VILLAGE OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Michael E. Schwab 
Village President 
____________ 
John Kruepke 
Michael Kufahl 
Debra Kurtz 
John Lippold 
Brian Emmrich 
Donald Olson 
Village Board of Trustees 
____________ 
John Walther 
Village Administrator 
____________ 
John St. Peter 
Matt Parmentier 
Edgarton, St. Peter, Petak and Rosenfeldt 
Village Attorneys 
____________ 
Deanna Boldrey, WCMC/CMC 
Village Clerk-Treasurer 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Village of Jackson, Wisconsin. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the prior code of the village, as supplemented through August 12, 2013, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the village board. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the prior code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code, as updated by Municipal Code Corporation. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Senior Code Attorney, and Ramona Connors, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Deanna Boldrey, Village Clerk-Treasurer, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the village's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Jackson, Wisconsin. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Jackson, Wisconsin. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Jackson, Wisconsin. 2017. 
ORDINANCE # 17-02 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE VILLAGE OF JACKSON, WISCONSIN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE 
THE VILLAGE BOARD OF THE VILLAGE OF JACKSON, WASHINGTON COUNTY, WISCONSIN, does ordain as follows: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled the "Code of Ordinance of the Village of Jackson, Wisconsin," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 48, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 10, 2016, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount required or permitted by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the village board may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the village board to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 10, 2016, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall take effect from and after its passage and posting. 
Introduced by: ____________       Seconded by: ____________ 
Passed and Approved: ____________       Vote: ____________ Aye ____________ Nay 
____________ 
Michael E. Schwab, 
Village President 
____________ 
Attest: Deanna L. Boldrey, 
Village Clerk 
Proof of Posting: 
I, the undersigned, certify that I posted copies of this Ordinance on bulletin boards at the Village Hall, Post Office and one other location in the Village. 
Dated: ____________       Village Official: ____________ 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the village board, held on the ____________ day of ____________ , ____________ . 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Included/Omitted Supplement Number 17-01 Included 1 17-02 Included 1 17-04 Included 1 17-05 Included 1 17-06 Included 1 17-07 Included 1  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Title of Code; citation; short title. 
    These ordinances shall be known as the Code of Ordinances of the Village of Jackson, Wisconsin, and shall take effect from and after passage and publication as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0103. This Code may also be referred to by the shortened title "Village of Jackson Municipal Code." All references to this Code shall be cited by section number. 
(Prior Code, § 21.06) 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0103. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  Generally. In the interpretation and construction of this Code, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the village board or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
(b)  Applicability. The rules of construction and definitions of this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code that contains any express provision excluding that construction or where the subject matter or context of that section may be repugnant thereto. 
(c)  Liberal construction; technical words and phrases. All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed so that the true intent and meaning of the village board may be fully carried out. All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases, and other words that have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law, shall be construed and understood according to their peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(d)  Minimum requirements; conflicting provisions. In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, the provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than a general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
(e)  Delegation of authority; designees. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other village officer to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or to perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
(f)  Gender; singular and plural. Every word in this Code and in any ordinance imparting the masculine gender may extend and be applied to females as well as males, and every word imparting the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
(g)  Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which may, by law, as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
(h)  Specific definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Code. The term "Code" means the provisions of this Code as amended from time to time. 
    County. The term "county" means the Washington County, Wisconsin. 
    Fee schedule. The term "fee schedule" means the official consolidated list maintained in the village clerk's office that includes rates for utility or other public enterprises, village fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by resolution of the village board. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Law. The term "law" means any statute, ordinance or regulation promulgated by the state, the United States, the county, the village or any of their agencies, as well as the rules and regulations of other bodies politic that may be appropriate. 
    May . The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and" and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
    Person. The term "person" extends and applies to natural persons, firms, corporations, limited liability corporations, associations, partnerships, and other bodies politic and to all entities capable of being sued, unless plainly inapplicable. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real, personal and mixed property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any place subject to the primary control of any public agency, including, but not limited to, any park, street, public way, cemetery, schoolyard or adjacent open space and any lake or stream. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the county governing authority of a special or temporary character. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
    Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Wisconsin. 
    Statute . The term "statute," unless otherwise specifically stated, refers to the indicated portion of the Wisconsin Statutes. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Village. The term "village" means the Village of Jackson, Wisconsin, located in Washington County, Wisconsin. 
    Village board. The term "village board" means the board of trustees of the Village of Jackson, Wisconsin. 
    Village officers or departments. The term "administrator," "clerk," "police chief," "fire chief," "public works director," "building inspector/code enforcement," "park and recreation director" or other village officers or departments, when referred to by title only, means the village administrator, clerk, police chief, fire chief, public works director, building inspector/code enforcement, park and recreation director or such other municipal officers or departments of the village. 
    Wisconsin Administrative Code, Wis. Admin. Code. The term "Wisconsin Administrative Code" or "Wis. Admin. Code" means the current edition of the Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
    Wisconsin Statutes, Wis. Stats. All references to "Wisconsin Statutes" or "Wis. Stats." means the current edition of Wisconsin Statutes. 
    Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference- Written, in writing, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(48). 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Prior Code, § 21.01) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions and rules of construction, Wis. Stats. §§ 990.001, 990.01. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-4. - Clerk to file documents incorporated by reference. 
    Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth herein. 
(Prior Code, § 21.03) 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Conflicting provisions. 
    If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 21.02A) 
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the village, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the village or any evidence of the village's indebtedness or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the village or creating interest and sinking funds; 
(2)  Any right or franchise, permit or other right granted by any ordinance; 
(3)  Any personnel regulations and any ordinance establishing salaries of village officers and employees or civil service rules; 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, or vacating any street or public way in the village; 
(5)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state; 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the village; 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for adopting an annual budget; 
(8)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the village or discontinuing territory as a part of the village; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the village; 
(11)  Ordinances prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances establishing speed limits or designating one-way streets, no parking areas, truck routes, stop intersections, intersections where traffic to be controlled by signals, etc.; 
(12)  Any ordinance calling municipal elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law; 
(13)  Any ordinance prescribing any fee or payment of money to the village; 
(14)  Any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes therefor; 
(15)  Any ordinance granting specific tax exemptions; 
(16)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(17)  Any administrative ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the village clerk-treasurer's office. 
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, penalties. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Separability of Code provisions. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion. The board declares that it would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Prior Code, § 21.02B) 
State Law reference- Severability, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(11). 
Sec. 1-10. - Procedure for amending Code. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the village board. 
State Law reference- Adoption of municipal ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 62.11. 
Sec. 1-11. - Effect of amendments. 
    Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the board to make the addition or amendment a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to this Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Sec. 1-12. - Effect of repeals. 
    The repeal or amendment of any section or provision of this Code or of any other ordinance or resolution of the board shall not: 
(1)  By implication be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or existing at the time at which such repeal or amendment takes effect. 
(2)  Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed or amended, unless the privilege of repealing such obligation or privilege has been reserved by the village. 
(3)  Affect any offense committed or penalty or forfeiture incurred, previous to the time when any ordinance shall be repealed or amended; except that when any forfeiture or penalty shall have been mitigated by the provisions of any ordinance, such provisions shall apply to and control any judgment to be pronounced after such ordinance takes effect for any offense committed before that time. 
(4)  Affect any prosecution for any offense, or the levy of any penalty or forfeiture pending at the time when any ordinance shall be repealed or amended, but the right of action shall continue and the offender shall be subject to the penalty as provided in such ordinances, and such prosecution shall proceed, in all respects, as if such ordinance had not been repealed, except that all such proceedings had after the time this Code shall take effect shall be conducted according to the provisions of this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 21.05) 
State Law reference- Effect of repeals, Wis. Stats. § 990.03. 
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by village personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the village board. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement insofar as it is necessary to embody the provisions into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the village to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the village to be misrepresented thereby. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 946.72. 
Sec. 1-15. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  General penalty. Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 as determined by the board in the schedule of deposits. 
(b)  Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the village from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code. 
(c)  Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the court for violation of any ordinance of the village, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture and costs. 
(d)  Court authority to impose alternative juvenile dispositions and sanctions. 
(1)  For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance, a court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in Wis. Stats. §§ 938.343 and 938.344 in accordance with the provisions of those statutes. 
(2)  For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates a condition of a dispositional order of the court under Wis. Stats. §§ 938.343 and 938.344, the municipal court is authorized to impose any of the sanctions listed in Wis. Stats. § 938.355(6)(d) in accordance with the provisions of those statutes. 
(Prior Code, § 21.04; Ord. No. 97-05) 
Sec. 1-16. - Failure of officers to perform duties. 
    The failure of any officer or employee of the village to perform an official duty imposed by this Code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of this Code unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code. 
Sec. 1-17. - Enforcement by citation. 
(a)  Authority . Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0113, the village has elected to use the citation method of enforcement of ordinances, including those for which a statutory counterpart exists. 
(c)  Bond schedule; municipal forfeiture schedule. The bond schedule provided by the village board from time to time by resolution and any forfeiture schedule adopted by the village board shall be on file in the office of the village clerk. 
(d)  Persons authorized to issue citations. Any law enforcement officer may issue citations authorized under this section. In addition, the police chief, fire chief, or code enforcement officer may issue citations with respect to specified ordinances that are directly related to their official responsibilities. 
(e)  Violator's options; procedure upon default . The options of violators and procedure on default shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0113. 
(f)  Other enforcement methods and remedies. This section does not preclude the village board from providing for enforcement of any law or ordinance relating to the same or other matter by other methods. In addition, the issuance of a citation under this section shall not preclude the village or any authorized officer from proceeding under any other ordinance or law by any other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance, regulation or order. 
(Prior Code, § 21.07) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Villages generally, Wis. Stats. § 61.187 et seq.; village board, Wis. Stats. § 61.32; village officers and employees, Wis. Stats. § 61.195 et seq.; municipal budget systems, Wis. Stats. § 65.01 et seq.; general municipality law, Wis. Stats. § 62.11 et seq.; municipal borrowing and municipal bonds, Wis. Stats. § 67.01 et seq.; municipal disposal of abandoned property, Wis. Stats. § 66.0139; local government purchasing, Wis. Stats. § 66.0131; municipal finance, Wis. Stats. § 62.12; manner of exercise of home rule, Wis. Stats. § 66.0101; municipal police and fire departments, Wis. Stats. § 62.13; municipal administrative procedures, Wis. Stats. § 68.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Form of government. 
    The village operates under a board of trustees system of government under Wis. Stats. ch. 61 (Wis. Stats. § 61.187 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 1.01) 
Sec. 2-2. - Official village map. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the village board to establish an official map for the purpose of serving and promoting the public health, safety, convenience, economy, orderliness, and general welfare of the community; to further the orderly layout and use of land; to stabilize the location of real property boundary lines; to ensure proper legal descriptions and proper monumenting of land; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, parks, playgrounds, and stormwater drainage; and to facilitate the further subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. 
(b)  Authority. This section is enacted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(6). 
(c)  Jurisdiction . The jurisdictional area of this section shall include all lands within the corporate limits of the village and those areas outside the village but within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the village. 
(d)  Map established and adopted. The village has established the official map of the village. The current official map is made a part of this section. The map is the official map of the village and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this section as though the matters and information thereon were fully described herein. The official map shall show the location and extent of all platted and existing streets, highways, drainageways, parkways, parks and playgrounds, airports and airport affected areas, and historic districts within the corporate limits of the village, and its extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction as heretofore laid out, adopted and established by law. 
(e)  Changes and additions. The village board may change or add to the official map so as to establish the exterior lines of; widen, narrow, extend, or close any platted, existing, proposed, or planned streets, highways, drainageways, parkways, parks, or playgrounds. The village board shall refer any change or addition to the official map to the plan commission and board of public works for review and report thereon, prior to adoption. A public hearing by the village board shall be required before any changes or additions to the official map are effective, except that changes and additions made by duly approved subdivision plats shall not require a public hearing if the changes or additions do not affect any land outside the area being platted. Notice of the public hearing shall be published as a Class 2 notice pursuant to state law. 
(f)  Distribution of copies. A copy of the official map shall be kept in the office of the village clerk, and shall be available for inspection by any interested person during regular office hours. The copy shall bear on its face a certification that it is a true copy of the official map described in and accompanying this section, and shall show the date of adoption of this section and be signed by the village president and countersigned by the village clerk. Thereafter, no change or addition to such official map shall become effective until it shall have been indicated by the appropriate convention on the copy of the official map and a certificate placed thereon or attached thereto bearing the number and date of adoption of the amending ordinance. The certificate shall be signed by the village president and countersigned by the village clerk. 
(g)  Filing with county. The village clerk-treasurer shall be responsible, immediately upon adoption of the official map or any amendment thereto, for recording a true copy of the official map with the county register of deeds. 
(Prior Code, § 5.07A-E, I-K; Ord. No. 08-07) 
Secs. 2-3-2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Sec. 2-23. - Composition; term. 
    The elected officials of the village shall be the village president and six trustees, whose term of office shall be two years beginning on the third Tuesday of April. The village president and three trustees shall be elected at the annual spring election in odd-numbered years, and the remaining three trustees shall be elected at the annual spring election in the even-numbered years. 
(Prior Code, § 1.02B) 
State Law reference- Election of village trustees, terms and number, Wis. Stats. § 61.20. 
Sec. 2-24. - Meetings. 
(a)  Organizational. On the third Tuesday of April an organizational meeting of the village board will be held at 7:30 p.m. or at such other time as may be set by the village board. 
(b)  Regular. The village board shall hold its regular meeting on the second Tuesday of the month at 7:30 p.m., or at such other time as may be established by the village board, provided that if the meeting day is a legal holiday the regular meeting shall be held on the next Tuesday at 7:30 p.m. 
(Prior Code, §§ 1.02B, 1.05B; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Sec. 2-25. - Enactment of ordinances. 
    All ordinances shall be in writing and shall be introduced by the president or a trustee. Each ordinance shall be read at the meeting at which introduced, shall be subsequently posted in two public places, and may be adopted at the next meeting after publication or posting or a subsequent meeting. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05K; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Sec. 2-26. - Special committees. 
    Special committees may be provided for in a motion or resolution designating their purpose and duration, and, unless otherwise specified, appointments thereto shall be made by the village president with confirmation by the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05L; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Sec. 2-27. - Suspension of rules. 
    The rules of procedure may be suspended by a two-thirds vote of the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05M; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Secs. 2-28-2-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Village president, Wis. Stats. § 61.24; village clerk, Wis. Stats. § 61.25; village treasurer, Wis. Stats. § 61.26; deputy village treasurer, Wis. Stats. § 61.261; village assessor, Wis. Stats. § 61.27; village marshal, Wis. Stats. § 61.28; village constable, Wis. Stats. § 61.29. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-58. - Appointment; probationary period. 
    Village officials shall be appointed in accordance with state law and this article. 
(Prior Code, § 1.03; Ord. No. 03-14; Ord. No. 10-07; Ord. No. 12-08) 
Sec. 2-59. - Verification of wages and salaries required. 
    Regular wages or salaries of village officers and employees shall be verified by the proper village official or department head and filed with the village clerk-treasurer in time for payment on the regular pay day. 
(Prior Code, § 2.03B) 
Secs. 2-60-2-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC OFFICIALS 

Sec. 2-78. - Village administrator. 
(a)  Appointment . The village administrator shall be appointed by majority vote of the members of the village board for an indefinite term or the term of office and conditions of employment may be a matter of contract between the village and the person appointed to the position. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The village administrator shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for directing, coordinating and expediting the activities of all village departments, except for such authority vested by state law in certain boards and commissions. The administrator shall make or direct such studies as are necessary to determine the most economical and efficient operation of such departments, sources and programs from the various departments when deemed necessary. 
(2)  Be at all times responsible to the president and the board of trustees and shall be responsible for effectuating all actions of the same which require administrative implementation or where the president and the trustees have directed the administrator to act. 
(3)  Direct and coordinate, with the cooperation of department heads, the preparation of the annual village budget for submission to the village board. In the event that the administrator does not agree with the budget, as submitted by a department head, the administrator shall notify the department head accordingly and the matter shall be placed on the village board agenda so that both the administrator and the department head can be given an opportunity to state their positions. The village board shall resolve such disputes. 
(4)  Make such reports as the president and trustees may require as to the current fiscal status of budget items and to review and report to the president and trustees any variations in the operations of the village budget. 
(5)  Submit, as deemed necessary, recommendations or suggestions for improving the health, safety or welfare of the village and shall institute and operate a system whereby village departments, as well as persons having business with the president or trustees or any village department, may properly and efficiently conduct such business. 
(6)  Be responsible for the efficient operation, utilization and physical security of all village-owned buildings and grounds. 
(7)  Perform such other duties and responsibilities, not inconsistent with the law, as may be prescribed by the president and trustees. 
(Prior Code, § 1.03A; Ord. No. 03-14; Ord. No. 10-07; Ord. No. 12-08) 
Sec. 2-79. - Village clerk-treasurer. 
(a)  Appointment . The village clerk-treasurer shall be appointed by a majority of the members of the village board for an indefinite term, subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of state law or the term of office and conditions of employment may be a matter of written contract between the village and the person appointed to the position. The offices of village clerk-treasurer and village administrator may be combined by vote of the board of trustees. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the village clerk-treasurer shall be those prescribed by state law and as specified in the job description for the position as may be established by the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 1.03B; Ord. No. 03-14; Ord. No. 10-07; Ord. No. 12-08) 
Sec. 2-80. - Village attorney. 
(a)  Appointment . The village attorney shall be appointed by a majority of the board of trustees for an indefinite term. The terms and conditions of the office shall be a matter of contract between the village and the village attorney. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The village attorney shall be chief legal advisor to the village president, the village board, and the village administrator and shall be responsible for preparing and drafting legal opinions, ordinances, and rules and regulations as may be required for expediting village matters. The village attorney shall also serve as prosecuting attorney for the village and shall represent the village in courts and commission hearings as directed. 
(Prior Code, § 1.03D; Ord. No. 03-14; Ord. No. 10-07; Ord. No. 12-08) 
Sec. 2-81. - Chief of police. 
(a)  Appointment . The police chief shall be appointed by a majority of the members of the police and fire commission for an indefinite term, subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of state law. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the police chief shall be those prescribed by state law for the positions of police chief, and as specified in the job description for the position as may be established by the village board. Such duties shall include responsibility for the administrative work in directing and coordinating all activities and employees of the village police department. The police chief shall also provide staff support for the police and fire commission. 
(Prior Code, § 1.03E; Ord. No. 03-14; Ord. No. 10-07; Ord. No. 12-08) 
Sec. 2-82. - Public works director/engineer. 
(a)  Appointment . The public works director/engineer shall be appointed by the village board for an indefinite term, subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of state law or the term of office and conditions of employment may be a matter of written contract between the village and the person appointed to the position. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the public works director/engineer shall be those as prescribed by state law and as specified by the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 1.03F; Ord. No. 03-14; Ord. No. 10-07; Ord. No. 12-08) 
Sec. 2-83. - Village assessor. 
(a)  Appointment . The village board shall, by majority vote, contract with a corporation or an independent contractor to serve as village assessor for an indefinite term. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the village assessor shall be those as prescribed by state law and as specified in the contract between the village and the corporation or independent contractor. The contract shall contain the terms and conditions of employment between the village and the corporation or independent contractor. 
(Prior Code, § 1.03G.1, G.2; Ord. No. 03-14; Ord. No. 10-07; Ord. No. 12-08) 
Sec. 2-84. - Building inspector/code enforcement officer. 
(a)  Appointment. The building inspector/code enforcement officer shall be appointed for an indefinite term, subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of state law or the term of office, and conditions of employment may be a matter of written contract between the village and the person appointed to the position. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The building inspector, under the direction of the village administrator, shall enforce the village building and zoning codes as well as perform other duties as provided in this Code. The building inspector shall direct and supervise the activities of building, plumbing, electrical, and heating inspections. 
(Prior Code, § 1.03H; Ord. No. 03-14; Ord. No. 10-07; Ord. No. 12-08) 
Sec. 2-85. - Emergency government coordinator. 
(a)  Appointment . The emergency government coordinator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the village board of trustees for an indefinite term, subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of state law or the term of office, and conditions of employment may be a matter of written contract between the village and the person appointed to the position. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The coordinator shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  The coordinator shall be the executive head of the emergency government department and shall be directly responsible for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency government department subject to the direction and control of the village board. 
(2)  The coordinator shall coordinate all activities for emergency government within the village and shall cooperate and maintain a liaison with emergency government agencies and organizations of other political jurisdictions and the state and federal governments, and shall participate in county and state emergency government activities upon request, and shall have such additional authority, duties and responsibilities as are authorized by this section and which may be required by the village. 
(3)  In accordance with the state plan format and the county ordinance of compliance, the coordinator shall prepare a comprehensive general plan for the emergency government of the village and shall present such a plan to the village board for its approval. When the village board has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty of all municipal agencies and all emergency government forces of the village to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner. 
(Prior Code, § 1.03J; Ord. No. 03-14; Ord. No. 10-07; Ord. No. 12-08) 
Sec. 2-86. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)  Appointment . The zoning administrator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the village board for an indefinite term, subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of state law or the term of office, and conditions of employment may be a matter of written contract between the village and the person appointed to the position. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The zoning administrator shall have the powers and duties as set forth in state law and this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 1.03K; Ord. No. 03-14; Ord. No. 10-07; Ord. No. 12-08) 
Sec. 2-87. - Fire chief. 
(a)  Appointment . The fire chief shall be appointed by a majority of the members of the police and fire commission for an indefinite term, subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of state law. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the fire chief shall be those prescribed by state law for the position of fire chief, and as specified in the job description for the position as may be established by the village board. Such duties shall include responsibility for the administrative work in directing and coordinating all activities and employees of the village fire department. 
(Prior Code, § 1.03L; Ord. No. 03-14; Ord. No. 10-07; Ord. No. 12-08) 
Sec. 2-88. - Director of parks and recreation. 
(a)  Appointment . The director of parks and recreation shall be appointed by the village board for an indefinite term, subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of state law or the term of office, and conditions of employment may be a matter of written contract between the village and the person appointed to the position. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The director of parks and recreation under the direction of the village administrator shall perform the powers and duties as specified in the job description and as specified by the village board. 
Secs. 2-89-2-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND OTHER BODIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-120. - Oaths. 
    Every appointee to village office shall take and file the official oath within five days after notice of appointment. 
State Law reference- Official oaths, Wis. Stats. § 19.01. 
Sec. 2-121. - Removal from appointed membership. 
    Persons shall be removed from appointment to a village board, commission, committee or other body in accordance with state law. 
(Prior Code, § 1.04K; Ord. No. 99-09; Ord. No. 3-10; Ord. No. 03-16; Ord. No. 04-13; Ord. No. 10-16; Ord. No. 10-08; Ord. No. 06-09) 
Secs. 2-122-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-141. - State law applicable. 
    All meetings of committees, boards and commissions are subject to applicable state law in addition to the provisions of this division. 
(Prior Code, § 1.04; Ord. No. 99-09; Ord. No. 3-10; Ord. No. 03-16; Ord. No. 04-13; Ord. No. 10-16; Ord. No. 10-08; Ord. No. 06-09) 
Sec. 2-142. - Notice. 
(a)  All governmental bodies shall proceed as follows in preparing, mailing and posting notices of the meetings: 
(1)  Members. Except where notice of the meeting has been given at a previous meeting or in case of extreme emergency, each member of the body shall be given notice of the proposed time, date, place and agenda of the meeting. 
(2)  Public. The presiding officer or his designee shall prepare the final agenda and give notice to the public and the media of the time, date, place and subject matter of the meeting by telephone, fax, e-mail or mailing a copy of the agenda showing the time, date and place of the meeting not less than 24 hours prior thereto, and in the same manner to any news medium that has filed a written request. 
(b)  Compliance with the notice provisions of this section does not relieve any governmental body of compliance with other provisions of the state law of the village ordinances relating to notice to individuals or publications of notice of public hearings. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05D.1, D.3, D.4; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Sec. 2-143. - Open meetings. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this division, the village board and all boards, commissions, and standing and special committees of the village shall comply with the requirements of subchapter IV of Wis. Stats. ch. 19 (Wis. Stats. § 19.62 et seq.) and the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 19.84 relating to the public notice of meetings. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05C; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Sec. 2-144. - Closed meetings. 
(a)  Notice; procedure. No meeting of a governmental body of the village shall be closed to the media or the public unless: 
(1)  Notice thereof has been given at the same time as notice of an open meeting of the body. 
(2)  A motion is made and carried at a properly convened open meeting by roll call vote recorded in the minutes. 
(3)  The presiding officer announces, prior to recording the vote on the motion to adjourn into closed session, to those present at the meeting the nature of business to be considered at the closed session and the specific applicable exemption under Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1) by which the closed session is authorized. 
(b)  Business limited. No business shall be taken up, discussed or acted upon at any closed session except that relating to matters contained in the announcement of the closed session by the chief presiding officer. 
(c)  Duties of presiding officers. The presiding officers of the bodies shall familiarize themselves with the specific exemptions of Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1) and in cases of doubt shall consult with the village attorney and inform the members of the governmental body of the determination of the village attorney before a vote is taken to adjourn any meeting into closed session. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05G; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Sec. 2-145. - Agenda. 
    Agendas prepared by any governmental body shall list the items of business to be discussed at the meeting. Any member who desires to make additions to the agenda shall submit the same in writing to the presiding officer not less than four business days prior to the scheduled meeting. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05D.2, F; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Sec. 2-146. - Public appearance. 
    Any village resident wishing to have the board make a decision on an issue or request shall submit a written request to the village clerk-treasurer not less than four business days prior to the meeting. All other village residents who wish to address the board may do so at the regularly scheduled village board meeting. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05E; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Sec. 2-147. - Secret ballots restricted. 
(a)  Prohibited; exception. No secret ballot shall be utilized to determine any decision or election of governmental bodies at any meeting; except the selection of a presiding officer, secretary or other officer of the body may be made by secret ballot. 
(b)  Members may require roll calls. Any member of the body may require a roll call vote to be taken and recorded on any election or other decision of the body, including the election of officers of such body. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05H; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Sec. 2-148. - Exclusion of member prohibited. 
    No elected or appointed member of any body may be excluded from any meeting of such body or any meeting of a subunit thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05J; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Secs. 2-149-2-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIFIC BODIES 

Sec. 2-180. - Board of public works. 
(a)  Membership. The board of public works shall consist of seven members made up of the village president, two village trustees and four at large citizen members or three trustees and four at large citizen members. 
(b)  Appointments. Appointments are made by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board at the organizational meeting in April of each year. Citizen members shall have staggered three year terms. The four citizen members shall be appointed by the president at the organizational meeting or at any other time if vacancy occurs during the middle of a term, subject to confirmation by the village board, for a three-year term. 
(c)  Meetings. Generally, the board of public works meets on the last Tuesday of each month. 
(Prior Code, § 1.04I; Ord. No. 99-09; Ord. No. 3-10; Ord. No. 03-16; Ord. No. 04-13; Ord. No. 10-16; Ord. No. 10-08; Ord. No. 06-09) 
Sec. 2-181. - Board of review. 
(a)  Membership. The board of review shall consist of the village president, the village clerk, and a citizen member appointed by the village president and confirmed by the village board. The citizen member shall be appointed by the village president at the organizational meeting, subject to confirmation by the village board, for a term of two years. If a vacancy occurs prior to the organizational meeting, the citizen member shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board, to complete the term. 
(b)  Alternates. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 70.47(6m)(c) and 70.46(1) the village board shall appoint alternates to serve on the village board of review in the event a standing board member of the board of review is removed or unable to serve for any reason. The appointments made will be for the year in which the appointment is made and for succeeding years or until such appointments are rescinded by action of the village board. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The board shall have the powers and duties prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 70.47. 
(Prior Code, § 1.04A; Ord. No. 99-09; Ord. No. 3-10; Ord. No. 03-16; Ord. No. 04-13; Ord. No. 10-16; Ord. No. 10-08; Ord. No. 06-09) 
State Law reference- Boards of review, Wis. Stats. § 70.46 et seq. 
Sec. 2-182. - Zoning board of appeals. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall consist of five citizen members appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board, for terms of three years beginning May 1. If a vacancy occurs prior to the organizational meeting, the citizen member shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board, to complete the term. Appointments shall be made by the village president during the month of April for terms that expire in May or at any other time if vacancy occurs during the term. The powers of the zoning board of appeals shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e). 
(Prior Code, § 1.04D; Ord. No. 99-09; Ord. No. 3-10; Ord. No. 03-16; Ord. No. 04-13; Ord. No. 10-16; Ord. No. 10-08; Ord. No. 06-09) 
Sec. 2-183. - Plan commission. 
(a)  Membership. The plan commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the village president. One member shall be the village president, who shall preside as chairman, two members shall be village trustees, and four members shall be citizen members. The two village board members shall be appointed annually by the village president at the organization meeting. The four citizen members shall be appointed by the president at the organizational meeting, subject to confirmation by the village board, for three year terms. If a vacancy occurs prior to the organizational meeting, the citizen member shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board, to complete the term. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The plan commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and duties and promote municipal planning as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.23 and such other powers and duties as shall be vested in the commission by the village board. 
(c)  Rules of procedure. The plan commission shall organize and adopt rules for its own governance in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Meetings. Meetings shall be held monthly on the last Thursday of each month, or at any other time as required, and shall be open to the public. 
(e)  Committees. The chairman may appoint standing and special committees. 
(Prior Code, § 1.04C; Ord. No. 99-09; Ord. No. 3-10; Ord. No. 03-16; Ord. No. 04-13; Ord. No. 10-16; Ord. No. 10-08; Ord. No. 06-09) 
Sec. 2-184. - Tourism commission. 
(a)  Membership. The membership shall consist of five members. The chair shall be the village president. The village administrator and park and recreation director shall each serve as voting members. One member must be an owner or operator of a lodging facility that collects room tax and one citizen member. The owner or operator of a lodging facility and one citizen member shall be appointed by the village president with confirmation by the village board. Appointments shall occur at the annual organizational meeting and commissioners shall serve for a one-year term, at the pleasure of the village president, and may be reappointed. Members may be reappointed to complete the term if necessary. 
(b)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The commission must direct the use of room tax revenue for tourism promotion and development. The commission must report annually to the village board on the revenues that were spent, first applying expenditures made on January 1, 2017. 
(2)  The commission shall contract with organization to perform the functions of tourism entity. The commission will ensure that at least 51 percent of the revenues are spent on tourism promotion and tourism development. 
(c)  Reporting. Beginning in 2017, annually or before May 1, the clerk-treasurer will certify and report required detail to the Wisconsin state department of revenue on the form provided by the Wisconsin state department of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 16-03, § I(1.04(k))) 
Sec. 2-185. - Planning director and department. 
(a)  Appointment. The planning department shall consist of a planning director appointed by the village board and such other employees as selected by the planning director and approved by the village board. The planning director shall be appointed for an indefinite term, subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of state law or the term of office, and conditions of employment may be a matter of written contract between the village and the person appointed to the position of planning director. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The planning department shall review and make recommendations to the village plan commission and the village board on all plats, subdivisions, certified survey maps, road dedications, planned unit developments, condominium developments and extraterritorial plat approval requests. In addition, the department shall develop plans and make recommendations to the plan commission and the village board on land use plans; zoning districts; land use standards; parks; recreational; conservancy; and other matters relating to the proper use and developments of lands with the village and within the village's extraterritorial zoning approval area. 
(Prior Code, § 1.04J; Ord. No. 99-09; Ord. No. 3-10; Ord. No. 03-16; Ord. No. 04-13; Ord. No. 10-16; Ord. No. 10-08; Ord. No. 06-09) 
Sec. 2-186. - Joint village and town parks and recreation committee. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this committee is to provide the village and town with a group of interested citizens to assist in the development, acquisition and maintenance of village and town parks and open spaces. Moreover, the role of the committee is to direct the joint parks and recreation department through financial, planning, annual budgeting, and providing recommendations and continuity to the recreation programs and staff. 
(b)  Membership. The committee shall consist of eight members, four appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board, and four appointed by the town chairman, subject to confirmation by the town board. All appointed members shall represent the village or town at large with no elected officials. All members shall hold office for staggered three year terms. The parks and recreation director shall act as an ex officio member and vote only when a tie situation occurs. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The joint parks and recreation committee shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and duties and promote parks and recreation through recommendations to the village board or town board, depending on the action/funding required. The committee is not a board of park commissioners under Wis. Stats. § 27.08. 
(Prior Code, § 1.04E; Ord. No. 99-09; Ord. No. 3-10; Ord. No. 03-16; Ord. No. 04-13; Ord. No. 10-16; Ord. No. 10-08; Ord. No. 06-09) 
State Law reference- Park boards, Wis. Stats. § 27.08. 
Sec. 2-187. - Police and fire commission. 
(a)  State law applicable except optional powers. The police and fire commission shall be constituted in accordance with state law, including Wis. Stats. § 62.13, but none of the specified optional powers enumerated in Wis. Stats. § 62.13(6) are extended to the commission. 
(b)  Membership. The commission shall consist of five citizens who are residents of the village, three of whom shall constitute a quorum. The village board elects to have neither the village president nor any other trustees as a member of the commission. 
(c)  Term of office. The village president shall annually appoint at the organizational meeting, subject to confirmation by the village board, for a five-year term. 
(d)  Meetings . Meetings shall be held on the first Wednesday of the month if warranted, or on such other day as the commission shall establish. Special meetings may be held upon proper notice when occasion demands. 
(e)  Organization . The commission shall designate a president, a vice-president, and a secretary from among its members and assign duties to each of them as are common to such offices. The commission shall establish reasonable rules of procedure. 
(f)  Powers and duties. The police and fire commission shall be those prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 62.13. 
(Prior Code, § 1.04F; Ord. No. 99-09; Ord. No. 3-10; Ord. No. 03-16; Ord. No. 04-13; Ord. No. 10-16; Ord. No. 10-08; Ord. No. 06-09) 
State Law reference- Police and fire departments, Wis. Stats. § 62.13; police and fire department pension funds, Wis. Stats. § 61.65. 
Sec. 2-188. - Personnel committee. 
(a)  Membership. The personnel committee shall consist of three members of the village board, the chair and two other trustees, who shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation of the village board, at the organizational meeting in April of each year. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The personnel committee: 
(1)  Is responsible to make salary, fringe, and policy recommendations concerning non-represented personnel to the village board for action. 
(2)  Is responsible to participate in union negotiating. 
(3)  Shall serve as an appellate body for union grievances. 
(4)  Shall make recommendations relative to personnel policies for non-represented employees and for personnel policies in those areas not restricted by the signed bargaining agreement. 
(Prior Code, § 1.04G; Ord. No. 99-09; Ord. No. 3-10; Ord. No. 03-16; Ord. No. 04-13; Ord. No. 10-16; Ord. No. 10-08; Ord. No. 06-09) 
Sec. 2-189. - Budget and finance committee. 
(a)  Membership . The budget and finance committee shall consist of the village president and two trustees or three trustees. The trustees shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board, at the organizational meeting in April of each year. The committee chair shall be appointed by the village president, subject to the village board approval. The budget and finance committee's operation is subject to state law and this article. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities. The committee shall: 
(1)  Meet each month or as needed. 
(2)  Accept, review, monitor, modify and approve budgetary items and special items as they occur and generally oversee the financial operation of the village. 
(3)  Prepare timely budgets for presentation to the village board. 
(4)  Review and approve monthly claims. 
(Prior Code, § 1.04H; Ord. No. 99-09; Ord. No. 3-10; Ord. No. 03-16; Ord. No. 04-13; Ord. No. 10-16; Ord. No. 10-08; Ord. No. 06-09) 
Secs. 2-190-2-214. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance, Wis. Stats. § 62.12; public deposits, Wis. Stats. § 34.01 et seq.; municipal budget systems, Wis. Stats. § 65.01 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-215. - Fiscal year. 
    The calendar year shall be the fiscal year. 
(Prior Code, § 2.04) 
Sec. 2-216. - Authority to authorize expenditures for public works projects. 
    The village board shall have the exclusive power to authorize expenditures on behalf of the village pertaining to public works, specifically including the power to determine whether to approve public works contracts, to borrow funds, and to enter into contracts for public works projects. No referendum is required except as may be required by state law. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05O; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Sec. 2-217. - Two official signatures required on order checks. 
    Order checks disbursing funds of the village for purposes and items authorized by the village board shall be signed by two designees of the following: the village clerk, the village treasurer, the village president, and the village administrator. 
(Prior Code, § 2.02; Ord. No. 03-15) 
Sec. 2-218. - Treasurer to certify accounts, demands and claims. 
    Prior to submission of any account, demand or claim to the village for approval of payment, the village treasurer shall certify that funds are available pursuant to the budget, that the item or service was duly authorized by the proper official or agency, that the item has been received or the service rendered in accordance with the purchasing agreement, and that the claim is accurate in amount and a proper charge has been credited to the treasury. 
(Prior Code, § 2.03A) 
Sec. 2-219. - Village funds to be spent in accordance with appropriation. 
(a)  No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the village, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed by amendment pursuant to this article. 
(b)  At the close of each fiscal year any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to re-appropriation; but appropriations may be made by the board, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished. 
(Prior Code, § 2.08) 
Secs. 2-220-2-246. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET 

Sec. 2-247. - General village budget procedure. 
(a)  Departmental estimates. On or about October 1 of each year, the village administrator shall submit to the village board a proposed budget for the village generally, for the water utility, and for the sewer utility for the ensuing year. 
(b)  Final draft of budget. On or about October 31 of each year, the budget and finance committee shall prepare and submit to the village board a proposed budget presenting a financial plan for conducting the affairs of the village generally, the water utility and the sewer utility for the ensuing calendar year. 
(c)  Content-Village general budget. The final draft of the general village budget shall include the following information: 
(1)  The expense of conducting each department and activity of the village for the ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items for the preceding and estimates for the current fiscal year, with reasons for increase and decrease recommended as compared with appropriations for the current year. 
(2)  An itemization of all anticipated income of the village from sources other than general property taxes and bonds issued, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the village from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year. 
(3)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general property taxes, which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
(4)  A debt payment schedule and budget will be prepared by the village treasurer and village administrator which will include the entire indebtedness of the village and the fully extended schedule of payments. 
(5)  Such other information as may be required by the village board and by state law. 
(d)  Same-Water and sewer utilities. The final budgets for the water and sewer utilities shall include the following information: 
(1)  The expense of conducting the operation of the utility for the ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items for the current year and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for increase and decrease recommended as compared with appropriations for the current year. 
(2)  An itemization of all anticipated income of the utility with a comparative statement of the amount received by the utility from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year. 
(e)  Distribution of copies. The village shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens. 
(f)  Hearing. The village administrator shall submit to the village board at the time the annual budget is submitted the draft of an appropriation resolution providing for the expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. Upon the submission of the proposed appropriation resolution to the board it shall be deemed to have been regularly introduced therein. The board shall hold a public hearing on the budget and the proposed appropriation resolution as required by law. Following the public hearing the proposed appropriation resolution may be changed or amended and shall take the same course in the board as other resolutions. 
(Prior Code, § 2.05) 
Sec. 2-248. - Amendment of the budget. 
    The village board may at any time by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership amend the budget. Notice of such amendment shall be given by publication within ten days thereafter in the official village newspaper. 
(Prior Code, § 2.07) 
Secs. 2-249-2-274. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 2-275. - Special assessment procedure. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0703, including, without limitation, those related to notice hearing and the adoption of a final resolution, shall, to the extent not inconsistent with this division, apply to special assessments levied under this division. 
(Prior Code, § 2.11D; Ord. No. 03-15) 
Sec. 2-276. - Alternate methods authorized. 
    As provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0703, in addition to other methods provided by law, special assessments for any public work and improvement may be levied by alternate methods. The village board has elected to levy such special assessments as provided in this division. 
(Prior Code, § 2.11A; Ord. No. 03-15) 
Sec. 2-277. - Preliminary resolution. 
    Whenever the village board shall determine that any public work or improvement shall be financed in whole or in part by special assessments levied under this section, it shall adopt a preliminary resolution setting forth the following: 
(1)  Its intent to exercise its police powers for the purpose of levying special assessments for the stated municipal purpose. 
(2)  The limits of the proposed assessment district. 
(3)  The time, either before or after completion of the work or improvement, when the amount of such assessments shall be determined and levied. 
(4)  The number of installments in which the special assessments may be paid, or that the number of installments will be determined after public hearing and will be included in the final resolution. 
(5)  The rate of interest to be charged on the unpaid installments or that the rate of interest will be determined after public hearing and will be included in the final resolution. 
(6)  The terms on which any of such assessments may be deferred while no use of the improvement is made in connection with the property or that such terms will be determined after public hearing and included in the final resolution. 
(7)  A directive that the village engineer prepare a report as required in this division. 
(Prior Code, § 2.11B; Ord. No. 03-15) 
Sec. 2-278. - Report of the village engineer. 
(a)  Whenever the village board, by preliminary resolution, directs the village engineer to prepare a report, the village engineer shall prepare a report consisting of the following: 
(1)  Preliminary of final plans and specifications for the public works. 
(2)  An estimate of the entire cost of the proposed work or improvements, except that when the village board determines by preliminary resolution that the hearing on such assessments shall be held subsequent to the completion of the work or improvements, the report shall contain a statement of the final cost of the work, service or improvement in lieu of an estimate of such costs. 
(3)  A schedule of the proposed assessments. 
(4)  A statement that each property against which the assessments are proposed has been inspected and is benefited, setting forth the basis of such benefit. 
(b)  Upon completion of the report, the village engineer shall file a copy of the report with the village clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 2.11C; Ord. No. 03-15) 
Sec. 2-279. - Lien. 
    Every special assessment levied under this division shall be a lien against the property assessed from the date of the final resolution of the village board determining the amount of such levy. 
(Prior Code, § 2.11D; Ord. No. 03-15) 
Secs. 2-280-2-306. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 2-307. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of Wis. Stats. § 66.0617, the local impact fees enabling legislation, the purpose of this division is to establish the mechanism for the imposition of impact fees upon new development to finance the capital costs of acquiring, establishing, upgrading, expanding and constructing public facilities which are necessary to accommodate land development. 
(b)  This division is intended to assure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide public facilities within the village and its service areas, as they are required to serve the needs arising out of land development. 
(Prior Code, § 22.01) 
Sec. 2-308. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Capital costs means the capital costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering and design costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, except that not more than ten percent of capital costs may consist of legal, engineering and design costs unless such costs which relate directly to the public improvement for which the impact fees were imposed actually exceed ten percent of capital costs. Capital costs do not include the non-capital costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities or the costs of equipment to construct, expand or improve public facilities. 
    Developer means a person that constructs or creates a land development. 
    Impact fees means cash contributions, contributions of land or interests in land or any other items of value that are imposed on a developer under this division. 
    Land development means the construction or modification of improvements to real property that creates additional residential dwelling units within the village or its service areas or that results in nonresidential uses that create a need for new, expanded or improved public facilities within the village or its service areas. 
    Public facilities means highways as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(22) and other transportation facilities, traffic control devices, facilities for collecting and treating sewage, facilities for collecting and treating stormwater and surface water, facilities for pumping, storing and distributing water, parks, playgrounds and other recreation facilities, solid waste and recycling facilities, fire protection facilities, law enforcement facilities, emergency medical facilities and libraries. Public facilities do not include facilities owned by a school district. 
    Service area means a geographic area delineated by the village board within which the village provides public facilities. 
    Service standard means a certain quantity or quality of public facilities relative to a certain number of persons, parcels of land or other appropriate measure, as specified by the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 22.02) 
Sec. 2-309. - Public facilities needs assessment. 
(a)  New public facilities or improvements or expansions of existing public facilities that are required because of land development for which impact fees or sewer service fees will be imposed are those which are identified in this division and in facilities needs assessment reports prepared prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived and any amendments hereto. 
(b)  All facilities needs reports that form the basis of any impact fee or sewer service fee imposed by the village shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk-treasurer at least 20 days prior to any public hearing to be held on the creation of this division and any amendments. A Class 1 notice is required prior to any required hearing. 
(c)  All facilities needs assessment reports shall remain on file in the office of the village clerk-treasurer for the entire period during which impact fees or sewer service fees arising out of a specific report and this division are collected prior to expenditure, and such reports shall, after expenditure of all impact fees or sewer service fees, be maintained as a public record for such time period as required by law. 
(Prior Code, § 22.03; Ord. No. 10-11) 
Sec. 2-310. - Impact fee revenue administration. 
(a)  Revenues from impact fees shall be placed in one or more segregated, interest bearing accounts and shall be accounted for separately from other village general and utility funds. Impact fee revenues and interest earned thereon may be expended only for capital costs for which the impact fees were imposed. 
(b)  Impact fee revenues imposed and collected but not used within a specified reasonable period of time after collection to pay the capital costs for which they were imposed shall be refunded on a prorated proportional basis, as determined by the village board, to the current record owner or owners of the property with respect to which the impact fees were imposed. 
(c)  Reasonable time periods for expenditure of impact fee revenues shall be within five years after the recommended time for completion of construction, expansion or improvement of a specific public facility identified in a facilities needs assessment report, or within five years after the projected loan obligations undertaken for a project should be satisfied. 
(Prior Code, § 22.04) 
Sec. 2-311. - Use of impact fees. 
    Funds collected from impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of paying the proportional costs of providing public facilities that become necessary due to land development. These costs may include the costs of debt service on bonds or similar debt instruments when the debt has been incurred for the purpose of proceeding with designated public facilities projects prior to the collection of all anticipated impact fees for that project. 
(Prior Code, § 22.05) 
Sec. 2-312. - Payment of impact fees. 
    All required impact fees, unless expressly excepted in a section of this division, or unless otherwise payable as specified herein, shall be paid to the village clerk-treasurer by the developer prior to being issued a building or plumbing permit, or both, whichever permits are applicable. Impact fee payments shall be assumed to be the responsibility of the owner of the record at the time the fee is imposed on a particular parcel. 
(Prior Code, § 22.06) 
Sec. 2-313. - Appeals. 
(a)  The developer or property owner upon whom an impact fee is imposed may contest the amount, collection, or use of an impact fee as specified herein. An appeal to contest either the amount or collection of an impact fee imposed on a developer shall be commenced at any time prior to endorsement of the approval certificate of any subdivision plat or certified survey map by the village clerk-treasurer but not later than 30 days from the date of notification of final action approving such plat or survey. An appeal to contest the amount or collection of an impact fee may be commenced within 30 days from the date of the notification of final action approving such plat or survey. An appeal to contest the amount or collection of an impact fee may be commenced within 30 days of application for a building or plumbing permit, if applicable to the particular impact fee. An appeal to contest the use of an impact fee shall be commenced not later than 30 days prior to the award of any public contract for expenditure of the collected fee revenues. 
(b)  An appeal is commenced by filing a complaint with the village clerk, which complaint shall specify the impact fee amount or collection objected to and the basis for the objection. The appeal shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the village board at its next regular meeting. The board shall take additional evidence and testimony on the matter, including reports from the village staff, and shall make its decision based upon the standards set forth in Wis. Stats. § 66.0617. The village board shall consider and decide the appeal, based upon the standards for impact fees in Wis. Stats. § 66.0617. The decision of the village board is final. 
(Prior Code, § 22.07) 
Sec. 2-314. - Sewer service fees. 
    The basis for the imposition of sewer service fees is the facilities needs assessment report and its attachments and public facilities needs assessment, which is on file in the office of the village clerk. The sewer service fees to be paid prior to the issuance of applicable building or plumbing permits are as follows: 
(1)  Fees shall be as provided in the village ordinance and village fee schedule. 
(2)  These fees do not apply in cases where an existing building is being hooked up to an existing sewer lateral or to a sewer lateral that has been replaced or repaired, unless the discharge has increased to more than the discharge provided by the service fee previously paid. In cases where an increase in the discharge can be demonstrated, the differential between the existing sewer service and the expanded sewer service shall be the basis for determining the applicable service fee, and the village board shall make such determination. 
(3)  These service fees shall be collected until all capital costs associated with specified projects in the public facilities needs assessment report have been incurred and satisfied, unless such time period exceeds five years beyond the projected completion of projects or five years beyond projected satisfaction of indebtedness for the specified projects for which these sewer service fees are imposed. 
(4)  Service fees shall be applicable to those persons, properties, and premises that are located in the village sewer service area. 
(Prior Code, § 22.08; Ord. No. 10-11) 
Sec. 2-315. - Water impact fees. 
    The basis for the imposition of water impact fees is the facilities needs assessment report and its attachments, which is on file in the office of the village clerk. The water impact fees to be paid prior to the issuance of applicable building or plumbing permits are as follows: 
(1)  Water impact fee in the village is set at $820.00. 
(2)  Each dwelling unit in a multifamily structure shall be treated as an individual connection. 
(3)  Fees do not apply in cases where an existing building is being hooked up to an existing sewer lateral or to a sewer lateral that has been replaced or repaired, unless the size of the meter is increased. In cases where an increase in the meter occurs, the differential between the existing water service and the expanded water service shall be the basis for determining the applicable impact fee and such determination shall be made by the village board. 
(4)  Fees shall be collected until all capital costs associated with specified projects in the report have been incurred and satisfied, unless such time period exceeds five years beyond the projected completion of projects or five years beyond projected satisfaction of indebtedness for the specified projects for which these water impact fees are imposed. 
(Prior Code, § 22.09; Ord. No. 11-02) 
Sec. 2-316. - Park facilities fees. 
    Park facilities fees may be charged pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.45. 
(Prior Code, § 22.10; Ord. No. 11-02) 
Sec. 2-317. - Police and fire facilities impact fees. 
(a)  The basis for the imposition of police and fire facilities impact fees is the facilities needs assessment report and its attachments, which are on file in the office of the village clerk. The police and fire facilities impact fee is to be paid prior to the issuance of applicable building permits. 
(b)  Police and fire facilities impact fee is set at $1,4300 per residential unit, multifamily is $1,280.00 per unit, and at $2.80 per $1,000.00 of improvements of nonresidential property. 
(c)  The fees shall be increased by ordinance as of January 1 of each year by a percentage equal to the consumer price index from the previous calendar year. 
(d)  Fees shall be collected until all capital costs associated with the projects identified in the public facilities needs assessment report have been incurred and satisfied, unless such time period exceeds five years beyond the projected completion of the projects or five years beyond satisfaction of indebtedness for the projects for which the impact fees are imposed. 
(Prior Code, § 22.11) 
Secs. 2-318-2-337. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC RECORDS 

Sec. 2-338. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authority means any of the following village entities having custody of a village record: an officer, elected official, agency, board, commission, committee, council, department or public body corporate and politic created by constitution subunit of the foregoing. 
    Custodian means that officer, department head, division head, or employee of the village designated under this article or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any village records or file, deposit or keep such records in his office, or is lawfully in possession of, or is entitled to possess such public records and who is required by this section to respond to requests for access to such records. 
    Record means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an authority. The term "record" includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), and computer printouts. The term "record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working; materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have no relation to his office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at a public library. 
(Prior Code, § 1.07A) 
Sec. 2-339. - Duty to maintain. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, each officer and employee of the village shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the officer or employee or his deputies, or to the possession or control of which he or they may be lawfully entitled as such officers or employees. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of an officer's term of employment, or whenever the officer or position of employment becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his successor all records then in his custody and the successor shall receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file the receipt with the village clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and receipted for by the clerk, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt. 
(Prior Code, § 1.07B) 
Sec. 2-340. - Legal custodians. 
(a)  Each selected official is the legal custodian of his records and the records of his office, but the official may designate an employee of his staff to act as the legal custodian. 
(b)  Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the village clerk-treasurer or the clerk's designee shall act as legal custodian for the village board and for any committees, commissions, boards, or other authorities created by ordinance or resolution for the village board. 
(c)  For every authority not specified in subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the authority's chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority. The officer may designate an employee of his staff to act as the legal custodian. 
(d)  Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his absence. 
(e)  The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and to carry out the duties of an authority under this article. The designation of a legal custodian does not affect the powers and duties of an authority under this section. 
(Prior Code, § 1.07C) 
Sec. 2-341. - Public access. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, any person has a right to inspect a record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(b)  Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office hours. 
(c)  If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon at least 48 hours advance notice of intent to inspect or copy. 
(d)  A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to village employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record. 
(e)  The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged. 
(f)  A request to locate and copy records shall be subject to the conditions and fees as set forth by resolution. 
(g)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.34 of and the guidelines therein listed, each authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for inspection and copying at the offices, for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization and the established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof. Each authority shall also prominently display at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a copy of Wis. Stats. §§ 19.31 to 19.39 and this article. This subsection does not apply to members of the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 1.07D) 
Sec. 2-342. - Access procedure. 
(a)  A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or the information requested. However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but the request must be in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under Wis. Stats. § 19.37. Except as provided below, no request may be refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may be refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a fee is required under this article. Acceptable identification may be required for any request for access to a public record whenever the requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or regulations so require. 
(b)  Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after conferring with the village attorney, determines that a written request is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the request may first be required to itemize his request in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance. 
(c)  A request for a record may be denied only as specifically provided in this article. If a request is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written request is denied in whole or part, the requester shall receive a written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written denial of a request shall inform the requester that if the request for the record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under Wis. Stats. § 19.37(1) or upon application to the attorney general, or district attorney. 
(Prior Code, § 1.07E) 
Sec. 2-343. - Limitations on right to access. 
(a)  As provided by Wis. Stats. § 19.36, the following records are exempt from inspection under this section: 
(1)  Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law. 
(2)  Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids by the state. 
(3)  The material used as input for a computer program or the material produced as a product of that program is subject to inspection. 
(4)  A record or any portion of a record containing information qualifying as a common law trade secret. 
(5)  Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality, which were necessary, and given in order to obtain the information contained in them. 
(6)  Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing. 
(7)  Records of current deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensation, performance, or discipline of any village officer or employee, or the investigation of charges against a village officer or employee, unless such officer or employee consents to such disclosure. 
(8)  Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or prevention. 
(9)  Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of village property, investing of village funds, or other village business whenever competitive bargaining reasons require non-disclosure. 
(10)  Financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data of specific persons, which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person, referred to in such history or data. 
(11)  Communications between legal counsel for the village and any officer, agent or employee of the village, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in which the village or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is likely to become involved, or communications which are privileged under Wis. Stats. § 905.03. 
(b)  In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record that is not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the village attorney, may deny that request, in whole or in part, only if he determines that the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full access to the requested record. 
(c)  If a record contains information that may be made public and information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information that may be made public and redact the information that may not be made public from the record before release. The custodian shall confer with the village attorney prior to releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the village attorney when separating out the exempt material. If in the judgment of the custodian and the village attorney there is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonably jeopardizing non-disclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be withheld from disclosure. 
(Prior Code, § 1.07F) 
Sec. 2-344. - Destruction of records. 
(a)  Village officers may destroy non-utility financial records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete, after completion of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 442, but not less than seven years after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular transaction, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e). 
(b)  Village officers may destroy utility records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete after completion of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 442 subject to state public service commission regulations, but not less than seven years after the record was effective, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e) and then after such a shorter period, except that water stubs, receipts of current billings and customers' ledgers may be destroyed after two years. 
(c)  Village officers may destroy records of which they are the legal custodian and which are considered obsolete, but not less than seven years after the record was effective unless another period has been set by statute, and then after such a period, or unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e). 
(d)  Unless notice is waived to the state historical society, at least 60 days' notice shall be given the state historical society prior to the destruction of any records as provided by Wis. Stats. § 19.21(4)(a). 
(e)  Any tape recordings of a governmental meeting of the village may be destroyed, erased or reused no sooner than 90 days after the minutes of the meeting have been approved and published, if the purpose of the recording was to make minutes of the meeting. 
(Prior Code, § 1.07G) 
State Law reference- Records of state offices and other public records, Wis. Stats. § 16.61. 
Secs. 2-345-2-361. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ETHICS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Code of ethics for local government officials, employees, and candidates, Wis. Stats. § 19.59; government accountability board, Wis. Stats. §§ 5.05, 15.60; state employees code of ethics, Wis. Stats. § 19.41; bribery of public officers and employees, Wis. Stats. § 946.10; special privileges from public utilities, Wis. Stats. § 946.11; misconduct in public office, Wis. Stats. § 946.12; private interest in public contracts prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 946.13. 

Sec. 2-362. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a code of ethics for all village officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of boards, committees and commissions of the village as well as any individuals who are candidates for elective office as soon as such individuals file nomination papers with the village. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the village and by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the village. 
(Prior Code, § 1.08A) 
Sec. 2-363. - Ethics committee. 
(a)  The ethics committee shall consist of five citizen members, none of who shall be an officer or employee of the village. The members of the committee shall be appointed by the village president (subject to confirmation by the village board) for staggered two-year terms. The ethics committee shall serve as the ethics board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.59. 
(b)  All hearings held by the committee shall be either recorded mechanically or by a court reporter and the original transcript or recording of the hearings shall be filed with the village clerk. At all proceedings under this section, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the village attorney shall serve as legal counsel to the committee. 
(c)  Upon a complaint by the village board, the village attorney may represent either the village board or the committee and special counsel may be retained to represent the other as appropriate. Compensation for such special counsel shall be established by the village board and paid by the village. 
(d)  The ethics committee may make recommendations with respect to amendments to the code of ethics. 
(Prior Code, § 1.08G) 
Sec. 2-364. - Responsibility of public office. 
    Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the state and federal constitutions and carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and municipality and to observe in their official acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their offices regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their prime concern. 
(Prior Code, § 1.08B) 
Sec. 2-365. - Dedicated service. 
(a)  All officials and employees of the village should be loyal to the objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain these objectives. Appointive officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority. 
(b)  Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work. 
(Prior Code, § 1.08C) 
Sec. 2-366. - Fair and equal treatment. 
(a)  Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or permit the unauthorized use of village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit. 
(b)  Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. 
(Prior Code, § 1.08D) 
Sec. 2-367. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  Financial and personal interest prohibited. No official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall act in regard to financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties in the public interest contrary to the provisions of this article or which would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties. As used in this section, the term "financial interest" means any interest that will yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee or to any person employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee. As used in this section, the term "personal interest" means any interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or from close business or political associations, whether or not any financial interest is involved. 
(b)  Incompatible employment. No official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render service, for private interest, when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties, unless otherwise permitted by law and unless disclosure is made as provided in this article. 
(c)  Disclosure of confidential information. No official or employee shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the village, nor shall such information be used to advance the financial or other private interest of the official or employee or others. 
(d)  Gifts and favors. No official or employee shall accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise, from any person which to their knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the village; nor shall any such official or employee accept any gift, favor or thing of value that may tend to influence them in the discharge of their duties, or grant in the discharge of their duties any improper favor, service or thing of value. 
(e)  Contracts. No official employee or agent of this village shall participate in the selection, award, or administration of a contract awarded by the village if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved. An example of such a conflict prohibited would arise when the official, employee or agent; any member of their immediate family; their partner, or an organization which employs, or is about to employ, any of the above; has a financial or other interest in the firm awarded the contract. No village officer or employee who in his capacity as such officer or employee participates in the making of a contract in which he has a private pecuniary interest, direct or indirect, or performs in regard to that contract some function requiring the exercise of discretion on his part, shall enter into any contract with the village unless, within the confines of Wis. Stats. § 946.13, the contract is awarded through a process of public notice and competitive bidding or the village board waives the requirement of this section after determining that it is in the best interest of the village to do so. 
(f)  Representing private interests before village agencies or courts. No official or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person, other than himself, his spouse or minor children, before any village agency or municipal court. However, a member of the village board may appear before village agencies on behalf of the member's constituents in the course of the member's duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. 
(Prior Code, § 1.08E) 
Sec. 2-368. - Hearings; determination. 
    Upon the sworn complaint of any person alleging facts which, if true, would constitute improper conduct under the provisions of this section, the ethics committee shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with all common law requirements of due process and, in written findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, make a determination concerning the propriety of the conduct of the subject official or employee. 
(Prior Code, § 1.08F) 
Sec. 2-369. - Penalty and sanctions. 
    In addition to any other applicable penalties, violation of any provision of this article may constitute a cause for suspension, removal from office or employment, or other disciplinary action. 
(Prior Code, § 1.08H) 
Secs. 2-370-2-396. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal administrative procedure generally, Wis. Stats. § 68.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-397. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Municipal authority includes the village board, commission, committee, agency, officer, employee, or agent of the village making a determination under this article and every person, committee or agency of the village to make an independent review under this article. 
    Person aggrieved includes any individual, partnership, corporation, association, public or private organization; officer, department, board, commission or agency of the village; whose rights, duties or privileges are adversely affected by a determination of a municipal authority. No department, board, commission, agency, officer or employee of the village who is aggrieved may initiate review under this article of a determination of any other department, board, commission, agency, officer or employee of the village, but may respond or intervene in a review proceeding under this article initiated by another. 
(Prior Code, § 20.04) 
Sec. 2-398. - Review of administrative determinations. 
    Any person aggrieved by an administrative determination of the board, commission, committee, agency, officer or employee of the village or agent acting on its behalf may have such determination reviewed as provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 20.01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.01. 
Sec. 2-399. - Determinations reviewable. 
    The following determinations, except determinations by the board of review, are reviewable under this article: 
(1)  The grant or denial in whole or in part after application of an initial permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except an alcohol beverage license. 
(2)  The suspension, revocation or non-renewal of an existing permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except an alcohol beverage license and except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
(3)  The denial of a grant of money or other thing of value under a statute or ordinance prescribing conditions of eligibility for such grant. 
(4)  The imposition of a penalty or sanction upon any person except a municipal employee or officer, other than by a court. 
(5)  The suspension or removal of a village officer or employee except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
(6)  Appeals of impact fees. 
(Prior Code, § 20.02) 
Sec. 2-400. - Determinations not subject to review. 
    The following determinations are not reviewable under this article: 
(1)  A legislative enactment (which is any ordinance, resolution or adopted motion of the village board). 
(2)  Any action subject to administrative or judicial review procedures under state statutes or other provisions of this Code. 
(3)  The denial of a tort or contract claim for money required to be filed with the village under Wis. Stats. § 62.25. 
(4)  The grant, denial, suspension, or revocation of a fermented malt beverage license under Wis. Stats. § 125.25 et seq., or intoxicating liquor license under Wis. Stats. § 125.12(2)(a) or 125.12(2)(b) or (c). 
(5)  Judgments and orders of a court. 
(6)  Determinations made during municipal labor negotiations. 
(7)  Determinations subject to grievance, arbitration, or other procedures provided in collective bargaining agreements. 
(Prior Code, § 20.03) 
Sec. 2-401. - Reducing determination to writing. 
    If a determination subject to this article is made orally or, if in writing, does not state the reasons, the municipal authority making such determination shall, upon written request of any person aggrieved by such determination made within ten days of notice of such determination, reduce the determination and the reasons to writing and mail or deliver such determination and reasons to the person making the request. The determination shall be dated and shall advise such person of his right to have such determination reviewed and the office or person to whom a request for review shall be addressed. 
(Prior Code, § 20.05A) 
Sec. 2-402. - Request for review of determination. 
    Any person aggrieved may have a written or oral determination reviewed by written request mailed or delivered to the municipal authority which made such determination within 30 days of notice to such person of such determination. The request for review shall state the grounds upon which the person aggrieved contends that the determination should be modified or reversed. A request for review shall be made to the officer, employee, agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body who made the determination; but failure to make such request to the proper party shall not preclude the person aggrieved from review unless such failure has caused prejudice to the municipal authority. 
(Prior Code, § 20.05B) 
Sec. 2-403. - Review of determination. 
(a)  Initial determination. If a request for review is made under this article, the determination to be reviewed shall be termed an initial determination. 
(b)  Who shall make review. A review under this section may be made by the officer, employee, agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body who made the initial determination. However, an independent review of such determination by another person, committee or agency of the village, appointed by the president, without confirmation, shall be provided if practicable. 
(c)  When to make review. The municipal authority shall review the initial determination within 15 days of receipt of a request for review. The time for review may be extended by agreement with the person aggrieved. 
(d)  Right to present evidence and argument. The person aggrieved may file with his request for review or within the time agreed with the municipal authority written evidence and argument in support of his position with respect to the initial determination. 
(e)  Decision on review. The municipal authority may affirm, reverse or modify the initial determination and shall mail or deliver to the person aggrieved a copy of the municipal authority's decision on review, which shall state the reasons for such decision. The decision shall advise the person aggrieved of his right to appeal the decision, that appeal may be taken within 30 days, and the office or person with whom notice of appeal shall be filed. 
(Prior Code, § 20.05C) 
Secs. 2-404-2-434. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPEAL 

Sec. 2-435. - Administrative appeal. 
(a)  If the person aggrieved had a hearing substantially in compliance with section 2-436 when the initial determination was made, he may elect to follow sections 2-401 through 2-403, but is not entitled to a further hearing under section 2-436 unless granted by the municipal authority. He may, however, seek judicial review under section 2-438. 
(b)  If the person aggrieved did not have a hearing substantially in compliance with section 2-436 when the initial determination was made, he may follow sections 2-401 through 2-403 and may appeal under this section from the decision made under section 2-403. Appeal from a decision on review under section 2-403 may be taken within 30 days of notice of such decision. 
(c)  An appeal under this section may be taken by filing with or mailing to the office or person designated in the municipal authority's decision on review a written notice of appeal. 
(Prior Code, § 20.06A) 
Sec. 2-436. - Hearing on administrative appeal. 
(a)  Time of hearing. The village shall provide the appellant a hearing on an appeal under section 2-435 within 15 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and shall serve the appellant with notice of such hearing by mail or personal service at least ten days before such hearing. The office or person with whom a notice of appeal is filed shall immediately notify the village attorney, who shall forthwith advise the village president of such appeal. 
(b)  Conduct of hearing. At the hearing, the appellant and the municipal authority may be represented by counsel and may present evidence and call and examine witnesses and cross examine witnesses of the other party. Such witnesses shall be sworn by the person conducting the hearing. The village president shall appoint, without confirmation, an impartial decision maker, who may be an officer, committee, board or commission of the village or the council who did not participate in making or reviewing the initial determination, who shall make the decision on administrative appeal. The decision maker may issue subpoenas. The hearing may, however, be conducted by an impartial person, committee, board or commission designated by the president to conduct the hearing and report to the decision maker. 
(c)  Record of hearing. The person conducting the hearing or a person employed for that purpose shall take notes of the testimony and shall mark and preserve all exhibits. The person conducting the hearing may, and upon request of the appellant shall, cause the proceedings to be taken by a stenographer or by a recording device, the expense to be paid by the village. 
(d)  Hearing on initial determination. Where substantial existing rights are affected by an initial determination, the municipal authority making such determination shall, when practicable, give any person directly affected an opportunity to be heard in accordance with this section before making such determination. 
(Prior Code, § 20.06B) 
Sec. 2-437. - Final determination. 
(a)  Within 20 days of completion of the hearing conducted under section 2-436 and the filing of briefs, if any, the decision maker shall mail or deliver to the appellant its written determination, stating the reasons. Such determination shall be a final determination. 
(b)  A determination following a hearing substantially meeting the requirements of section 2-436 or a decision on review under section 2-403 following such hearing shall be a final determination, judicial review of which may be obtained under section 2-438. 
(Prior Code, § 20.06C) 
Sec. 2-438. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final determination may seek review by writ of certiorari within 30 days of receipt of the final determination. 
(b)  The record of the proceedings shall be transcribed at the expense of the person seeking review. A transcript shall be supplied to anyone requesting the transcript at his expense. If the person seeking review establishes impecuniousness to the satisfaction of the reviewing court, the court may order the proceedings transcribed at the expense of the village; and the person seeking review shall be furnished a free copy of the transcript. By stipulation, the court may order a synopsis of the proceedings in lieu of a transcript. The court may otherwise limit the requirement for a transcript. 
(Prior Code, § 20.07) 
Sec. 2-439. - Legislative review. 
(a)  Seeking review pursuant to this article does not preclude a person aggrieved from seeking relief from the council or any of its boards, commissions, committees or agencies which may have jurisdiction. 
(b)  If, in the course of legislative review under this section, a determination is modified, such modification and any evidence adduced before the council, board, commission, committee or agency shall be made part of the record on review under section 2-438. 
(c)  The council, board, commission, committee or agency conducting a legislative review under this section need not conduct the type of hearing required under section 2-436. 
(Prior Code, § 20.08) 
Secs. 2-440-2-461. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 2-462. - Clerk's election duties. 
    As provided in Wis. Stats. § 7.15, the village clerk-treasurer shall have charge of and supervise all elections held in the village. 
Sec. 2-463. - Election officials appointment, duties and powers. 
    Election officials for each polling place shall be appointed pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 7.30, 7.31 and 7.32. Election officials shall have the powers and perform the duties prescribed for such officers by state law. Inspectors shall serve as clerk of election as may be necessary. The village clerk-treasurer is authorized to select alternate officials or two sets of officials to work at different times on election day. The clerk may also reduce the number of election officials for any given election to not less than three. 
Sec. 2-464. - Candidates for elective village office. 
    Candidates for elective village office shall file nomination papers pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 8.05(4)(b). Whenever the number of candidates for an elective office exceeds twice the number to be elected to the office, a nonpartisan spring primary election shall be held on the third Tuesday in February or on such other day as may be designated by the state as the spring primary election day for that year. 
Sec. 2-465. - Elector registration required. 
    The registration of village electors is required as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 6.26 through 6.57. 
Sec. 2-466. - Wards and polling place. 
(a)  Wards determined. The village is divided into the following wards: 
(1)  Ward 1. Census blocks in Tract No. 450103 that are within the village limits in Washington County, Wisconsin, identified as Block No. 1041, 1042, 1043, 1044, 1045, 1046, 1047, 1048, 1049, 1050, 1051, 1078, 1082, 1083, 1087, 1088. Also, census blocks in Tract No. 450104 that are within the village limits in Washington County, Wisconsin, identified as Block No. 1011, 1012, 1013, 1014, 1015, 1016, 1020, 1021, 1022. 
(2)  Ward 2. Census blocks in Tract No. 450104 that are within the village limits in Washington County, Wisconsin, identified as Block No. 1000, 1001, 1002, 1003, 1005, 1037, 1038, 1039, 1040, 1041, 1079, 1080, 1081, 1082, 1083. 
(3)  Ward 3. Census blocks in Tract No. 450103 that are within the village limits in Washington County, Wisconsin, identified as Block No. 1026, 1027, 1052, 1053, 1054, 1055, 1056, 1057, 1058, 1059, 1060, 1061, 1062, 1069, 1070, 1071, 1072, 1073, 1074, 1075, 1079, 1091. Census blocks in that part of Tract No. 450104 that are within the village limits in Washington County, Wisconsin, identified as Block No. 1004, 1006, 1008, 1009, 1010. 
(4)  Ward 4. Census blocks in Tract No. 450103 that are within the village limits in Washington County, Wisconsin, identified as Block No. 1022, 1023, 1024, 1066, 1067, 1068, 2022, 2037, 2038, 2039, 2040, 2041, 2042, 2043, 2044, 2045. 
(5)  Ward 5. Census blocks in Tract No. 450103 that are within the village limits in Washington County, Wisconsin, identified as Block No. 1063, 1064, 1065, 1076, 1077, 1080, 2061, 2062, 2063, 2064, 2065, 2066. 
(6)  Ward 6. Census blocks in Tract No. 450104 that are within the village limits in Washington County, Wisconsin, identified as Block No. 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010. 
(7)  Ward 7 . Census blocks in Tract No. 450104 that are within the village limits in Washington County, Wisconsin, identified as Block No. 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, 2028. 
(8)  Ward 8 . Census blocks in Tract No. 450103 that are within the village limits in Washington County, Wisconsin, identified as Block No. 2025, 2027, 2046, 2047, 2048, 2049, 2053, 2054, 2055, 2056, 2057, 2058, 2059, 2060. 
(9)  Ward 9 . Census blocks in Tract No. 450104 that are within the village limits in Washington County, Wisconsin, identified as Block No. 2024, 2025, 2026, 2027, 2029, 2030, 2031, 2032, 2033, 2048, 2049, 2051. 
(10)  Ward 10 . State Senate District 20, State Assembly District 60, Washington County Supervisory District 18. 
(b)  Polling place . The polling place for all wards shall be the village board room. 
(Prior Code, § 1.06; Ord. No. 11-06; Ord. No. 13-03; Ord. No. 13-04; Ord. No. 13-05, § I) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcohol beverages, Wis. Stats. ch. 125; local option, Wis. Stats. § 125.05; municipal regulation of alcoholic beverages, Wis. Stats. § 125.10; fermented malt beverages generally, Wis. Stats. § 125.25 et seq.; intoxicating liquor generally, Wis. Stats. § 125.51 et seq.; unlicensed places serving alcoholic beverages as nuisance, Wis. Stats. § 125.14; carrying handgun where alcohol beverages may be sold and consumed, Wis. Stats. § 941.237; parental liability for acts of minor child, Wis. Stats. § 895.035; beverage taxes, Wis. Stats. § 139.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - State law adopted. 
(a)  The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 125, relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendment, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of alcohol beverage control. 
(Prior Code, § 6.01A; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No. 08-02; Ord. No. 08-05; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 12-01) 
State Law reference- Authority for municipality to enact ordinances regulating the sale of alcohol beverages and to adopt state provisions, Wis. Stats. § 125.10. 
Secs. 4-2-4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-21. - Classes of licenses. 
    There shall be the following classes of licenses which, when the fee as set forth specified by resolution is paid, and the license issued, shall permit the holder to sell, deal, or traffic in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages as provided by state law: 
(1)  Class "A" fermented malt beverages license. The Class "A" fermented malt beverages license is for the sale of fermented malt beverages for off-premises consumption only. 
(2)  Class "B" fermented malt beverages license. The Class "B" fermented malt beverages license is a fermented malt beverage license for the sale of fermented malt beverages for on- or off-premises consumption. 
(3)  "Class A" intoxicating liquor license. The "Class A" intoxicating liquor license is for the sale of intoxicating liquors for off-premises consumption only. 
(4)  "Class B" intoxicating liquor license. The "Class B" intoxicating liquor license is for the sale of intoxicating liquor for on- or off-premises consumption. No such license shall be issued except to a person to whom is also issued a Class "B" retail fermented malt beverage license. 
(5)  Temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license . The temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license may be issued to a bona fide club, municipal association, agricultural society or lodge that has been in existence for a period of not less than six months prior to the date of application to sell fermented malt beverages at a gathering or meeting of such organization upon the terms and conditions and hours of operation as set by the village board and upon the payment of a fee specified by resolution. 
(6)  Operator licenses. Operator licenses that may be issued are: operator license, temporary operator license, provisional operator license, and managers license. All license applications shall be approved or denied by the village board for the purpose of complying with Wis. Stats. ch. 125 and this chapter. The fee for such license shall be set by resolution. 
(7)  "Class C" intoxicating liquor license. The "Class C" intoxicating liquor license is a license authorizing the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where sold. A "Class C" intoxicating liquor license may not be issued to a restaurant where alcohol sales exceed 50 percent of the total gross receipts and may not be issued to a party not possessing a Class "B" fermented malt beverage license. 
(8)  Fermented malt beverages wholesale licenses. Fermented malt beverages wholesale licenses may be issued by the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 6.01B; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No. 08-02; Ord. No. 08-05; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 12-01) 
Sec. 4-22. - Applications for license. 
    Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on the form prescribed by law, shall be sworn to by the applicant as provided by Wis. Stats. ch. 125 and shall be filed with the village clerk-treasurer not less than 15 days prior to the granting of such license. Such application shall be accompanied by the cost of publication as provided by Wis. Stats. ch. 125. Application for operator's license shall be made in the manner prescribed in division 2 of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6.01C; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No. 08-02; Ord. No. 08-05; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 12-01) 
Sec. 4-23. - Granting of licenses. 
(a)  Opportunity shall be given by the village board to any person to be heard for or against the granting of any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages license. Each license shall be numbered in the order in which issued and shall state the premises for which issued, the date of issuance, the fee and the name of the licensee. 
(b)  Class "A" and "B" fermented malt beverages licenses, and "Class A" and "Class B" intoxicating liquor licenses shall only be permitted as a conditional use in business or business PUD zoning districts. 
(Prior Code, § 6.01D; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No. 08-02; Ord. No. 08-05; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 12-01) 
Sec. 4-24. - Restrictions on granting licenses. 
    In addition to the requirements imposed by the adopted state statutes, the following provisions shall apply to the granting of licenses under this article: 
(1)  Licenses shall be issued in accordance with Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
(2)  No license shall be granted for operation of any premises upon which taxes or assessments or other financial claims of the village are delinquent and unpaid. 
(3)  No retail Class "A" or Class "B" licenses shall be issued or renewed unless the premises to be licensed or for which the license is to be renewed conforms to sanitary, safety, fire, electrical, plumbing, and health requirements of applicable state laws and regulations and village ordinances. 
(4)  The village shall inspect the licensed premises and send a written notice to the license holder of the items not in compliance with this Code and state statute regulations prior to June 15 of each year itemizing the noncompliance items. If the licensed premises has not been brought into compliance as required by the notice, no license shall be issued until the premises are in compliance. 
(Prior Code, § 6.01E; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No. 08-02; Ord. No. 08-05; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 12-01) 
Sec. 4-25. - License expiration date. 
    All licenses issued under this article shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(Prior Code, § 6.01H; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No. 08-02; Ord. No. 08-05; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 12-01) 
Sec. 4-26. - Applicants must be eligible for license under state law. 
    Licenses and permits shall be issued only to those persons eligible under Wis. Stats. ch. 125. Licenses and permits granted in error shall be void. 
(Prior Code, § 6.01H; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No. 08-02; Ord. No. 08-05; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 12-01) 
Sec. 4-27. - Policies and quota. 
(a)  Quota of "Class A" intoxicating liquor license. The village may issue one license for each qualified applicant. 
(b)  Quota for "Class B" intoxicating liquor license. The village may issue one license for each 500 population or fraction thereof, except as otherwise provided for in state statutes. 
(c)  Quota for "Class C" intoxicating liquor license. The village may issue "Class C" intoxicating liquor licenses provided they do not exceed the quota established for "Class B" intoxicating liquor licenses. 
(d)  Determining population. Population is to be determined by the last preceding population estimate as calculated annually by the state department of administration. 
(e)  Consumption restricted to inside premises; exception. The licensed premises for consumption of beverages shall be restricted to the inside of a building. The village board may allow consumption on contiguous property owned or rented by the licensee only by the granting of a conditional use permit under the provisions of chapter 48. 
(Prior Code, § 6.01F; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No. 08-02; Ord. No. 08-05; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 12-01) 
Sec. 4-28. - Conditions of license. 
(a)  Entry of officers. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents to the entry of police or other duly authorized representatives of the village at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search, and consents to the removal from such premises of all things and articles held in violation of village ordinances or state laws, and consents to the introduction of such things and articles into evidence in any prosecution that may be brought for such offense. 
(b)  Disorderly conduct is prohibited. Each licensed premises shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous, or indecent conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises. 
(c)  Gambling prohibited . No gambling or game of chance shall be permitted in any form upon the licensed premises unless specifically permitted by state law. With regard to enforcement for the possession of five or fewer video gambling machines on a Class B licensed premises, the village shall defer to the state department of revenue. 
(d)  Illegal beverages prohibited. No beverages of an alcoholic content prohibited by the laws of the United States shall be sold, bartered, exchanged, offered or exposed for sale, or kept in or about the premises. 
(e)  Revocations, suspensions, non-issuance or non-renewable . The village board may revoke, suspend, refuse to renew or refuse to issue a new license for reasons stated in Wis. Stats. ch. 125, or for continued violation of village ordinances according to the procedures prescribed Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
(Prior Code, § 6.01G; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No. 08-02; Ord. No. 08-05; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 12-01) 
Sec. 4-29. - Commencement of operations. 
    Within 90 days after issuance of an intoxicating liquor license or fermented malt beverage license, the licensee shall be open for business with adequate stock and equipment. Upon the owner's failure to do business within such time, the owner's license shall be subject to revocation by the village board after a public hearing. The village board may, for good cause shown, extend such 90-day period. 
Sec. 4-30. - Cessation of operations. 
    If any licensee under this article shall suspend or cease doing business for 90 consecutive days or more, the intoxicating liquor license or fermented malt beverage license shall be subject to revocation by the village board after a public hearing. The board may, for a good cause shown, extend such 90-day period. 
Sec. 4-31. - Licensed premises defined. 
    The term "licensed premises" means the area described in the license or permit. 
(Prior Code, § 6.01H; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No. 08-02; Ord. No. 08-05; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 12-01) 
Secs. 4-32-4-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATOR'S LICENSES 

Sec. 4-51. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division are cumulative to and shall be in addition to all other provisions of this article related to licensees generally. 
Sec. 4-52. - Application; fees. 
    Application for an operator's license to sell or serve intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on a form provided by the village clerk-treasurer and filed in the office of the village clerk. The operator's license shall be operative only within the village limits. No license shall be issued until the applicant has complied with the examination and investigation provisions of this division. Fees for operator's licenses shall be as provided in the village fee schedule and are nonrefundable. 
Sec. 4-53. - Successful completion of responsible beverage services course required. 
    No operator's license shall be issued to an individual who has not successfully completed a responsible beverage services course. 
Sec. 4-54. - Review procedure; granting or denial of license. 
(a)  Investigation by police department. The village police department shall conduct an investigation of the applicant, including, but not limited to, requesting information from the state, surrounding municipalities and any community where the applicant has previously resided concerning the applicant's arrest and conviction record. 
(b)  Police chief's recommendation. Based upon such investigation, the chief of police shall recommend in writing to the village board approval or denial of the application. If the chief of police recommends denial, he shall provide the reason for recommendation of denial in writing to the village clerk. 
(c)  Final action by village board. Upon receipt of recommendation from the chief of police, the village clerk-treasurer shall cause the name of the applicant to be placed on the next regular village board agenda for action to either grant or deny the application for license. 
Sec. 4-55. - Provisional licenses. 
(a)  Issuance. A provisional operator's license may be issued by the village board or the village clerk, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  By the village board. The village board may issue a provisional operator's license to a person who is enrolled in a training course under Wis. Stats. § 125.l7(6)(a) and shall revoke the license if the applicant fails to complete the course in which he enrolls. 
(2)  By the village clerk. After investigation and recommendation by the chief of police, the clerk may issue a provisional operator's license to a person who is enrolled in a training course under Wis. Stats. § 125.17(6)(a). 
(b)  Expiration. A provisional operator's license shall expire 60 days after its issuance or when a regular operator's license is issued to the holder, whichever is sooner. 
Sec. 4-56. - Temporary licenses. 
    After investigation and recommendation by the chief of police, the village clerk-treasurer may issue a temporary operator's license to applicants who qualify for the issuance of an operator's license and who are employed by, or who are donating their services to, nonprofit entities pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.17. A temporary operator's license shall be valid for a period of from one day to 14 days as designated on the license. No person may hold more than one temporary operator's license per year pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.17. 
Secs. 4-57-4-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4-86. - Opening hours for retail beer and liquor stores. 
    Opening hours for retail beer and liquor stores are per Wis. Stats. §§ 125.32(3) and 125.68(4). 
(Prior Code, § 6.01H; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No. 08-02; Ord. No. 08-05; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 12-01) 
Sec. 4-87. - Serving alcohol beverages while intoxicated prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee or agent of the licensee to serve alcohol beverages while intoxicated. Intoxication shall mean having a blood alcohol content of .08 or more. A police officer may ask the person to submit to a preliminary breath test upon reasonable suspicion. Refusal to submit may be considered by the village board as grounds for revocation, suspension, non-issuance, or non-renewal of a license for the licensee, agent, or the establishment. If the licensed premises' principal business is the sale of alcohol beverages, the police will order it closed if no other licensed server is on the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 6.01H; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No. 08-02; Ord. No. 08-05; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 12-01) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes against animals, Wis. Stats. § 951.01 et seq.; local regulation of wild animals, Wis. Stats. § 29.038; wild animals and plants generally, Wis. Stats. § 29.001 et seq.; protection of endangered species, Wis. Stats. § 29.604; noxious substances, Wis. Stats. § 29.601; soil and water conservation and animal waste management, Wis. Stats. § 92.01 et seq.; local regulation of livestock operations, Wis. Stats. § 92.15; animal health generally, Wis. Stats. § 95.001 et seq.; diseased animals, Wis. Stats. § 95.19; rabies control program, Wis. Stats. § 95.21; disposition of animal carcasses, Wis. Stats. § 95.50; strays and lost chattels, Wis. Stats. § 170.01 et seq.; animals distrained or doing damage, Wis. Stats. § 172.01 et seq.; animals not to run at large, Wis. Stats. § 172.01; humane officers, Wis. Stats. § 173.01; dogs generally, Wis. Stats. § 174.001 et seq.; dog license tax, Wis. Stats. § 174.05; dog licenses and collar tags, Wis. Stats. § 174.07; humane killing of dogs, Wis. Stats. § 562.105. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    At large means an animal is off the premises of its owner and upon any public street or alley, school grounds, public park or other public grounds, or upon any private property without the permission of the owner of the property. 
    Vicious dog means any dog which attacks a human being or another domestic animal without provocation and any dog with a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, cause injury or otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or other domestic animals as evidenced by its habitual or repeated chasing or snapping, or barking or snarling in a threatening manner. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06A, D.1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Enforcement; penalties and other remedies. 
    The police department is authorized to remove animals from a premises for violation of any part of this chapter. Animals removed because of such action shall be turned over to the county humane society. In addition, violations of this chapter shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-15. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06E.6) 
Sec. 6-3. - Adoption of state law. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 174, exclusive of any penalties, are adopted by reference and made a part of this Code so far as applicable. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06B.1) 
Secs. 6-4-6-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CARE AND CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-25. - Animals at large. 
(a)  Prohibited. No animal shall be allowed to run at large. An animal shall not be deemed "at large" if the following provisions apply: 
(1)  It is attached to a leash not more than ten feet in length, which is of sufficient strength to restrain the animal and the leash is held by a person competent to govern the animal and prevent it from annoying or worrying pedestrians or trespassing on private property or trespassing on public property where such animals are forbidden. 
(2)  It is properly restrained within a motor vehicle. 
(3)  It is a certified law enforcement dog engaged in official duties or training. 
(b)  Setting animals at large prohibited . No person may open any door or gate of a private premises for the purpose of setting a dog or other animal at large, except the owner of such animal. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06A, C.5) 
State Law reference- Animals distrained, and animals not to run at large, Wis. Stats. § 172.01 et seq. 
Sec. 6-26. - Keeping of wolf-dog hybrids prohibited. 
    No wolf-dog hybrid, defined as any cross-breed resulting from the mating of a domesticated dog and a wolf, coyote, jackal or dingo or resulting from the mating of any wolf-dog hybrid and another wolf-dog hybrid or a domesticated dog, may be kept within the village. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06D.6) 
Sec. 6-27. - Keeping of animals and fowl restricted. 
    No animals or fowl, except domesticated pets, shall be kept within the village, except in areas used for agricultural purposes. The commercial raising of all animals and fowl is prohibited except when permitted as a conditional use or planned unit development use amendment. The keeping of exotic pets that might generate a neighborhood disturbance or possibly devalue property will require a conditional use permit or planned unit development use amendment. 
(Prior Code, § 9.05; Ord. No. 03-09) 
Sec. 6-28. - Outdoor animal containment and shelter facilities. 
(a)  Shelter generally. No person may fail to provide any animal or bird in his charge with shelter from the inclement weather to ensure the protection and comfort of the animal or bird. 
(b)  Protection from high and low temperatures. When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort to any animal or bird, shade shall be provided by natural or artificial means to allow protection from the direct rays of the sun, but still allow air to pass to keep the animal cool. Whenever the outdoor temperature is at or below 40 degrees Fahrenheit, clean dry bedding material shall be provided for insulation and to retain the body heat of the animal. 
(c)  Dog and cat enclosures. Dogs and cats kept outdoors for more than one hour at a time shall be provided with moisture-proof and wind-proof shelter of a size which allows the animal to turn around freely and to easily sit, stand and lie in a normal position, and to keep the animal clean, dry and comfortable. The quarters shall be maintained in a clean condition and in a good state of repair. 
(d)  Motor vehicles and garages not to be used as shelter; exception. Motor vehicles or garages shall not be used as proper shelter under the provisions of this section, except that during winter months a doghouse may be placed inside a garage for additional shelter. 
(e)  Food storage. Food supplies outside of the dwelling unit shall be stored in a rodent-proof container, and food and water containers shall be kept clean. 
(f)  Bedding material. Litter and or bedding material outside of the dwelling unit shall be changed as often as necessary to prevent an odor nuisance. 
(g)  Feces removal. Any area where an animal is housed or allowed to remain shall be kept clean of feces, animal waste and other substances in order to keep the animal healthy and comfortable. Feces shall be removed from yards, pens, and enclosures once every 48 hours to prevent health problems and shall be stored in a tightly covered metal container until final disposal. No odor nuisances shall be permitted. 
(h)  Insect control. Yards, pens, premises, and animals shall be kept free of insect infestations. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06E.1, E.4) 
Sec. 6-29. - Cruelty prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall directly or indirectly cruelly beat, frighten, overburden, neglect or abuse any animal or bird, or use any device or chemical substance by which pain, suffering or death may result, whether the animal or bird belongs to the person or another. This section does not apply when reasonable force is used to drive off vicious or trespassing animals; treatment or euthanasia performed by a veterinarian; the use of Mace and similar products for the protection of persons or other animals; or training devices when used as directed by the manufacturer. 
(b)  The owner of any animal shall provide or obtain treatment should the animal be injured or ill. 
(c)  No person shall abandon or transport any animal or bird in a cruel manner. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06E.2) 
State Law reference- Crimes against animals, Wis. Stats. § 951.01 et seq. 
Sec. 6-30. - Food and water. 
    No person owning or having custody of any animal or bird may neglect or fail to provide it with necessary nourishing food at least once daily, and shall provide a constant supply of clean water to sustain the animal or bird in good health. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06E.3) 
Sec. 6-31. - Tethering. 
(a)  Chains, ropes, leashes and similar tethers shall be placed or attached in a manner that they not be entangled with another animal or object and shall be of sufficient length in proportion to the size of the animal to allow the animal proper exercise and convenient access to food, water and shelter. 
(b)  A tether shall be located so as not to allow the animal to trespass on public or private property, or in such manner as to cause harm or danger to persons or other animals. A tether shall be located so as not to allow the animal to jump over an obstacle where the tether can become entangled and the animal be harmed in any manner. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06E.5) 
Sec. 6-32. - Duty to report animal bite. 
    Every person, including the owner or person harboring or keeping a dog or other animal, who knows that such animal has bitten any person shall immediately report such fact to the police department. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06C.3) 
Secs. 6-33-6-52. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 6-53. - Dog and cat licenses. 
(a)  Required; fees. It shall be unlawful for any person in the village to own, harbor, or keep any cat or dog more than five months of age that has not been licensed by the village. License fees shall be as provided in the village fee schedule. 
(b)  Seizure of animals in violation. Police officers are authorized to capture and restrain any dog or cat running at large and any untagged dog, and to transfer the animal to the custody of the county humane society. This does not preclude the immediate killing of a dog for the protection of other animals and persons as authorized in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06B.2, C.2) 
State Law reference- Dog license tax, Wis. Stats. § 174.05; dog licenses and collar tags, Wis. Stats. § 164.06; publication of license and vaccination requirement, Wis. Stats. § 174.052. 
Sec. 6-54. - Maximum number of cats and dogs per residence. 
    No more than two dogs and two cats may be licensed for any one residence. Exceptions may be requested by application to the plan commission and village board for a conditional use permit or PUD amendment. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06B.4) 
Sec. 6-55. - Rabies vaccination required for dogs and cats. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, or keep a dog in the village which is over five months of age and does not have a current rabies vaccination as required by Wis. Stats. § 95.21(2), or to own, harbor or keep a cat in the village which is over five months of age and does not have current rabies vaccination issued by a veterinarian. A rabies vaccination tag shall be attached to the collar of all licensed dogs at all times, except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 95.21(2)(f). 
(Prior Code, § 8.06B.3) 
State Law reference- Rabies control program, Wis. Stats. § 95.21. 
Sec. 6-56. - Nuisance dogs prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to own, harbor or keep any dog that: 
(1)  Habitually pursues vehicles upon any street, alley or highway. 
(2)  Molests passersby or assaults or attacks any person without provocation. 
(3)  Is at large. 
(4)  Habitually barks or howls to the annoyance of any person. 
(5)  Kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal. 
(6)  Goes outdoors without valid license and rabies tags attached to the collar, unless the dog is securely confined in a fenced area. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06C.1) 
State Law reference- Dogs running at large and untagged dogs subject to impoundment, Wis. Stats. § 174.042; dog licenses and collar tags, Wis. Stats. § 174.07. 
Sec. 6-57. - Dog and cat feces removal. 
    Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, or in control of any dog or cat shall promptly remove and dispose of all feces left by the dog or cat on any public property and on any private property not owned by such person or lawfully occupied by such person. 
(Prior Code, §§ 8.06C.6, 9.09; Ord. No. 95-16; Ord. No. 07-01) 
Sec. 6-58. - Quarantine and destruction of certain cats and dogs suspected of rabies infection. 
(a)  Quarantine. A police officer shall order a dog or cat quarantined if the officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a person, is infected with rabies or has been in contact with a rabid animal. If a quarantine is ordered, the owner of the dog or cat shall be subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 95.21 
(b)  Humane killing authorized. The officer may kill an animal only as a last resort or if the owner agrees. The officer shall attempt to kill the animal in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head. Killing of an animal is authorized under this section in the following circumstances: 
(1)  If a quarantine required by this section cannot be imposed because the animal cannot be captured, the officer may kill the animal. 
(2)  A police officer may order killed or may kill an animal other than a dog or cat if the officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a person or is infected with rabies. 
(3)  In addition, a police officer may order killed or may kill a dog or cat if the owner of the dog or cat violates the quarantine provisions of Wis. Stats. § 95.21(5)(a), (b), or (c). 
(Prior Code, § 8.06C.4) 
Secs. 6-59-6-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 6-90. - Determination. 
    The police chief or designee shall investigate every dog complaint and make a determination as to whether or not such dog is vicious. In the event the police chief makes a determination that a dog is vicious, he shall so inform the owner, keeper or harborer of such dog and provide such person with a copy of this division. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06D.3) 
Sec. 6-91. - Appeal of determination. 
    Any person aggrieved by the determination of the police chief under this division may appeal such determination with the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06D.4) 
Sec. 6-92. - Disposition of vicious dogs. 
(a)  Any law enforcement officer of the village may take custody of an animal if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe the animal is one of the type set forth in Wis. Stats. § 173.13(1)(a)(1) to (9). Subject to review by the circuit court, the animal, if taken into custody because it is hopelessly injured, an imminent threat to public health or safety, or the health or safety of itself or its custodians, shall be turned over to the appropriate agency for euthanization. 
(b)  This section does not preclude the immediate killing of a dog for the protection of other animals and persons, as authorized by Wis. Stats. § 174.01. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06D.5) 
State Law reference- Taking custody of animals, Wis. Stats. § 173.13; restraining action against dogs, Wis. Stats. § 174.01. 
Sec. 6-93. - Prohibited in multifamily dwellings. 
    No vicious dog may be kept within any portion of any two-family or multiple-family dwelling as defined in chapter 48. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06D.2(d)) 
Sec. 6-94. - Leash and muzzle. 
    No person owning, harboring or having the care of a vicious dog may permit such dog to go outside its kennel or pen unless the dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four feet in length. No person may permit a vicious dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash. The dog may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts and buildings. A vicious dog on a leash outside the dog's kennel shall be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the dog from biting persons or other animals. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06D.2(a)) 
Sec. 6-95. - Confinement indoors. 
    No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit the building on its volition. No vicious dog may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06D.2(c)) 
Sec. 6-96. - Confinement outdoors. 
(a)  All vicious dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled. 
(b)  The pen, kennel or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. A structure used to confine a vicious dog shall be locked with a key or combination lock when the dog is within the structure. The structure shall have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures shall be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  All structures erected to house vicious dogs shall comply with all applicable municipal zoning and building regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06D.2(b)) 
Sec. 6-97. - Signs. 
    All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "beware of dog." A similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of the dog. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06D.2(e)) 
Sec. 6-98. - Insurance. 
(a)  All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs shall provide proof to the police chief of public liability insurance in a single incident amount of $50,000.00 per incident for bodily injury to or death of any person or for the damage to property owned by any person which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of vicious dogs. 
(b)  The insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy will be made unless a ten-day written notice is first given to the police chief. 
(c)  The owner or custodian of the dog shall produce evidence of the required insurance upon request of a law enforcement officer. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06D.2(f)) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fences generally, Wis. Stats. § 90.01 et seq.; regulation of building industry generally, Wis. Stats. § 101.01 et seq.; one- and two-family dwelling code, Wis. Stats. § 101.60 et seq.; municipal authority regarding one- and two-family dwelling code, Wis. Stats. § 101.65; multifamily dwelling code, Wis. Stats. § 101.971 et seq.; modular home code, Wis. Stats. § 101.70 et seq.; municipal authority regarding modular home code, Wis. Stats. § 101.76; electrical wiring and electricians, Wis. Stats. § 101.80 et seq.; municipal authority regarding electrical wiring and electricians, Wis. Stats. § 101.86; municipal licensing authority regarding electricians, Wis. Stats. § 101.861; manufactured and mobile homes, Wis. Stats. § 101.91 et seq.; plumbing and fire protection systems and swimming pool plan review, Wis. Stats. § 145.01 et seq.; special inspection warrants, Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, install, alter, repair, move, demolish, convert, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or premises in the village contrary to or in violation of any provision of this chapter to cause, permit or support the same to be done. 
(b)  Any person that shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit not less than as defined in the municipal forfeiture schedule for each violation, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be confined in the county house of correction until such forfeiture and costs are paid, for not more than the number of days set forth in Wis. Stats. § 800.095(4). Each and every day during which any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition, appropriate legal or equitable action may be commenced to obtain compliance or enjoin any person from violating any of the sections of this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 12.38) 
Secs. 8-2-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-21. - Building inspector police power to enforce. 
    The building inspector shall have the power to enforce this chapter and rules and regulations which affect construction such as littering, strewing mud on streets, etc. 
(Prior Code, § 10.01B) 
Sec. 8-22. - Report of violations. 
    All police officers shall report at once to the building inspector any building work which is being carried on without a permit as required by this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 10.03D) 
Sec. 8-23. - Records. 
    The building inspector shall keep a record of all permits, fees and inspections under this chapter, and shall make an annual report thereon to the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 10.03E) 
Sec. 8-24. - Fees. 
    The fees for this chapter shall be as provided in the village fee schedule. All fees shall be paid to the village. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02A.10) 
Sec. 8-25. - Appeals and variances. 
    The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from the rulings of the building inspector and permit such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interests. Any action taken by the board shall be at a public hearing, after notice thereof has been given by publication for one week in the official newspaper of the village. 
(Prior Code, § 10.11) 
Secs. 8-26-8-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 8-54. - Notice; time within inspections to be completed. 
    The builder shall notify the building inspector when ready, and the building inspector shall, within 48 hours after such notice, inspect all buildings as outlined in the state building code. After completion he shall make a final inspection of all new structures, buildings and alterations. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02A.11) 
Sec. 8-55. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    The building inspector shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and of all state law that relates to building construction. The building inspector shall have the right during reasonable working hours to enter any public or private building in the discharge of his official duties. 
(Prior Code, § 10.01A) 
Sec. 8-56. - Final inspections. 
    All permits require a final inspection. The department of building inspection shall be notified by the owner, owner's agent, or contractor, stating all work has been completed and arrange a final inspection within ten days of completion of the work. All new construction of any one and two family buildings, residential rental buildings, multifamily buildings, commercial buildings, commercial occupant, or industrial buildings shall not be occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the department of building inspection of the village. Occupancy granted to the building contractor shall have a one year period from the original date of occupancy certificate. It is the responsibility of the building contractor to provide the new owner's information to the building inspection department. 
(Prior Code, § 10.04B) 
Secs. 8-57-8-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND PLANS 

Sec. 8-86. - Building permit required. 
(a)  Generally. No building or any part thereof shall hereafter be erected or ground broken for the same, within the village except as provided in this chapter, until a permit therefor shall first have been obtained by the owner, or his authorized agent, from the building inspector. The term "building" as used in this section shall include any building, structure, and any enlargement, alteration, heating or ventilating installation, moving, or anything affecting the fire hazards or safety of any building or structure. 
(b)  Access street to be recorded on official village map. For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the official map, no permit for the erection of any building shall be issued unless a street or highway giving access to such proposed structure has been duly placed on the map. 
(c)  Building may not be placed in public ways. No permit shall be issued for any building in the bed of any existing or proposed street, highway, drainageway, or parkway shown on the official map. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5.07F, 10.02A.1) 
Sec. 8-87. - Application. 
    Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the building inspector and shall state the name and address of the owner of the land, and also of the owner of the building, if different, the legal description of the land upon which the building is to be located, the name and address of the designer, and shall contain such other information as the building inspector may require. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02A.2) 
Sec. 8-88. - Plans. 
(a)  With such application there shall be submitted two complete sets of plans and specifications for residential and three sets for commercial and industrial, including a certified survey showing the location and elevations of the proposed building with respect to adjoining streets, alleys, lot lines and buildings, and including the architectural design of the proposed building. Plans for buildings required to comply with the state building code shall bear a stamp of approval from the governing state agency. Such plans and specifications shall be submitted in duplicate. One set shall be returned after approval as hereinafter provided, the other set shall remain on file in the office of the village building inspector. All plans and specifications shall be signed by the designer. 
(b)  The building inspector may require each applicant for a building permit to submit a plan, prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor, showing accurately the location of any proposed building with reference to any street, highway, drainageway, or parkway shown on the official map. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5.07F, 10.02A.3) 
Sec. 8-89. - Waiver of plans. 
    If the building inspector finds that the character of the work is sufficiently described in the application, he may waive the filing of plans for alterations, repairs, moving or construction. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02A.4) 
Sec. 8-90. - Approval of architectural design. 
    Multifamily, commercial, or industrial plans and specifications shall be submitted to the plan commission/village board which shall determine whether the architectural design and appearance of the proposed building is so at variance with the architectural design and appearance of the other buildings in the surrounding neighborhood as to cause a material depreciation in the value of such property. If the village board determines that the proposed building is so at variance, it shall direct the building inspector to deny the application. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02A.5) 
Sec. 8-91. - Approval of plans. 
    If the village board has approved the architectural design and if the building inspector determines that the proposed building will comply in every respect with all ordinances of the village and all applicable state law and rules, he shall officially approve and stamp one set of the plans and return it to the owner, and shall issue, within one week, a building permit therefor which shall be kept and displayed at the site of the proposed building. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered in any respect which involves any of the above mentioned ordinances, laws and orders, or which involves the safety of the building or occupants, except with the written consent of the building inspector. In case adequate plans are presented for part of the building only, the building inspector may, at his discretion, issue a permit for a part of the building before receiving the plans and specifications for the entire building, subject to the approval of the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02A.6) 
Sec. 8-92. - Minor repairs. 
    The building inspector may authorize minor repairs or alterations which do not change the occupancy area, structural strength, fire protection, exits, light or ventilation of the building without requiring a building permit to be issued. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02A.9) 
Sec. 8-93. - Lapse of permit. 
    A building permit shall lapse and be void unless operations under the permit are commenced within six months from the date of the issuance thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 10.03B) 
Sec. 8-94. - Permit revocation. 
    If the building inspector shall find at any time that the above mentioned ordinances, laws, orders, plans, and specifications are not being complied with, and that the holder of the permit refuses to conform after a written warning or instruction has been issued to him, he shall revoke the building, electrical or plumbing permit by written notice posted at the site of the work. When any such permit is revoked, it shall be unlawful to do any further work thereunder, until the permit is reissued, excepting such work as the building inspector may order to be done as a condition precedent to the reassurance of the permit, or as he may require for the preservation of human life and safety. 
(Prior Code, § 10.03C) 
Sec. 8-95. - Appeals. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to review any administrative decision of the village building inspector regarding denial of a permit for the erection of a structure under this article and grant relief from the requirements of this article under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(6)(e), (f) and (g). 
(Prior Code, § 5.07H) 
Secs. 8-96-8-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING AND TECHNICAL CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-119. - State codes adopted. 
(a)  The village adopts by reference, as though fully set forth herein, the following chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code and the building and technical codes of the village, as amended and modified by the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Fire code, as follows: Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 314, Fire prevention. 
(2)  Electrical code, as follows: 
a.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 316, Electrical. 
b.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 113, Service rules for electrical utilities. 
c.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 114, Wisconsin Electrical Code, Vol. I. 
(3)  Uniform dwelling code. Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 320 through 325, as follows: 
a.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 320, Administration and enforcement. 
b.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 321, Construction standards. 
c.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 322, Energy conservation. 
d.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 323, Heating, ventilating and air conditioning. 
e.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 324, Electrical standards. 
f.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 325, Plumbing. 
g.  Wis. Admin. Code chs. 320-325 appendices A, B and C. 
(4)  Commercial building code. Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 360 through 366, as follows: 
a.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 360, Erosion and sediment control; stormwater. 
b.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 361, Administration and enforcement. 
c.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 362, Buildings and structures. 
d.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 363, Energy conservation. 
e.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 364, Heating, ventilating and air conditioning. 
f.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 365, Fuel gas appliances. 
g.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 366, Existing buildings. 
h.  Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 361-364, Appendices A and B. 
(5)  Historic buildings, as follows: Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 372, Cleaning methods. 
(6)  Plumbing code. Wis. Stats. ch. 145 and Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 381 through 386, as follows: 
a.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 381, Definitions and standards. 
b.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 382, Plumbing design, construction etc. 
c.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383, Private on-site wastewater treatment systems. 
d.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 384, Plumbing products. 
e.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 384, Appendix. 
f.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 385, Soil and site evaluations. 
g.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 390, Design and construction of public swimming pools, etc. 
h.  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 390, Appendix. 
(b)  Any act required to be performed or prohibited by an administrative code provision incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the administrative code provisions incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this chapter to secure uniform statewide regulation of one- and two-family dwellings in the village. A copy of these administrative code provisions and any future amendments shall be kept on file in the village zoning committee's office. 
(Prior Code, § 10.04A) 
Sec. 8-120. - Foundation repairs and damp-proofing. 
    Applications for permit shall include a statement of the existing foundation defects, and an analysis of the cause of those existing defects to ensure that all conditions responsible for foundation defects are corrected. Plans or specifications must be submitted for approval prior to issuance of a permit. Except as otherwise permitted by the village, the applicant shall submit site-specific engineering calculations and details sealed by a professional engineer registered in this state for foundation repair work of any kind. 
(Prior Code, § 10.05; Ord. No. 02-11) 
Sec. 8-121. - New methods and materials. 
    All materials, methods of construction, and devices designed for use in buildings or structures covered by this chapter and not specifically mentioned in or permitted by this chapter, shall not be so used until approved in writing by the governing state agency for use in buildings or structures covered by state building code, except sanitary appliances, which shall be approved in accordance with the state plumbing code. Such materials, methods of construction, and devices, when approved, must be installed or used in strict compliance with the manufacturer's specifications and any other rules or conditions of use established by the governing state agency. 
(Prior Code, § 10.06) 
Sec. 8-122. - Location of buildings. 
    All buildings shall be located and have an elevation in harmony with a majority of the existing buildings in the immediate area. All buildings shall comply with setback requirements established as a condition of a conditional use approval or as a condition of a planned unit development approval or with the village's zoning regulations as required. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02A.7) 
Sec. 8-123. - Temporary dwellings. 
    No garage or accessory building shall be constructed or used for residential purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02A.8) 
Sec. 8-124. - Basement homes prohibited. 
    No person shall construct or use a basement for residential purposes. Any basement constructed shall have at least one story erected on it within one year after issuance of the building permit. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02A.12) 
Sec. 8-125. - Recreational or travel trailers not to be used as residences. 
    No person shall occupy a recreational or travel trailer within the village for residential purposes, except as provided in the village's zoning regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02A.13) 
Sec. 8-126. - House numbering. 
    Address numbers, supplied by the village in a black on white color, shall be displayed on the building on either side of the front entrance door and, if possible, under an outside light for illumination at night. Requests to display the address at any other location must be approved, in writing, by the building inspector. Address numbers must be kept visible from the street at all times. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02C) 
Sec. 8-127. - Fences. 
(a)  No fence shall exceed a maximum height of six feet unless a conditional use or PUD amendment is granted. 
(b)  All fences shall be self-supported structures. There shall be no barbed wire or electric fences, except in areas used for agricultural purposes. No permits for fences on vacant lots shall be issued without approval of the village. 
(c)  Fencing may enclose the rear yard, but may not extend beyond the front yard setback, unless the fence height is no more than 36 inches high and the height of the posts supporting the fence are not more than 42 inches high when measured from ground level. Fence posts shall face the owner's side of the fence. Such a fence shall not appear to be a total screen, when viewed at a 90-degree angle to the fence. All front yard fencing shall be reviewed for sight line conflict by the village police department or the village building inspector. Any deviation of these requirements shall require a conditional use permit. 
(d)  Permission must be obtained from the adjacent property owner if the fence is to be built within three feet of the property lines before construction will be permitted. Permission is to be furnished to the building inspector in written form. 
(e)  The owner of any fence shall maintain the fence on both sides, unless otherwise agreed to in writing. 
(Prior Code, § 10.09) 
Sec. 8-128. - Mailboxes, mail receptacles and newspaper boxes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mail receptacle means that container attached to a building, designed and located to accommodate mail pick-up and delivery by federal postal service employees on foot, and shall be installed as per requirements of the United States Post Office. 
    Mailbox means that freestanding container, designed and located adjacent to roadways to accommodate mail pick-up and delivery from a vehicle, and shall be installed as per requirements of the United States Post Office. 
(b)  The mailbox or newspaper box or support shall: 
(1)  If of wood, be no more than five inches in diameter; if round, four inches by four inches, if of dressed lumber. 
(2)  If of metal, have nominal inside diameter no greater than 1.5 inches. 
(3)  Be securely anchored in the ground at a minimum depth of two feet and a maximum depth of three feet. 
(4)  Not be heavy metal posts or pipes, concrete posts, or miscellaneous items of farm equipment such as milk cans filled with concrete. 
(c)  Mailboxes and newspaper boxes shall be firmly attached to their post or support. 
(d)  When grouping mailboxes or newspaper boxes are required, it shall be the responsibility of the mailbox holder or newspaper box holder to maintain the neat appearance of the mailbox or newspaper box and post or support. 
(e)  Size of mailbox shall be as required by the United States Post Office and mailboxes, newspaper boxes and mail receptacles shall conform to federal postal service specifications. 
(f)  The village shall not be responsible for any damages incurred to newspaper boxes or any other standards except for mailboxes damaged by village snow removal equipment. The village will make available up to ten temporary mailboxes that will be supplied to residents for up to 30 days, at no charge, if their mailbox is damaged by village snowplow operations. The village must be notified at the time the mailbox is discovered to be damaged by village snowplow operations. The resident shall submit a written claim describing the damage done to their mailbox by village snowplow operations, within ten days of the occurrence. The resident shall notify the village for inspection of the mailbox, when it has been repaired. When both the written claim is submitted to the village, and the mailbox is repaired and inspected, then the village shall reimburse the resident per the approved fee schedule, per snowplowing season. Any resident who would request additional compensation shall ask to be put on the budget and finance and village board agendas, so they may present their claim. 
(Prior Code, § 10.10) 
Sec. 8-129. - Private swimming pools. 
(a)  Definition. The term "pool" is hereby defined as a receptacle for water, whether above or below ground, intended for use by the owner, his friends and invited guests, for bathing or swimming. 
(b)  Permit required. All pools with a water depth of two feet or more shall require a building permit from the building inspector prior to construction or installation. 
(c)  Location . No pool shall be located closer than six feet to any lot line on the property on which the pool is constructed. 
(d)  Fencing requirements. In-ground pools shall be completely fenced, before filling, with a fence of at least four feet in height, but not more than six feet in height. Access to the pool shall be through a gate or gates in the fence equipped with a lock or self-latching device at the top of the gate or gates. There shall be no more than four inches between the bottom of the fence and the grade of the lot. Above-ground pools, which have a height of less than 42 inches above grade at the poolside, shall be fenced in the same manner as required for in-ground pools and shall be covered when not in use by a sturdy and secure pool cover or emptied. 
(e)  Electrical installations. All electrical wiring associated with swimming pools shall require a permit. All electrical wiring for swimming pools shall comply with the National Electrical Code (NEC). Lights used to illuminate the pool shall direct light only on the pool. 
(f)  Plans. The plan filed with the application for a building permit shall show the pool in relation to all other buildings on the property, lot lines, and electrical power service laterals. All fences and decks built in conjunction with the pool shall also be shown on the plans. 
(g)  Equipment . Circulating pumps and filters shall be located and operated so as not to create a nuisance or noise problem. If necessary, the equipment shall be shielded or contained behind a protective barrier. 
(h)  Nuisance prohibited. All pools shall be maintained in such a way as to not create a nuisance, hazard, eyesore, or be a detriment to public health, safety, or welfare. The drainage of any pool may not be discharged onto adjoining property. The pool may, however, be drained into village streets or gutters which empty into the village's storm sewer. 
(Prior Code, § 10.13; Ord. No. 03-12) 
Sec. 8-130. - Repairs to buildings. 
(a)  No building, or part of a building or addition thereto, shall be enlarged, added to, or removed to any other place, nor shall any building which may hereafter be damaged to the extent of 75 percent of its current fair market value, be repaired or rebuilt, nor shall any such building when the damages are less than 75 percent of the current fair market value be so repaired as to occupy a greater space than before the damage thereto. 
(b)  The amount or extent of the damage that may be done to any building shall be determined by three disinterested residents of the village, one of whom shall be chosen by the owner of the building, the second by the building inspector and the two so chosen shall elect a third, and the decision of a majority of the persons so chosen shall be final. If the owner shall fail and neglect for 24 hours after being notified by the building inspector to make such choice, then the building inspector shall choose two disinterested residents of the village and the two so chosen shall elect a third, and the decision of a majority of the persons so chosen shall be final. 
(Prior Code, § 10.07) 
Sec. 8-131. - Unsafe buildings. 
(a)  Whenever the building inspector finds any building or part thereof within the village to be in his judgment so old, dilapidated or so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, and so that it would be unreasonable to repair the same, he shall order the owner to raze and remove such building or part thereof, or if it can be made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to raze and remove at the owner's option. Such order and proceedings shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0413. 
(b)  Whenever the building inspector finds a building, dwelling or structure, which has deteriorated or become dilapidated or blighted so as to offend the esthetic character of the immediate neighborhood or produce blight, he may proceed under Wis. Stats. § 66.0413(2)(b) to require the owner to correct the blighting defects or conditions. 
(Prior Code, § 10.08) 
Secs. 8-132-8-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLUMBING 

Sec. 8-161. - Plumbing defined. 
    Plumbing, for the purpose of this article, shall have the meaning provided by state law and rule adopted in this chapter and, in addition, means the construction, connection to or alteration of any drain, soil or waste pipe to carry domestic sewage, stormwater or industrial waste from a point three feet outside of the foundation walls of any building to the sewer lateral at the curb or other disposal terminal including the private sewage disposal or treatment plant. This definition does not include minor repairs to faucets and the removal of stoppage in soil or waste pipes. 
(Prior Code, § 11.01) 
Sec. 8-162. - Duties of plumbing inspector. 
    The plumbing inspector shall perform such duties as are provided for in Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 82.21, department of safety and professional services, and shall make monthly and annual reports to the village board. The plumbing inspector shall be under the direct supervision of the village board and shall enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. The plumbing inspector shall prepare suitable forms for applicants, permits and other reports. 
(Prior Code, § 11.03) 
Sec. 8-163. - Authority of plumbing inspector. 
(a)  Right to enter and inspect. The plumbing inspector shall have the right during reasonable working hours to enter any public or private building in the discharge of his official duties. 
(b)  Withholding permits. The plumbing inspector may withhold issuance of a plumbing permit to any person who has not complied with a lawful order of the plumbing inspector. The person that is refused such a permit may appeal within ten days to the village board. 
(c)  Inspection of plumbing work. The plumber in charge shall notify the plumbing inspector whenever any work is ready for inspection (i.e., soil, vent, underground drain, final inspection). All plumbing work shall be left exposed until such time as the inspector has completed his examination and inspection. When, in the opinion of the inspector, a test is necessary, he may require a water, air test or smoke test on any part or the installation as per Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 82.21. 
(Prior Code, § 11.04) 
Sec. 8-164. - Permit required. 
    No plumbing shall be installed in the village without first filing an application and receiving a permit. This shall also apply to any building located outside the limits of the village before such building may be connected to the sewer or water system. Each application must be approved by the local plumbing inspector before a permit to install plumbing may be issued. Licensed master plumbers only may receive such permits, with the exception that a permit may be issued to a property owner to install plumbing in a single-family residence, which is owned and occupied, by such owner, as his home. 
(Prior Code, § 11.05) 
Sec. 8-165. - Street openings. 
(a)  Permit required. A permit shall be applied for and received before excavating in any street, alley or other public way to repair, alter or install plumbing. Charge for such permit shall be set forth by resolution and the applicant shall furnish bond. 
(b)  Bond required. Before a permit may be issued for excavating for plumbing in any public street, way or alley, the person applying for such permit shall execute to the village and deposit with the village treasurer a corporate surety bond to be approved by the village in the sum of $1,000.00 conditioned that he will perform faithfully all work with due care and skill, and in accordance with the laws, rules and regulations of plumbing. The bond shall state that the person will indemnify and save harmless the village and the owner of the premises against all damages, costs, expenses, outlays and claims of every nature and kind arising out of unskillfulness or negligence on his part in connection with plumbing or excavating for plumbing as prescribed in this chapter. Such bond shall remain in force and must be executed for a period of one year, except that on such expiration it shall remain in force as to all penalties, claims and demands that may have accrued thereunder prior to such expiration. 
(c)  Manner of opening. No openings in streets, alleys or other public ways to install plumbing will be permitted when the ground is frozen, except when necessary. In opening any street or other public way, all materials for paving or ballasting shall be removed with the least possible injury or loss and together with the excavated material from the trenches shall be placed where the least practicable inconvenience to the public will be caused, and admit of free passage of water along the gutters. 
(d)  Protection of opening. All openings made in the public streets or alleys shall be enclosed with sufficient barriers, and lights shall be maintained upon the same at night and all other necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public against accidents from the beginning condition that the excavator or plumber is bonded as herein provided for all damages that may result from his neglect of necessary precaution against all accidents to persons or property of others. 
(e)  Restoration of street. In opening a trench on any street or lot, the sidewalk materials, sand, gravel and earth, or whatever material is removed or penetrated, must be replaced in precisely the same condition and relation to the remainder as it was before. All rubbish must be removed at once, leaving the street or sidewalk in perfect repair and must be so maintained for a period of one year thereafter. All gas, water and electric lines or conduits must be protected from injury or settling in a manner approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(f)  Backfilling . When any excavation is made in a permanently paved road or street or in a road or street which is to be permanently paved, all clay or hardpan must be replaced by material approved by the village. All rubbish must be removed at once, leaving the street or sidewalk in perfect repair and must be so maintained for a period of one year thereafter. All gas, water and electric lines or conduits must be protected from injury or settling in a manner approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 11.06) 
Sec. 8-166. - Connections with sanitary sewer and storm sewer. 
(a)  Connections with sanitary sewers. Roof leaders, down spout wastes, surface and ground water drains, and sump pumps shall not be connected to house sewers which discharge into a sanitary sewer or directly into a sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Connection with storm sewers. Whenever a storm sewer services a dwelling or commercial establishment within the village, all sump pumps shall be connected to the storm sewer. 
(Prior Code, § 11.07) 
Sec. 8-167. - Cross connection control. 
(a)  A cross connection shall be defined as any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the village water system, and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals whereby there may be a flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems. 
(b)  No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular village public water supply may enter the village water supply or distribution system, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of incorporation into the village supply or distribution systems is approved by the water utility and the state department of natural resources in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.09. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the utility department to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system where cross connections with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections will be based on potential health hazards involved by the state department of natural resources. 
(d)  Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the utility department shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property served by a connection to the public water system of the village for cross connections. If entry is refused, such representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. 
(e)  The village water utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this Code exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats. ch. 68, except as provided in chapter 44. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connections has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(f)  If it is determined by the village water utility that a cross connection or an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the clerk of the village and delivered to the customer's premises, service may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats. ch. 68, within ten days of such emergency discontinuance. 
(Prior Code, § 11.08; Ord. No. 96-09) 
Sec. 8-168. - Private well abandonment. 
(a)  Coverage. All private wells, including geothermal wells, located on any premises, which are served by the public water system of the village, shall be properly filled by such time and in such manner as set forth by resolution. Only those wells for which a well operation permit has been granted by the village engineer may be exempted from this requirement, subject to conditions of maintenance and operation. 
(b)  Well operation permits. Application shall be made on forms provided by the village engineer. A permit may be granted to a well owner to operate a well for a period of three years if the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The well has passed an installation that meets the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812, and a well constructor's report is on file with the department of natural resources (DNR), or certification of the acceptability of the well has been granted by the private water supply section of the department of natural resources. 
(2)  The well has passed an inspection by a DNR licensed well inspector and DNR form 3300-221, the state well and pressure system inspection form, is on file with the village engineer. The inspection form on file shall be no greater than ten years old. 
(3)  The well has a history of producing safe water and presently produces bacteriological safe water as evidenced by a sample submitted to a state certified laboratory for microbial analysis. 
(4)  No physical connection exists between the piping of the public water system and the private well. 
(5)  The proposed use of the well can be justified as being necessary in addition to water provided by the public water system. 
(c)  Methods . Wells to be abandoned shall be filled according to the procedures outlined in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812. The pump and piping must be removed and the well checked out, by the village water utility department, for obstructions and cross connections prior to plugging. Any obstruction or liner must be removed. An abandonment permit must be obtained from the office of the village engineer prior to the beginning of work. 
(d)  Reports and inspection. A well abandonment report must be submitted by the well owner to the department of natural resources on forms provided by that agency (available at the office of the village engineer). The report shall be submitted immediately upon completion of the filling of the well. The filling must be observed by a representative of this municipality. 
(Prior Code, § 11.09; Ord. No. 96-09; Ord. No. 01-04; Ord. No. 09-10; Ord. No. 10-03) 
Secs. 8-169-8-189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 8-190. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to safeguard life and property by regulating the proper installation, maintenance and use of electricity and utilization devices by providing for the review and licensing of persons, firms and corporations undertaking electrical work, by issuing permits for electrical work, by inspections of existing and newly installed wiring, equipment and devices, and fixing a penalty for violation thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 12.02) 
Sec. 8-191. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to all existing and new installations, reconstructions, alterations and extensions of electric and communication conductors and equipment within or on public and private buildings, structures and premises, including mobile homes, parking lots, trenches and tunnels and industrial substations. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03) 
Sec. 8-192. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. This division is applicable to all new installations, reconstructions, alterations and extensions of electrical wiring on the load side of the electrical service point of any building, structure, or other, utilizing electrical service. 
(b)  Existing installations. An existing installation may be required to be brought into compliance with this Code and within a specified time period if the electrical inspector determines there is a risk to life or property or the installation is not being used as originally installed. 
(c)  Change of occupancy, alterations or damage. If the type of occupancy of an existing premises is changed, the electrical wiring shall be made to conform to the requirements of this Code for the new type of occupancy. Any alterations to an electrical system shall conform to the requirements for a new installation. Any electrical system damaged by fire, lack of maintenance or other, shall be repaired/replaced to the requirements for a new installation. 
(Prior Code, § 12.04) 
Sec. 8-193. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building classification or occupancy classification. The building inspector referencing the applicable state codes shall determine building classification or occupancy. 
    Completion of work means completion of an electrical installation, whether partially finished or completely finished, by which the electrical inspector has made a final electrical inspection and has approved, partially or completely, the installation for its intended use. 
    Duly qualified means proof of a valid state master electrician certificate, or other equivalent license or certification issued by the state. 
    Electrical inspector means any person duly certified for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Code. 
    Electrical system or electrical wiring means all equipment, wiring, materials, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures and apparatus used for the production, modification, regulation, control, distribution, utilization or safeguarding of electrical energy for mechanical, chemical, cosmetic, heating, lighting or similar purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 12.06) 
Sec. 8-194. - Records. 
    All files shall be kept at the department of building inspections, a complete record of all permits, with their date of issue, and a record of all inspections made, to allow ready information concerning electrical installations. 
(Prior Code, § 12.09) 
Sec. 8-195. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the electrical inspector shall have the right to file an appeal with the zoning board of appeals for a review of the decision of the electrical inspector, provided the appeal is made in writing. Upon receipt of such appeal, the zoning board of appeals shall proceed to determine whether the action of the electrical inspector complies with the intent of this Code and shall make a decision in accordance with its findings. 
(Prior Code, § 12.18) 
Sec. 8-196. - Unsafe electrical installations. 
(a)  All electrical installations which are unsafe and constitute a fire hazard, or otherwise dangerous to the life or property by reason of inadequate maintenance, overload, obsolescence, defect or failure to conform to code are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by removal, repair or replacement in accordance with the procedure provided in this section. 
(b)  Whenever the electrical inspector shall find any electrical installation to be illegal as defined in this section, the inspector shall give to the owner, agent or persons in charge of the premises written notice stating the defects thereof. Said notice shall require the owner or those responsible to place the installation in a safe condition in accordance with the provisions of this Code within the stated time. 
(c)  Upon failure to comply with written notice, the electrical inspector shall have the authority to order the disconnection of electrical service, or portion thereof, and the service shall not be re-energized until written permission is given by the inspector. 
(d)  In case of emergency, or where necessary for safety to persons or property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the electrical inspector shall have the authority to immediately disconnect or cause disconnection of any electrical service or equipment. 
(Prior Code, § 12.12) 
Sec. 8-197. - Unlawful connection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection from a supply of electricity to any electrical system or equipment until inspected and approved by the electrical inspector. Any electrical system or equipment ordered disconnected by the inspector shall not be energized until inspected and approved by the inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 12.13) 
Sec. 8-198. - Unlawful installation by unqualified person. 
    It shall be unlawful to install new, alter existing or repair any electrical system or to do any electrical work unless the person, firm or corporation doing the work is duly qualified. 
(Prior Code, § 12.14) 
Sec. 8-199. - Unlawful to break utility seal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to break the seal of an electric meter, meter transformer or any other equipment sealed by the utility owning the same. When such seal has been broken, the owner utility shall immediately be notified. Any person observing a broken or missing seal shall immediately notify the owner utility. 
(Prior Code, § 12.15) 
Sec. 8-200. - Unlawful to set meter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to set a meter for electrical metering purposes, which has not been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 12.16) 
Sec. 8-201. - Liability. 
    This section shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person supplying electricity to, or selling, renting, leasing, owning, using, operating, controlling, installing, altering, repairing, removing, replacing, disturbing, connecting, disconnecting or maintaining any electrical equipment, for damages to persons or property caused by defect therein or therefrom; nor shall the village be held as assuming any responsibility or liability by reason of the issuance or revocation of any license or permit, or by the inspection or re-inspection authorized by this division, or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any electrical equipment, sales, rentals, drawings, plans, specifications, materials, samples, test reports, literature, information or schedules authorized by this division. Nor shall the village be held liable for any damages resulting from the enforcement of this division. 
(Prior Code, § 12.17) 
Sec. 8-202. - Work to be safeguarded. 
    All energized work shall be protected during construction. 
(Prior Code, § 12.33) 
Secs. 8-203-8-227. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permits 

Sec. 8-228. - Required; procedure. 
(a)  Required. No building, structure or premises shall be wired for electrical lights, meters, heating units, signs, refrigeration or other electrical wiring, nor shall any electrical equipment be installed, nor shall any alteration or change be made in any wiring system, nor shall electric current be supplied to any new electrical system before notifying the electrical inspector and securing a permit or authority to proceed with the work. 
(b)  Application. A licensed contractor shall first file with the electrical inspector an application for an electrical permit. The application shall state the name of the owner of the property, the address of the premises where the work is proposed, a description of all work proposed and other information as the electrical inspector may request. Required fees as prescribed by this Code shall accompany the application. 
(c)  Temporary work. On applying for a permit for temporary work, a specified period of time for which such wiring is to remain in service shall be stated. Service shall be disconnected at the end of this period and shall not again be connected without written permission from the electrical inspector. For buildings where conduit wiring is required, special permits for temporary work may be granted by the inspector for the installation of exposed wiring of lights and power for the building operations, display, decorative lighting, etc., for use for a limited period, subject to discontinuance and complete removal at expiration. 
(d)  Emergency work. In the case of emergency work, the electrical contractor doing or causing work to be done shall report the same to the building inspection department immediately after beginning work; and such work shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(e)  Issuance. If upon examination it is found that the information on the application is complete, the electrical inspector shall issue an electrical permit. The electrical inspector may require the applicant to submit plans, drawings, specifications, schedules, literature or other materials, such as samples or test reports, as may be necessary to determine the compliance of equipment for safe installation and use. No other electrical work shall be done except work as described in the application for permit. Additional work not listed on the original permit shall require a new electrical permit to be secured prior to starting the new work. 
(Prior Code, § 12.26) 
Sec. 8-229. - Supervising electrician. 
(a)  Required. An electrical permit may be issued to any person that appoints a supervising electrician who is employed permanently by the company. Such supervising electrician shall not just be an officer of the company. The supervising electrician shall supervise and be responsible for all work performed by the license holder and shall be available to the electrical inspector to discuss any matter involving electrical work permitted by the license holder. 
(b)  Change of status. The electrical inspector shall be immediately informed by the electrical contractor of any change of status of an appointed supervising electrician. 
(c)  Electrical license suspended. In the event the supervising electrician resigns or is not able to perform as defined, the electrical contractor or the supervising electrician shall immediately notify the electrical inspector. The permit shall automatically be suspended until a qualified successor has been appointed. 
(d)  Qualifications of appointed supervising electrician. The appointed supervising electrician must possess a valid state master electrician certificate. 
(Prior Code, § 12.23) 
Sec. 8-230. - Homeowner performing work. 
(a)  Permits. Electrical permits are available to single-family owners who reside at the residence. Homeowners are permitted to do any electrical within their dwelling except for service up-grades or service installations. This section does not apply to owners of duplex residences or multifamily buildings, regardless of the owner residing in one of the units. The owner of the residence shall be required to obtain permits and call for inspections for the installation or alteration of any electrical work. 
(b)  Qualifications . The owner shall legally own premises the license is sought for and must reside at the premises. 
(c)  Access for inspections. The electrical inspector shall have unrestricted access of the premises of the license holder at any reasonable time. 
(d)  Change of status. The department of building inspection shall be immediately informed by the owner of any change in status as the result of a sale of property or no longer residing at premises. 
(Prior Code, § 12.25) 
Sec. 8-231. - No permit issued to person in arrears in payment of village fees. 
    No permit shall be issued to any licensee who is in arrears on the payment of any of the fees or special assessments or who has failed to comply with any outstanding lawful order of the electrical inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 12.29) 
Sec. 8-232. - Approval of other permit. 
    The approval or conditional approval of a building, plumbing or HVAC permit shall not be considered as approval of the electrical plans, electrical specifications, electrical equipment, or of an electrical permit. 
(Prior Code, § 12.30) 
Sec. 8-233. - Lapse. 
    The electrical permit shall have lapsed and be voided unless electrical work is commenced within 120 days of the date of issuing of the permit or, if work authorized by the permit is suspended at any time after the work is commenced, for a period of 120 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained. A written request from the permit holder, prior to termination, may extend the electrical permit up to an additional 120 days. A permit that has lapsed and become void shall not relieve the permit holder of completion of the electrical work to a safe condition. 
(Prior Code, § 12.27) 
Sec. 8-234. - Revocation. 
    The electrical inspector may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this Code in case of false statements or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which a permit or approval was based. A permit that has been revoked shall not relieve the permit holder of completion of the work to a safe condition. 
(Prior Code, § 12.28) 
Sec. 8-235. - Working without a permit. 
(a)  Authority of the electrical inspector. When any work is begun on the installation or alteration of an electrical system or to the installation of new or replacement of any electrical equipment without first obtaining an electrical permit therefor, except emergency cases, the electrical inspector may issue an order for immediate disconnection of any such equipment or electrical system and to stop work until a permit has been procured. 
(b)  Penalty. When obtaining an electrical permit after the work has commenced, the total fee shall be doubled with a minimum fee in accordance with the fee schedule. The payment of such double fees shall not relieve the permit holder from fully complying with all the regulations of this Code or from any other penalties prescribed by the Code. 
(c)  Emergency. The electrical inspector shall make the determination as to the existence of an emergency. 
(Prior Code, § 12.31) 
Secs. 8-236-8-263. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Inspections 

Sec. 8-264. - Electrical inspections. 
    Electrical inspections shall be under the supervision of the director of building inspection. The director may employ qualified persons to aid in expediting any or all electrical inspections. The director shall have, except where otherwise provided in this Code, the general management and control of all matters pertaining to electrical inspections and shall enforce all state laws and village ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 12.07) 
Sec. 8-265. - Electrical inspector; power and authority. 
    The electrical inspector is authorized, directed and empowered to inspect any and all buildings, structures, and premises, public and private, and to, as herein provided, condemn and order removed or remodeled and put into safe condition for the prevention of fire and for safety of life and property, all electrical equipment installations and connections to electrical current for light, heat, power or communications purposes and to control the disposition and arrangement of the same so that persons and property shall not be in danger therefrom. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08) 
Sec. 8-266. - Interpretation by the electrical inspector. 
    The electrical inspector shall have full authority to exercise judgment in a reasonable and proper manner and rule accordingly on all special cases in regard to any matters in this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 12.10) 
Sec. 8-267. - Right of entry. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this Code, or whenever the electrical inspector or authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises, any condition which makes such building or premises unsafe, the electrical inspector or authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon by this Code, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the inspector shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11) 
Sec. 8-268. - When required and notifications. 
    Upon completion of electrical wiring required to be inspected as hereafter stated or before any electrical wiring is to be hidden from view, the electrical contractor installing the electrical wiring shall notify the electrical inspector that the installation is ready for inspection. The request for inspection shall include the permit number and location of work to be inspected. 
(Prior Code, § 12.32(1)) 
Sec. 8-269. - Inspection of work. 
    The electrical inspector shall perform the requested inspection within two business days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after receiving notification. If after two business days an inspection has not been made, the contractor shall inform the electrical inspector of his intention to proceed with the work. 
(Prior Code, § 12.32(2)) 
Sec. 8-270. - Inspection types. 
    Inspections required to be performed shall be of the following types for the purpose of determining if the work complies with this Code: 
(1)  A rough-in inspection before concealment of the electrical wiring or raceway piping; includes ceiling; 
(2)  Final inspection for releasing the installation for its intended use; and 
(3)  Re-inspection, as necessary, to conform compliance and satisfactory completion of the electrical work. 
(Prior Code, § 12.32(3)) 
Sec. 8-271. - Approval. 
    If it is found that the installation complies with this Code, the electrical inspector shall post a notice of approval of same and authorize concealment of the electrical wiring, connection of electrical service or final inspection approval of the installation for its intended use. 
(Prior Code, § 12.32(5)) 
Sec. 8-272. - Connection. 
    For connection of a new relocated electrical service to any building, structure or premises, the electrical inspector shall issue a certificate of inspection. The electric company furnishing electrical power and the power company shall not energize the service until after receiving approval from the electrical inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 12.32(6)) 
Sec. 8-273. - Disapproval. 
    If the installation is incomplete or not strictly in accordance with this Code, the electrical inspector shall post a rejection notice. The notice shall not be removed until approved by the electrical inspector. The electrical contractor installing the faulty installation shall remove all hazards and make necessary changes or additions within seven days and call for a re-inspection. A re-inspection fee will be assessed for the re-inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 12.32(7)) 
Sec. 8-274. - Authority to remove. 
    The electrical inspector shall have authority to cause the removal of any obstruction which may prevent the proper inspection of any electrical equipment. Concealment of electrical work before inspection by any person is a violation of this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 12.32(8)) 
Sec. 8-275. - Final inspection. 
    The electrical contractor shall promptly call for a final inspection when work is completed and before the electrical installation is used for its intended purpose. It is the responsibility of the electrical contractor to ensure the electrical installation is safeguarded until approved by the electrical inspector. A penalty fee may be assessed for failure of the electrical contractor to promptly request a final inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 12.32(9)) 
Sec. 8-276. - Re-inspection fee. 
    When additional inspections are required because of failure to comply with Code requirements, additional permit fees may be assessed as listed in the fee schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 12.35) 
Sec. 8-277. - Failure to call for final inspection. 
    An additional fee may be assessed, as listed in the fee schedule, for failure of a permit holder to call for a final inspection for completion of work for which an electrical permit was issued. The assessment may also be applied when the electrical contractor allows use of the electrical installation before the electrical inspector finally approves the installation. 
(Prior Code, § 12.36) 
Secs. 8-278-8-302. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 8-303. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby declared that in order to arrest or prevent the deterioration of residential, industrial and commercial properties which can spread to surrounding properties and result in the depreciation of property values, and in order to protect the environment and preserve the aesthetic character of neighborhoods and the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the village adopts this maintenance code. 
Sec. 8-304. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to the exterior of all buildings in the village, including the premises on which they are located, together with all accessory structures, except as otherwise provided. 
(Prior Code, § 10.14A) 
Sec. 8-305. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building inspector is the person designated by the director of the department of building inspection and the village board to enforce these regulations. 
    Commercial building means all occupied spaces other than those used in residential property. 
    Debris means broken concrete, bricks, blocks or other mineral matter; bottles, porcelain, and other glass or crockery; boxes; lumber (new or used), posts, sticks or other wood; paper, rags, cardboard, excelsior, rubber, plastic, wire, tin and metal items; discarded household goods or appliances, junk lawn mowers, tar paper, residues from burning or any similar materials, which constitute health, fire or safety hazards or a serious blighting influence upon their neighborhood or the village in general. 
    Dwelling unit means residential accommodation, including a single kitchen designed for occupancy by, or occupied by, not more than one family for living and sleeping purposes. 
    Junk means any old scrap metal, metal alloy, synthetic or organic material or waste, or any junked, ruined, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicle or machinery, or any part thereof, whether salvageable or not. An unlicensed motor vehicle shall be construed to be a junked motor vehicle. 
(b)  When the terms "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "commercial unit," "industrial building," or "premises" are used in this division, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the phrase "or any part thereof." 
(Prior Code, § 10.14C) 
Secs. 8-306-8-328. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Administration and Enforcement 

Sec. 8-329. - Property inspection. 
    Property inspection shall be under the supervision of the director of the department of building inspection, who is authorized to assign qualified persons to administer this division and perform inspection work and other assignments and duties as required by the property maintenance code. 
(Prior Code, § 10.14B) 
Sec. 8-330. - Premises inspection. 
(a)  The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of dwelling, commercial and industrial units and premises in the village as regulated by the property maintenance code. Inspections shall be made only under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the building inspector finds that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there are violations of the provisions of this division, which affect the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(2)  Upon a complaint in writing being made by the owner, occupant, or by a concerned citizen, against the property. All complaints shall be signed by the author to be considered valid. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the building inspector, whenever possible, to coordinate his inspections with those of other village departments so as to minimize inconvenience to tenants and property owners. 
(c)  All property shall be inspected by appointment unless such appointments cannot be reasonably arranged. 
(d)  In the event that the building inspector is denied voluntary access during a reasonable hour to any premises covered by this division for the purpose of determining conditions that may be adverse to public health, safety and welfare, he may secure a warrant under the terms of Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 
(e)  Every occupant of a building shall give the owner or his agent access to the premises at all times for the purpose of making such repairs as might be necessary to gain compliance with any provision of this division. 
(Prior Code, § 10.14D) 
Sec. 8-331. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violations of this division as determined by the building inspector shall be outlined in written form and shall be served upon all affected occupants, owners or their agents. Such notice and order shall be served by the building inspector, or by such employee of the village designated by him, or by receipted registered mail. If either method of service should fail, the building inspector shall post and publish such notice or order under the terms of Wis. Stats. § 66.0113(1)(a). Such notices and orders shall include: 
(1)  An adequate description of the real estate so affected. 
(2)  A statement of the alleged violation, including the corresponding reference to the Code requirement. 
(3)  An order for remedial action to correct such violation. 
(4)  A reasonable time for compliance to the Code. 
(b)  The time period for compliance may be extended only at the discretion of the building inspector who shall base his decision on the seriousness of the problem and the time required to remedy it. 
(c)  Code violations that may be the separate responsibility of the owner and the occupant shall not be combined in the same notice and order unless the owner is also the occupant. 
(d)  Any person or persons affected by a notice or order related to enforcement of this division shall be entitled to appeal such notice before the zoning board of appeals. 
(e)  The building inspector shall not seek punitive nor remedial action against any owner or occupant of a dwelling unit affected by such orders while the orders are being appealed to the zoning board of appeals. 
(Prior Code, § 10.14E) 
Sec. 8-332. - Emergency orders. 
(a)  If the building inspector shall determine that a building is in such condition that it constitutes a public nuisance or that there is great and immediate danger to public health, safety and welfare, or that a building is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, occupancy, or use, he shall post a notice on the premises to that effect in accordance with the terms of Wis. Stats. § 66.0413 in the same manner as described therein. 
(b)  In addition to posting such property as unfit, unsafe or unsanitary, he shall order the building, or that portion of it so affected, to be vacated in the manner prescribed by the applicable provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0413. 
(c)  No person shall remove or deface any placard placed by the building inspector on any building or dwelling, which has been declared unfit or unsafe for human habitation or use. 
(Prior Code, § 10.14F) 
Sec. 8-333. - Change of ownership/occupancy. 
(a)  Inspection. Generally, residential and non-residential rental properties will be inspected before a change in ownership can occur. Nonresidential properties will be subject to inspection when there is a change in occupancy or ownership. 
(b)  Certificates of occupancy required. Except as otherwise provided, whenever there is a change of ownership of any residential, residential rental building, multifamily building, commercial building, commercial occupant, or industrial building or appurtenances, such a change of ownership shall not be made unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the department of building inspection of the village. Changing ownership/occupancy or accepting change of ownership/occupancy without a certificate of occupancy is in violation of this section, subjecting a person, firm, or corporation to penalties hereinafter set forth in this division. 
(c)  Change of ownership defined. The term "change of ownership" shall also include a change of ownership of real property resulting from a gift of real property or from the death of an owner of real property pursuant to the law. Change of ownership between a husband and wife if one of the parties continues to occupy the building/property shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Temporary certificates. In order not to delay or impede a pending change of ownership/occupancy, the department of building inspection may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy if the Code violations at the time of change of ownership/occupancy, in the opinion and judgment of the building official or his appointed representative, are not an immediate threat or pose no imminent threat to the health, welfare and safety of the owners, tenants, or occupants of the property in question. 
(e)  Responsibility for correction of Code defects. Under such circumstances, the former owner/seller and the new owner/occupant shall be jointly and severally liable and responsible for correcting all Code violations existing at the time the inspection was made. Failure to correct all noted violations shall subject both parties to the penalties within the scope of this division. A new owner may submit a letter of responsibility signed by the seller and the buyer stating that the buyer is aware of all violations and agrees solely to bring the property into compliance. 
(f)  Issuance. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the department of building inspection after an inspection of the premises discloses that the premises are in compliance with the village's property maintenance code, electrical, and plumbing codes. Compliance with the provisions of the codes shall be met if the provisions of the respective codes in effect at the time of the inspection are met. Present day construction codes will not be used, for they are not retroactive. It shall, however, be the responsibility and duty of the building official or his representative to exercise reasonable judgment as to when to apply current standards to protect the health, welfare and safety of the owner/occupant. 
(g)  Noncompliance. If an inspection by the department of building inspection or representative discloses noncompliance with any of the provisions of the village codes referenced herein, the department shall issue a notice letter, which will list all areas of noncompliance within a 30-day period. For items which pose a more immediate danger to the owner/occupant, the time for compliance may be reduced as is deemed necessary by the building inspection department. When a subsequent inspection discloses compliance, a certificate of occupancy will be issued. If there is continued noncompliance after the time limit established by the village, the matter will be referred to the village attorney for prosecution, using the penalties set forth in this division. 
(h)  No warranty. A certificate of occupancy indicates that so far as can be reasonably determined by visual inspection of the premises and review of the village property file (records), the premises meet the requirements of this division. Neither the village, nor the department of building inspection assumes any liability in the inspection or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and by the issuance of a certificate of occupancy does not guarantee or warrant as to the condition of the premises inspected. 
(i)  Permission to inspect. If the owner of the premises refuses to grant the village, or its representatives, permission to inspect the premises, no such inspection shall be made until a special inspection warrant is attained, authorized under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119, at which time the warrant will be served by the village police department and the inspection will ensue. 
(j)  Forms . The department of building inspection shall provide forms to be used for applications for inspection, certificates of occupancy and certificates of noncompliance and applicable correspondence. 
(k)  Fee . A fee per residential unit or nonresidential building in the amount provided in the village fee schedule shall be paid to the village for the inspection of the premises prior to the inspection being made and a certificate of occupancy being issued. The fee shall be paid at the time of application for the inspection. If more than one re-inspection is required, an additional fee in the amount provided in the village fee schedule shall be paid for each re-inspection beyond the first. 
(l)  Outside inspection agencies. The department of building inspection will allow outside inspection agencies to do occupancy inspections provided the outside agency carries current state agency certifications in the areas relating to the type of building to be inspected. The department of building inspection will provide the forms, which will be used for recording the inspection. The forms shall set forth minimum levels of life safety that all properties shall have. A copy of this report shall be submitted to the village no more than 24 hours after the inspection is made. Failure to comply with this section may result in penalties being levied against all parties concerned. 
(Prior Code, § 10.14M) 
Sec. 8-334. - Review by zoning board of appeals. 
(a)  Petition for hearing. Any person affected by any notice or order which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this division may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the zoning board of appeals, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Petitions shall be submitted and filed prior to the expiration of the time limit set forth in the notice and order from the building inspector. 
(2)  Petitions shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the board and filed in the office of the village clerk-treasurer who shall then provide a copy thereof to the building inspector. The form shall contain all necessary information for the processing of such appeal. 
(3)  The petition shall set forth the petitioner's name, address and a brief statement of the grounds for such appeal. 
(4)  The building inspector shall, upon the filing of such petition, transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the petition for hearing was made. 
(b)  Hearings. The board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the petition which shall be not less than 20 days or more than 30 days after the date upon which the petition was filed. The board shall have the power to postpone the hearing at the request of the petitioner for good and sufficient reason. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and show why such notice or order should be modified or withdrawn. Failure of a petitioner to appear shall have the same consequences as if no petition was filed. Any parties in interest other than the petitioner may appear at such hearings and may offer testimony at the discretion of the board if such testimony is relevant to the hearing. 
(c)  Effect on order appealed. Any notice or order served pursuant to this division shall automatically be in force if written petition for a hearing is not received within the prescribed time. 
(d)  Authority to administer oaths. The board shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations in connection with the conduction of any hearing held in accordance with provisions of this division. 
(Prior Code, § 10.14K) 
Secs. 8-335-8-356. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Maintenance Standards and Specifications 

Sec. 8-357. - Minimum standards for safe and sanitary maintenance. 
(a)  Floors, walls, foundations, etc. Every interior floor, wall, and ceiling, including door and window assemblies, shall be kept clean and in good repair, and shall be capable of affording privacy. Any sagging or bulging shall be properly repaired to a level or plumb position. All surfaces shall be free from serious cracking, irregularities, and peeling paint. A waterproof or impervious surface shall be provided in spaces subject to moisture. All surface repairs shall provide ease of maintenance and durability appropriate for the use of the room. 
(b)  Exterior wood surfaces. Exterior wood frame surfaces shall be painted or provided with comparable finish in order to prevent deterioration, exclude insects and preserve the visual aesthetic character of the neighborhood. 
(c)  Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, interior door used for ingress and egress to a building, and basement hatchway shall be weathertight, watertight, rodent-proof, and kept in proper working condition. Windows and patio doors shall have screens for natural ventilation. All cracked, loose and broken window panes shall be replaced and made secure. Sills and sash work shall be maintained in good repair. 
(d)  Stairs and porches. Every outside stairway, porch, and all appurtenances thereto shall be kept in a clean, sanitary and safe condition. A stairway shall have uniform treads and risers and uniform covering. All stairways and porches shall be kept free of snow, ice and obstructions to passage. Stairs and porches shall be kept safe so as to support the normal loads placed thereon. Replacement stairs shall be constructed in accordance with applicable state department of safety and professional services codes. 
(e)  Garbage and refuse receptacles. Garbage and refuse receptacles shall be provided for each building in accordance with the requirements of this division. 
(f)  Means of exit. Every dwelling unit shall have a safe, unobstructed means of exit leading to safe and open space at ground level. Each exit required by this and other applicable codes shall be maintained in good repair. 
(g)  Plumbing . Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions. Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall be properly maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Flooring material shall be smooth and installed in one piece. All required repairs shall be done by a licensed plumber. 
(h)  Inspection of water/sewer. The village water utility shall check the curb stop shutoff if the valve is accessible and functioning correctly. All repairs shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The village sewer utility shall examine the sanitary sewer lateral with a portable pipeline camera. All repairs required for the lateral located on the property will be the responsibility of the property owner. If the damage has occurred in the right-of-way, the village sewer utility is responsible for the repair. 
(i)  Drainage of premises. Every premises shall be properly drained by the owner so as to prevent stagnant water from accumulation thereon. Surface and rainwater run-off shall not be diverted or obstructed so as to create a nuisance or damage to adjoining properties. Swimming and wading pools, and other sources of water storage, shall not be drained on or through neighboring property, by either the tenant or the owner. If overland control measures do not resolve the problem, the owner will be ordered to hook up to storm sewer at their expense. 
(Prior Code, § 10.14G, H) 
Sec. 8-358. - Responsibilities of owners and occupants. 
(a)  When owners have written lease agreements with their tenants, such lease agreements are viewed strictly between owner and tenant. All notices or orders will be issued to and be viewed by the village to be the responsibility of the owner. 
(b)  Owners of buildings shall maintain the exterior of each such building in a clean, safe and sanitary condition and shall dispose of rubbish and garbage in the manner provided in this division. 
(c)  If insect or rodent infestation occurs in a single dwelling unit, the occupant of such dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination. Whenever insect or rodent infestation occurs in more than one dwelling unit in a building or in any commercial unit of a building, the owner of the building shall be responsible for the extermination. 
(Prior Code, § 10.14I) 
Sec. 8-359. - Outside storage of materials. 
(a)  Yard areas of any real estate shall not be permitted to deteriorate or remain in a condition that is not in accord with the following: owners or occupants shall keep yard areas in a clean and sanitary condition, free from any accumulations of materials, debris, or refuse. Yards shall not be used to store appliances, furnaces, hot water heaters, water softeners or building material not used within five days, or any bulk items. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of rocks, trees, stumps, waste building material or other debris from land development, building construction, street grading, or installation of underground utilities upon the surface of any land in the village except at approved disposal sites. 
(c)  No landowner shall allow an accumulation of rocks, trees, stumps, waste material or other debris from land development, building construction, street grading, or installation of underground utilities upon the surface of his land for a period of more than ten days. 
(d)  All firewood shall be cut and neatly stored in the rear lot. Firewood shall be no closer than ten feet to the dwelling/building. All firewood shall be stored in straight, orderly piles, which are at least 12 inches above grade and not more than five feet (total) above grade. At no time shall there be more than two full cords of wood stored outside. 
(Prior Code, § 10.14J) 
Sec. 8-360. - Landscaping and lawn care. 
(a)  Generally. Landscaping, plants and other decorative surface treatments, including species of grass common to southeastern Wisconsin, shall be installed and maintained so as to present an attractive appearance in all courts and yard areas in accordance with generally accepted landscaping practices. 
(b)  Maximum height of natural lawns. Except with prior application to and approval of the village of a land management plan, natural lawns shall be maintained to a height not to exceed eight inches in height. 
(c)  Plant maintenance. Plants shall be maintained so as not to present hazards to adjoining properties or to persons or vehicles traveling on public ways. Plants which property owners or tenants wish to plant near street corners shall be approved by the village prior to planting to ensure a site obstruction will not ensue. Green spaces shall be maintained so as to enhance the appearance and value of the property on which they are located and adjoining properties. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. In the event the owner or occupant fails to comply with an order of the building inspector to cut grass or trim trees, shrubs, or bushes, the building inspector shall refer this matter to the public works director who shall instruct the village personnel to do whatever cutting of grass or trimming of vegetation is required and a special assessment shall be levied against the property owner for time, equipment, and travel necessary to accomplish all the required work. 
(e)  Unconventional landscapes. Unconventional landscapes may be permitted through a conditional use or a planned unit development approval process. Unconventional landscapes require: 
(1)  A detailed planting plan, planning schedule, and anticipated plant succession shall be submitted as part of the conditional use or planned unit development application and are subject to approval by the village board. 
(2)  Detailed maintenance requirements (for example: a request for periodic burning of prairie landscapes for regeneration) shall also be submitted with the conditional use or planned unit development application and are subject to approval by the village board. 
(3)  Unconventional landscapes shall not be permitted within three feet of the side or rear property lines without the written permission of the adjacent property owners. 
(4)  Unconventional landscapes shall not be permitted in the terrace (the public right-of-way) between the sidewalk and curb. 
(5)  Unconventional landscapes may be installed within the public right-of-way where there is no curb or gutter and a rural street section exists. 
(6)  The village shall not be held responsible for damage to landscape plants, which are in the right-of-way. 
(7)  All unconventional landscapes are subject to the following cutting and trimming requirements: Grasses and weeds not to exceed 12 inches and trees/shrubs which project or obscure sidewalks, sightlines, or encroach on adjoining properties. 
(Prior Code, § 10.14L) 
Sec. 8-361. - Storage of junk. 
(a)  No person shall store junked or discarded property (including automobiles, automobile parts, trucks, tractors, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery, or machinery parts, wood, bricks, concrete blocks, or other unsightly debris which may substantially depreciate property values in the neighborhood) for more than five days unless it is in connection with an approved use in an appropriately zoned district. 
(b)  The village may require, by written order, any premises violating this section to be put in compliance within the time specified in such order, and if the order is not complied with, the penalty provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
(Prior Code, § 9.11) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for local regulation of transient merchants, Wis. Stats. § 66.0423; marketing and trade practices generally, Wis. Stats. § 100.01 et seq.; trade regulations generally, Wis. Stats. § 125.01 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of offensive industry, Wis. Stats. § 66.0415; miscellaneous trade regulations; Wis. Stats. § 134.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Mandating of employee benefits for private businesses. 
    No village ordinance, rule, or regulation shall mandate that any business entity, other than the village itself, provide certain wages or benefits to its employees or set forth the amount or type of any employee wages or benefits provided by an employer located within the village limits. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05N; Ord. No. 09-03) 
Sec. 10-2. - Fees. 
    Fees associated with this chapter shall be as provided in the village fee schedule. 
Sec. 10-3. - Shows, exhibitions, carnivals and circuses. 
(a)  License required. Any person owning, conducting or managing for gain within the village any exhibition, show, amusement, carnival, circus, concert or musical entertainment shall obtain a license. 
(b)  Application. Application for a license shall be submitted on forms supplied by the village clerk. The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance showing that the applicant is covered by liability insurance by an insurance company licensed to do business in this state in the amount of $300,000.00 for the injury or death of one person, $1,000,000.00 for any one accident and $50,000.00 for property damage. If the entertainment involves carnival type rides, proof of current inspection of such rides by the governing state agency must also be furnished. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not be construed to require a license for premises holding a lecture on a scientific, moral, educational or literary subject, or for a concert of music given exclusively for a scientific, religious, educational or literary subject, or for any lecture, concert, performance, exhibition or show given or made by the citizens of the village, none of whom makes a vocation of providing such amusement. All uses conducted externally on premises on a license site shall require a conditional use permit. 
(Prior Code, § 6.06) 
Secs. 10-4-10-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-25. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canvasser and solicitor mean any individual, whether principal, agent, or employee, who solicits business from door-to-door, or by appointment on the premises of the prospective buyer, for the sale of merchandise or services to be delivered and paid for at a later date, either by cash in one lump sum or on contract. 
    Peddler means any individual, whether principal, agent, or employee, who engages in, does, or transacts business in the village using the public thoroughfares therefore, or traveling door-to-door selling and delivering wares or services, and receiving cash payment. 
    Transient merchant and seasonal merchant mean any individual, whether principal, agent, or employee, who engages in, does or transacts any temporary, seasonal or transient business in the village, either in one location or by moving his place of business from location to location in the village selling goods, merchandise, services, or wares, and whether or not for the purpose of carrying on such business such individual hires, leases, occupies, or uses a building, structure, vacant lot, or vehicle, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, merchandise, services and wares. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03C.1-C.3) 
Secs. 10-26-10-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 10-54. - Permit required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of peddler, trucker, canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, or seasonal merchant in the village without first obtaining a permit from the village clerk-treasurer in the manner provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03A) 
Sec. 10-55. - Exemptions. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided in this article, this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person delivering merchandise to regular customers on established routes; 
(2)  Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods; 
(3)  Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown; 
(4)  Any person who has an established place of business where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested home visit by, the person; 
(5)  Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the prospective customer; 
(6)  Any village resident under 18 years of age selling a product, service, or ticket having an individual item cost of $25.00 or less, promoted or sponsored by a school or youth service or a religious, nonprofit, or charitable organization located within the county. 
Sec. 10-56. - Exception for certain religious, charitable, patriotic and philanthropic entities. 
(a)  A person who engages in door-to-door advocacy for the purposes of religious proselytizing, political speech or the distribution of handbills for noncommercial purposes is exempt from the registration requirements of this article but subject to the requirements of division 3 of this article. The exemption from registration in this subsection will cease to be effective if the person solicits donations or solicits the sale of goods or services. 
(b)  Any entity desiring to solicit or to have solicited in its name, donations of money or property, or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited, for a charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose, must register with the village clerk, but shall be exempt from paying a fee, provided that it first files a sworn application on a form to be furnished by the village clerk-treasurer which includes the following information: 
(1)  Name and purpose of the cause for which permit is sought. 
(2)  Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization. 
(3)  Period during which solicitation is to be carried on. 
(4)  Whether or not any commission, fees, wages or compensations are to be expended in connection with such solicitation and the amount thereof. 
(5)  Proof that the entity is either registered as a charity with the state or that it is exempt from such registration per state law. 
(c)  Upon being satisfied that the entity is a religious, charitable, patriotic or philanthropic organization, the clerk shall issue a permit without charge. 
(d)  Entities entitled to the exceptions provided in this section are subject to all requirements of division 3 of this article. 
(e)  Any charitable organization not registered under Wis. Stats. § 202.12 or that is exempt from state registration requirements shall nevertheless be required to register under this article and obtain a license as provided herein. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03B) 
Sec. 10-57. - Application. 
    Application for a permit under this article shall be submitted on the proper form together with the fee specified in the village fee schedule. The application shall be filed with the village clerk, shall be sworn by the applicant, and shall contain such information as the village clerk-treasurer may require for the effective enforcement of this article, and the safeguarding of the residents of the village from fraud, misconduct, or abuse. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03C.4) 
Sec. 10-58. - Investigation or background check; issuance. 
    Upon receipt of each application and fee, the village clerk-treasurer shall refer the application to the police chief, who shall institute a background check of the applicant. The police chief shall recommend approval or rejection of the application as soon as practical after receipt of the application from the clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03C.5) 
Sec. 10-59. - Grounds for denial. 
    The following are grounds for denial of a permit application under this article: 
(1)  The failure of an applicant to truthfully provide any information requested by the village as part of the application process. 
(2)  The failure of an applicant to sign the license application. 
(3)  The failure of an applicant to pay the required fee, if any, at the time of application. 
(4)  A conviction within five years immediately preceding the date of the application for any federal or state statute, regulation or local ordinance that's substantially related to the permitted activity. 
(5)  Revocation within five years immediately preceding the date of the application of any license issued to an applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant. 
(6)  Evidence of any unresolved or ongoing government or legal action against the applicant or his business entity filed by any state or government entity. 
(7)  The existence of three or more substantiated complaints about the conduct of the applicant or his business entity within the preceding three years from residents of the village or other jurisdictions where licenses or certificates of registration have been issued. 
(8)  A change in the name of the applicant or his business entity in an attempt to hide or escape any legal obligation. 
(9)  Registration in any state as a sex offender. 
Sec. 10-60. - Bond. 
    If the village clerk-treasurer determines from his investigation of the application that the interests of the village or the inhabitants of the village require protection against possible misconduct of the license, or that the applicant is otherwise qualified, but due to causes beyond his control is unable to supply all of the information required by this article, the village clerk-treasurer may require the applicant to file a bond in the sum of $500.00 with surety acceptable to the clerk-treasurer running to the village, conditioned upon the fact that he will fully comply with the ordinances of the village and the laws of the state relating to peddlers, canvassers, solicitors, transient merchants or seasonal merchants, and guaranteeing to any citizen of the village doing business with him that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of the applicant, provided that action to recover on the bond shall be commenced within six months after expiration of the license. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03C.6) 
Sec. 10-61. - Display of license. 
    Persons licensed under the provisions of this article shall display the license issued by the village clerk-treasurer on the outermost layer of clothing on the front one third of the body at all times when engaged in the activities covered by this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03E.2) 
Sec. 10-62. - Expiration, renewal and transfer. 
    All permits issued under this article shall be valid for a period of 30 days from the date of issue. Permits are renewable upon expiration, provided no justifiable complaint has been filed against the permittee. Permits issued under this article are personal and may not be transferred. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03D) 
Sec. 10-63. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Permits issued under this article may be revoked by the village clerk-treasurer at any time for just cause, including, but not limited to, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in the application or made in the course of carrying on business; conviction of the permittee of any crime or misdemeanor, or conducting the licensed business in an unlawful or disorderly manner or in such manner as to menace the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. Any ground for denial of permit issuance as provided in this article and any violation of division 3 of this article shall also be grounds for revocation. 
(b)  The permittee may appeal the village clerk's decision to revoke his permit by filing in writing a statement objecting to the village clerk's decision. This appeal shall be submitted to the village board at its next regularly scheduled meeting for hearing and determination of revocation. If the village board upholds the village clerk's decision of revocation of permit, the permittee shall forfeit all associated fees. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03F) 
Secs. 10-64-10-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATION AND PREMISES REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-85. - Consent required; occupant signs. 
    No peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant or seasonal merchant shall go in or upon any private residence, business establishment, or office in the village for the purpose of soliciting orders for goods, merchandise, services, wares, or peddling the same, or soliciting subscriptions from magazines or other periodicals where a sign bearing the words: "no peddlers," "no canvassers," "no solicitors," or words of similar meaning are displayed. In addition, no peddler, canvasser, solicitor or transient or seasonal merchant shall call at the rear door of a dwelling or remain on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, the occupant or any other person having authority over the premises. Failure to comply with an authorized person to leave the premises is grounds for revocation of the permit issued under this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03E.1) 
Sec. 10-86. - Misrepresentation prohibited. 
    No permittee shall intentionally misrepresent to any prospective customer the purpose of his visit or solicitation, or the name or business of his principal, if any, nor the source of supply of the goods, merchandise, services or wares which he sells or offers for sale, nor the disposition of the proceeds or profits of his sales. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03E.3) 
Sec. 10-87. - Loud noises and speaking devices. 
(a)  No permitee, or any person in his behalf, shall shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell, blow a whistle, or use any sound amplifying device upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the village, or upon private premises where sound of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, merchandise, services, or wares that the licensee proposes to sell. 
(b)  No person shall violate the noise restrictions of section 30-4(b). 
(Prior Code, § 6.03E.4) 
Sec. 10-88. - Use of streets. 
    No permittee shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall any licensee be permitted a stationary location thereon, nor be permitted to operate in a congested area where such operation might impede or inconvenience the public use of such street. For the purpose of this section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested, and the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03E.5) 
Sec. 10-89. - Hours. 
    No permittee or any person on his behalf shall engage in door-to-door selling of goods, merchandise, services, wares or soliciting other than from 9:00 a.m. to 30 minutes prior to official sunset time. 
(Prior Code, § 6.03E.6) 
Secs. 10-90-10-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-107. - Purpose and intent. 
    The village board intends that the enforcement of this article shall be used primarily to combat the obscenity industry and shall never be used for harassment or censorship purposes against materials or performances having serious artistic, literary, political, educational or scientific value. The village board further intends that the enforcement of this article shall be consistent with the state and federal constitutions and the compelling state interest of protecting the free flow of ideas. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11A; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-108. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult-oriented establishment includes, but is not limited to, adult entertainment stores, adult theaters, adult mini-theaters, adult cabarets and any premises to which public patrons or members are invited or admitted and that are physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult entertainment, whether or not such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for commercial gain. 
    Adult cabaret means an establishment that features topless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers. 
    Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any motion picture, videocassette, live performance, display or dance of any type which has as its dominant theme or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any actual or simulated "specified sexual activities," "specified anatomical areas," the removal of articles of clothing or partial or total nude appearance. 
    Adult entertainment store means an establishment including in its stock in trade for sale, rent, lease, inspection or viewing books, films, videocassettes, novelties, magazines or other periodicals which have as their dominant theme or are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specific sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult mini-theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting adult entertainment having as its dominant theme or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons. 
    Adult theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting adult entertainment having as its dominant theme or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons. 
    Operator means any person, partnership, corporation or other organization operating, conducting, maintaining or owning any adult-oriented establishment. 
    Specified anatomical areas means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola or human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means simulated or actual: 
(1)  Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(2)  Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus. 
(3)  Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11B; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-109. - License for each establishment required. 
    No person may engage in, conduct or carry on the operation or maintenance of an adult-oriented establishment without first obtaining a valid adult-oriented establishment license issued under this chapter. A license may be issued only for one adult-oriented establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person desiring to operate more than one adult-oriented establishment must have a license for each adult-oriented establishment. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11B; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-110. - Application. 
(a)  Generally; fee. Any person desiring an adult-oriented establishment license shall file a written application with the village clerk-treasurer on a form provided by the clerk's office and pay the required fee in the amount provided in the village fee schedule to defray the costs of administration and investigation of the application. The information provided to the clerk shall be given under oath. 
(b)  Corporations . If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as set forth in its articles of incorporation, together with the date and state of incorporation, the names and residence addresses to each of its officers, directors and each stockholder holding five percent or more of the stock or beneficial ownership of the corporation. The application shall also be verified by an officer of the corporation. 
(c)  Partnerships. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name of the partnership, the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners, and be verified by each partner. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate application shall apply to a corporate partner. 
(d)  Other applicants. If the applicant is neither a corporation nor a partnership, the application shall set forth the true full name and residence address of the applicant and be verified by the applicant. The application shall also include any other name by which the applicant has been known during the previous five years. 
(e)  Information to be included. The application shall set forth the proposed place of business of the adult-oriented establishment by physical business address, including suite number, and not by post office box, and shall contain a description of the nature and scope of the proposed business operation. In addition, the following information shall be furnished concerning the applicant if an individual; concerning each officer and director and all stockholders who own five percent or more of the stock or beneficial ownership if the applicant is a corporation; and concerning each partner, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership: 
(1)  The previous residence address, if any, for a period of three years immediately prior to the date of application and the dates of such residence. 
(2)  Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(3)  A complete set of fingerprints. 
(4)  The business, occupation or employment history for three years immediately preceding the date of application, including, but not limited to, whether such a person previously operated under any permit or license in another municipality in this or another state and whether any such permit or license had ever been suspended or revoked. 
(5)  The proposed hours of the operation. 
(6)  A detailed floor plan. 
(7)  All convictions in any state or federal court within the past five years, including municipal ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, with a brief statement of the nature of the convictions and the jurisdiction in which the convictions occurred. 
(8)  All pending criminal charges in any state or federal court, with a brief statement of the nature of the pending charges and the jurisdiction in which the charges are pending. 
(9)  The names of persons who will have custody of the business records, at the business location. 
(10)  The name and address of the person who will be the agent for service of process. 
(11)  Such other information relating to the application as may be required by the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11C.1-C.4; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-111. - Police chief and building inspector to inspect. 
    The village clerk-treasurer shall notify the police chief and the building inspector of any adult-oriented establishment license application, and these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each such application and the premises to determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11C.5; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-112. - Failure to provide information or appear for examination deemed grounds for denial. 
    Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the application, failure or refusal to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding the application or refusal to submit to or cooperate with regard to any information required by this article shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11C.8; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-113. - Standards for issuance of license. 
    The village board shall issue an adult-oriented establishment license if it finds that: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to this article. 
(3)  The location of the adult-oriented establishment is not within 1,000 feet of any such church or synagogue building, school building, licensed daycare or park or within 200 feet of any residential district. 
(4)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misstatement in the application. 
(5)  The applicant has supplied all the information required and the information requested by the public safety committee regarding the investigation of his application. 
(6)  The adult-oriented establishment, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the village's building and zoning codes. 
(7)  The applicant has not had an adult-oriented establishment license or permit or other similar license or permit revoked or suspended in this state or any other state within 30 years prior to the date of application. 
(8)  The applicant, if an individual; any of the stockholders holding five percent or more of the stock or beneficial ownership of the corporation, and any officers, agents, or directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, does not, at the time of application, have pending any criminal charge for, or within five years prior to the date of application has not been convicted of, any offense involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, robbery, the use or threatened use of force or violence upon the person of another, or sexual immorality under the law of this or any other state or any other offenses enumerated as exceptions under Wis. Stats. § 111.335. 
(9)  The applicant, if a corporation, is licensed to do business and is in good standing in the state. 
(10)  All individual applicants; all stockholders holding five percent or more of the stock or beneficial ownership, directors and officers, if the applicant is a corporation; and all partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, are at least 18 years of age. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11E; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-114. - Display of license. 
    The adult-oriented establishment license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the adult-oriented establishment. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11F; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-115. - Report of change in corporate status required. 
    Any corporation holding an adult-oriented establishment license under this article shall report to the village clerk, in writing, within 15 days of the event described herein, any change of officers of the corporation and any change in the membership of the board of directors of the corporation. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11G; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-116. - Sale or transfer of business interest voids license. 
    Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in an adult-oriented establishment, the license shall be void. Any person desiring to continue to operate an adult-oriented establishment following sale or transfer shall apply for a license. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11H; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-117. - Renewal. 
(a)  Expiration. Every license issued pursuant to this division shall terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance unless sooner revoked and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. 
(b)  Application for renewal. All applications for the renewal of adult-oriented establishment licenses issued by the village shall be filed with the village clerk's office on a form to be provided by the clerk no later than 60 days prior to the expiration of the license. The renewal application shall contain such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as is required for an application for a new license. Applications to renew licenses shall be processed by the village in the same fashion as new applications. 
(c)  Re-inspection required. No license shall be renewed without a re-inspection of the premises as required for original licensure. 
(d)  Renewal fee; late fee; partial refund upon denial of renewal. A license renewal fee in the amount provided in the village fee schedule shall be submitted with the renewal application. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty shall be assessed against any applicant who files for renewal less than 60 days before the license expires. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11K; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-118. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Any adult-oriented establishment license may be suspended for not more than 90 days or revoked by the village board for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Any of the grounds that would warrant the denial of the original application for the license. 
(2)  Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on any application or material facts were omitted from any application. 
(3)  The operator or any employee of the operator violates any provision of this article or any rules or regulations adopted by the village board pursuant to this article; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if the village board shall find that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could not, by the exercise of due diligence, have had such actual or constructive knowledge. 
(4)  The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license permit. 
(5)  Any cost or fee required to be paid by this article is not paid. 
(6)  Any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the adult-oriented establishment. 
(7)  The establishment is operated outside of operation hours established by the village board. 
(8)  There is any substantial change in the floor plan approved by the village board without the approval of the board. 
(b)  An adult-oriented establishment license may be suspended or revoked after notice and hearing before the village board to determine if grounds for such suspension or revocation exist. Notice of the hearing shall be in writing and may be served by certified mail addressed to the licensee at the current address of the licensee on file with the village clerk's office. The notice shall be served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the licensee and shall designate the time and place where the hearing will be held. 
(c)  Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an adult-oriented establishment for six months from the date of revocation of the license. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11L; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-119. - Operator responsible for acts of employees. 
    Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11I.1; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-120. - Operator to ensure compliance by establishment and patrons. 
    The operator shall ensure compliance of the adult-oriented establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11I.7; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Sec. 10-121. - Operation and premises requirements. 
(a)  Minors prohibited. No employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow any minor to loiter around, to frequent an adult-oriented establishment, or to allow any minor to view adult entertainment. 
(b)  Clean and sanitary premises required. The operator shall maintain the adult-oriented establishment in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. 
(c)  Minimum lighting. The operator shall maintain at least ten footcandles of light in the public portions of the adult-oriented establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room, or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisles; provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one footcandle of illumination in the aisles, as measured from the floor. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverages prohibited. No alcohol beverage may be served or permitted on the premises. 
(e)  Sexual activity prohibited. No sexual activity of any kind shall be permitted on the premises. 
(f)  Advertising prohibited. No person licensed as an adult-oriented establishment may, in any manner, advertise its establishment as licensed by the village. 
(g)  Physical layout of private booths, rooms or cubicles. Any adult-oriented establishment having available for customers, patrons or members, any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following: 
(1)  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the adult-oriented establishment and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type devices. 
(2)  Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant shall engage in any type of sexual activity. 
(3)  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms or cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
(4)  Each booth shall have at least one side totally open to a lighted public aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying the same. 
(5)  All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable. 
(6)  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable. 
(7)  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use, shall be a minimum of ten footcandles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(Prior Code, § 14.11I, J; Ord. No. 94-08) 
Secs. 10-122-10-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MASSAGE THERAPY AND BODY WORKS THERAPY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-06 , §§ 1-4, adopted May 9, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as Ch. 27. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. IV, §§ 10-161-10-164. 

Sec. 10-161. - State law adopted. 
    Article IV is hereby created in regards to massage therapy and bodywork therapy. 
(1)  The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 460, relating to the massage therapy and bodywork therapy, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(2)  Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this article. Any future amendment, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this article in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of massage therapy and bodywork therapy. 
(Ord. No. 17-06 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-162. - Massage establishment license required. 
(a)  License required. No person shall carry on the business of operating a massage establishment within the village without a valid license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section for each and every such place of business shall be reviewed annually. 
(b)  Application fee. Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage establishment shall apply in writing upon a form prescribed by and filed with the village clerk. An application fee as established by resolution shall accompany the application to defray the costs of the investigation. A copy of their Wisconsin seller's permit shall also accompany the application. 
(c)  Conditional use permit. Applicants for a license under this section shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to the village's zoning ordinance prior to granting of the license. 
(d)  Investigation. Applications for licenses under this section shall be referred to the chief of police, fire inspectors, and building inspector, all of whom shall cause an investigation to be made and report their findings to the village board. 
(e)  Grant or denial of license. Within 30 days of receipt of an application, the village board shall either grant or deny a massage license. The board shall grant a massage license if it finds: 
(1)  The required fees have been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this Section. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for the license. 
(4)  The massage establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with this Code, including, but not limited to, the village's building, fire, zoning and health regulations. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders, any officers or directors of the corporation, or if the applicant is a partnership, the partners have not been convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or immorality as outlined in Wis. Stats. ch. 944 within five years prior to the date of the applications. 
(6)  The applicant has not had a massage establishment license or a massage technician permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this village or any other municipality located in or out of this state within five years prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, is 18 years of age. 
(8)  The applicant, if a corporation, is licensed to do business and is in good standing in the state and provides a copy of the Wisconsin seller's permit. 
(Ord. No. 17-06 , § 2) 
Sec. 10-163. - License of massage therapists and bodywork therapist required. 
(a)  License of massage therapists and bodywork therapist required. No person shall practice or administer massages without a valid license issued pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 460. 
(Ord. No. 17-06 , § 3) 
Sec. 10-164. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall practice or administer massages in the Village without a valid permit as issued by the Village of Jackson. 
(b)  Application fee. Any person desiring a massage technician permit shall file a written application with the village clerk on a form to be provided by the clerk. The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  An application fee as established by resolution to defray the cost of investigation. 
(2)  State issued license pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 460. 
(c)  Employment of technicians without permits. It shall be unlawful for any person who operates a massage establishment to allow or permit persons to act therein as massage technicians without first having a permit as required by sub (a) above. 
(d)  Massages on unlicensed premises prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a massage technician within a massage establishment, which does not have a license as required. 
(e)  Prohibited conduct of technicians, operators and patrons. It shall be unlawful for any massage technician to massage the sexual and genital parts of any patron, for any operator of a massage establishment to allow or permit such massage or offer to massage in such massage establishment, for any patron to permit such massage upon his body. 
(f)  Effective date. The license requirements of this article shall be effective upon adoption of the ordinance. Licenses shall be effective for one year commencing January 1 of each year unless sooner suspended, canceled or revoked. 
(g)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums or other health care facilities licensed under the state, and physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists licensed or registered to practice their respective professions under the laws of the state, or nurses registered under the laws of the state acting under their direction and control. 
(2)  Barbershops and beauty parlors, barbers and beauticians licensed under the laws of the state provided that such massage as is practiced are limited to the head and scalp. 
(3)  Accredited high schools and colleges and coaches and trainers therein while acting within the scope of their employment. 
(4)  Trainers of any amateur, semi-professional or professional athlete or athletic team. 
(Ord. No. 17-06 , § 4) 
Secs. 10-165-10-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TATTOOISTS AND TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS AND BODY PIERCING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-07 , §§ 1-4, adopted May 9, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as Ch. 39. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. V, §§ 10-191-10-194. 

Sec. 10-191. - State law adopted. 
    Article V is hereby created in regards to the regulation of tattooists and tattoo establishments and body piercing. 
(1)  The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 463, Body Art, and SPS 221 Tattooing and Body Piercing, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(2)  Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this article. Any future amendment, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this article in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of tattooists and tattoo establishments and body piercing. 
(Ord. No. 17-07 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-192. - Tattoo establishment license required. 
(a)  License required. No person shall carry on the business of operating a tattoo establishment within the village without a valid license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section for each and every such place of business shall be reviewed annually. 
(b)  Application fee. Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a tattoo establishment shall apply in writing upon a form prescribed by and filed with the village clerk. An application fee as established by resolution shall accompany the application to defray the costs of the investigation. A copy of their Wisconsin seller's permit shall also accompany the application. 
(c)  Conditional use permit. Applicants for a license under this section shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to the village's zoning ordinance prior to granting of the license. 
(d)  Investigation. Applications for licenses under this section shall be referred to the chief of police, fire inspectors, and building inspector, all of whom shall cause an investigation to be made and report their findings to the village board. 
(e)  Grant or denial of license. Within 30 days of receipt of an application, the village board shall either grant or deny a tattoo establishment license. The board shall grant a tattoo establishment license if it finds: 
(1)  The required fees have been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this section. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for the license. 
(4)  The tattoo establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with this Code, including, but not limited to, the village's building, fire, zoning and health regulations. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders, any officers or directors of the corporation, or if the applicant is a partnership, the partners have not been convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or immorality as outlined in Wis. Stats. ch. 944 within five years prior to the date of the applications. 
(6)  The applicant has not held a tattoo establishment license or a tattooist technician permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this village or any other municipality located in or out of this state within five years prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, is 18 years of age. 
(8)  The applicant, if a corporation, is licensed to do business and is in good standing in the state and provides a copy of the Wisconsin seller's permit. 
(9)  There shall be no more than one tattooing and one body-piercing license issued per 5,000 population in the village. 
(10)  Any license issued shall be posted at all times on the licensed premises in a conspicuous location. 
(11)  Prior to issuance of a tattoo or body piercing establishment license, the licensee shall submit written procedures to the Health Officer setting forth each step to be taken by an operator in sterilizing equipment that is not single-use. 
(12)  Every act or omission by an employee or practitioner, constituting a violation of the provisions of this article, shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct. The operator shall be liable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. 
(13)  Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed an act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the license shall be suspended, revoked, or not renewed. 
(Ord. No. 17-07 , § 2) 
Sec. 10-193. - License of tattooists and body piercing required. 
(a)  License of tattooist and body piercing required. No person shall practice or administer tattoos and body piercings without a valid license issued pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 463 and SPS 221. 
(Ord. No. 17-07 , § 3) 
Sec. 10-194. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall practice or administer tattoos or body piercing in the village without a valid permit as issued by the village. 
(b)  Application fee. Any person desiring a tattoo and body piercing technician permit shall file a written application with the village clerk on a form to be provided by the clerk. The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  An application fee as established by resolution to defray the cost of investigation. 
(2)  State issued license pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 463 and SPS 221. 
(3)  The permit is renewable on or before July 1 of each year, and upon proof of state licensure. Permits shall be effective for one year commencing July 1 of each year unless sooner suspended, canceled or revoked. 
(c)  Employment of technicians without permits. It shall be unlawful for any person who operates a tattoo body piercing establishment to allow or permit persons to act therein as tattoo body piercing technicians without first having a permit as required by subsection (a) above. 
(d)  Tattoo and body piercing on unlicensed premises prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tattoo body piercing technician within a tattoo body piercing establishment, which does not have a license as required. 
(e)  Effective date. The license requirements of this article shall be effective upon adoption of the ordinance. Licenses shall be effective for one year commencing July 1 of each year unless sooner suspended, canceled or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 17-07 , § 4) 
Chapter 12 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts generally, Wis. Stats. § 755.001 et seq.; municipal court procedure, Wis. Stats. § 800.001 et seq.; procedure in forfeiture actions, Wis. Stats. § 23.50; authority for municipal citations for certain ordinance violations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0113; form of citation in municipal court, Wis. Stats. § 800.02; contempt of court generally, Wis. Stats. § 785.01 et seq.; municipal court contempt procedure, Wis. Stats. § 800.12; application by municipal court for remedial or punitive sanctions, Wis. Stats. § 785.06; arrests, bails, and penalties generally, Wis. Stats. § 345.11 et seq.; sentencing of juveniles, Wis. Stats. § 345.18; sentencing in traffic forfeiture actions, Wis. Stats. § 345.20l; deposits, Wis. Stats. § 345.26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 12-19. - State law adopted. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, all provisions pertaining to the establishment of a municipal court as provided for in Wis. Stats. ch. 755 and Wis. Stats. § 66.0301 are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Any amendments, revisions or modifications of these statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02) 
Sec. 12-20. - Municipal court created. 
    The village has created and established a municipal court, to be designated as the "Mid-Moraine Municipal Court," under the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 755 and pursuant to the agreement for the operation of the municipal court for the county, as amended ("agreement"), a copy of which is on file with the village clerk-treasurer. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02A) 
Sec. 12-21. - Municipal court judge. 
    The municipal court shall be under the jurisdiction of and presided over by a municipal judge, who shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in this state and who resides in any of the member municipalities as defined in the agreement. The municipal judge shall be elected at large in the spring election for a term of four years commencing on May 1 of the year of his election. The governing bodies of the member municipalities shall provide for a primary election in the event that more than two candidates file nomination papers for the position of the municipal judge. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02B) 
State Law reference- Assignment of judges, Wis. Stats. § 751.03; term of municipal judge, Wis. Stats. § 755.02; oath and bond of municipal judge, Wis. Stats. § 755.03; salary and fees of municipal judge, Wis. Stats. § 755.04; illness, absence or vacancy, pending actions triable by court which receives papers, continuance on vacancy and notice of trial, Wis. Stats. § 800.06. 
Sec. 12-22. - Bond. 
    The bond required by Wis. Stats. § 755.03(1) shall be $2,500.00. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02C) 
State Law reference- Oath and bond, Wis. Stats. § 755.03. 
Sec. 12-23. - Hours. 
    The municipal court shall be open at such times as the municipal judge determines, subject to the agreement. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02D) 
Sec. 12-24. - Contempt. 
    The municipal judge may impose forfeiture for contempt of court and a jail sentence for nonpayment of the forfeiture and any applicable assessments, under Wis. Stats. § 800.12(2). 
(Prior Code, § 18.02E) 
State Law reference- Contempt of court generally, Wis. Stats. § 785.01 et seq.; municipal court contempt procedure, Wis. Stats. § 800.12; application by municipal court for remedial or punitive sanctions, Wis. Stats. § 785.06; jail surcharge, Wis. Stats. § 302.46. 
Sec. 12-25. - Jurisdiction. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit either the jurisdiction of the municipal court or the authority of the municipal court to impose penalties under state law. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02F) 
Secs. 12-26-12-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JOINT PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT 

Sec. 12-54. - Establishment of joint participation plan. 
(a)  The board hereby agrees to the conditions as set forth in the terms listed in a joint document of participating members entered into pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 755.01 by adopting an identical ordinance thereby creating and establishing a municipal court. 
(b)  The municipal court shall be organized and shall operate pursuant to state law, the ordinances adopted by the member municipalities and the terms of this article. 
(c)  Except for matters required by statute to be determined by the respective governing bodies of the member municipalities, the general operation of the court shall be by the judge and the court administrative committee. 
(Prior Code, § 18.03) 
Sec. 12-55. - Court administrative committee. 
(a)  Composition . The court administrative committee shall be comprised of one representative of each member municipality who shall be appointed by the mayor, president or chairman of the member municipality, subject to confirmation by the municipality's governing body. In order to assure participation and continuity or representation, each member municipality may provide for an alternate representative who shall act on committee matters in the absence of the representative. Neither the representative nor the alternate representative of a member municipality shall be a police officer for the municipality or an attorney representing the municipality. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The administrative committee shall have general control over the operation of the court, except where such control is specifically granted to the judge or the governing bodies by statute, in which case the administrative committee shall be a recommending agency. The administrative committee shall be responsible for the initial selection of the clerk of the municipal court, subject to appointment by the judge. The administrative committee shall recommend to the governing bodies for determination the salary of the judge and the number and salary of the clerks or deputy clerks. The administrative committee shall cause appropriate bank accounts to be established for the deposit of all fees, forfeitures, assessments and costs paid into the court and shall adopt appropriate accounting procedures to ensure the proper handling of the funds. The administrative committee shall, with the assistance of the judge, prepare an annual budget for the operation of the court. 
(c)  Voting and procedure. The court administrative committee shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order and a majority vote of all representatives of the court administrative committee shall be required to adopt any motion or resolution. Four members or alternate members shall constitute a quorum. 
(Prior Code, § 18.04) 
Sec. 12-56. - Judge's salary. 
    The salary of the judge shall be set forth by a majority of the governing bodies of member municipalities. In order to provide for appropriate withholding and FICA tax procedures and in order to avoid the necessity of establishing employer accounts and identification numbers for a single employee, it is hereby agreed that the judge's salary shall be administered by the Mid-Moraine Municipal Court Clerk. This procedure is for accounting and tax purposes only. 
(Prior Code, § 18.05) 
Sec. 12-57. - Court personnel. 
(a)  Clerk . The initial selection of a clerk of the municipal court shall be the administrative committee. The clerk must be appointed by the judge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 775.10. 
(b)  Compensation . The salary and fringe benefits of the clerk and any other court personnel shall be established by a majority of the governing bodies after recommendation of the administrative committee. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06) 
State Law reference- Court employees generally and clerk's oath and bond, Wis. Stats. § 755.10. 
Sec. 12-58. - Forfeitures, fees, penalty assessments and costs. 
(a)  All forfeitures, fees, penalty assessments and costs paid to the municipal court under a judgment shall be paid to the Mid-Moraine Municipal Court Clerk within seven days after receipt of the money by the judge or other court personnel. At the time of the payment, the municipal judge shall report to the treasurer the title of the action, the offense for which a forfeiture was imposed and the total amount of the forfeiture, fees, penalty assessments and costs, if any. 
(b)  The court shall disburse the fees, costs and penalty assessments as provided by Wis. Stats. §§ 814.65(1) (fees of municipal court), 757.05 (penalty surcharge), 167.31(5) (weapons surcharge), and 346.655 (driver improvement surcharge). The municipal portion of the court costs (as provided in Wis. Stats. § 814.65(1)) shall be transferred at least monthly to the municipal court operational account. All forfeitures shall be disbursed by the treasurer at least monthly to the member municipality for which judgment was entered. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07) 
State Law reference- Arrests, bails, and penalties generally, Wis. Stats. § 345.11 et seq.; sentencing of juveniles, Wis. Stats. § 345.18; sentencing in traffic forfeiture actions, Wis. Stats. § 345.20l; deposits, Wis. Stats. § 345.26; fees of the municipal court, Wis. Stats. § 814.65. 
Sec. 12-59. - Budget process. 
(a)  Time and approval . The administrative committee and the judge shall formulate a budget annually no later than September 1 of each year for the next succeeding year. The members of the committee shall present the budget to their respective governing bodies for approval. The budget shall be approved annually by the governing bodies no later than November 1. Approval by the majority of all the member municipalities shall constitute approval of the budget. 
(b)  Court costs . The local share of the court costs required to be collected pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 814.65(1) shall be applied to the expenses of the court as determined in the budget. The local share shall not be credited to a member municipality's account. 
(c)  Expenses . The net expenses, whether dominated start-up expenses, capital expenditures, operating expenses, or otherwise, and including those charged under paragraph five, after application of the local share of court costs, shall be paid by the Mid-Moraine Municipal Court Clerk, which shall in turn charge each of the other member municipalities its share. Each member municipality shall pay the Mid-Moraine Municipal Court Clerk its share within 30 days of billing. Each member municipality's share shall be proportional to the number of citations and complaints filed with the court by each member municipality during the preceding three years. 
(Prior Code, § 18.08) 
Sec. 12-60. - Location of sessions. 
    Each member municipality shall provide a place for the court to hold sessions, and the judge shall hold sessions in each such place at least once each month. All proceedings for each case of a member municipality shall be held in the place provided by the member municipality and to the extent reasonably possible, at a time convenient to the member municipality. 
(Prior Code, § 18.09) 
Sec. 12-61. - Contract administration and amendments. 
    The affirmative vote of a majority of all member-governing bodies shall be required to adopt any resolution pertaining to the operation of the court. 
(Prior Code, § 18.10) 
Sec. 12-62. - Withdrawal. 
    Any member municipality may withdraw from this agreement by giving notice in writing to the judge no later than August 31 of any year. Upon giving such notice, the member municipality's participation in the municipal court shall terminate at the end of the year. 
(Prior Code, § 18.11) 
Sec. 12-63. - Survival of obligations. 
    The obligation to contribute to expenses and the right to receive distributions shall survive the withdrawal from, or termination of, this agreement except that a municipality which withdraws shall not be responsible for expenses incurred after its withdrawal. 
(Prior Code, § 18.13) 
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management generally, Wis. Stats. § 323.01 et seq.; succession to local offices, Wis. Stats. § 323.54; emergency powers of local governments, Wis. Stats. § 323.14; prohibition against restricting firearms or ammunition during emergency, Wis. Stats. § 323.24; emergency location and continuity of governments, Wis. Stats. § 323.50 et seq.; temporary locations of local government units, Wis. Stats. § 323.52; town fire protection, Wis. Stats. § 60.55. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disaster means a severe or prolonged, natural or human-caused, occurrence that threatens or negatively impacts life, health, property, infrastructure, the environment, the security of this state or a portion of this state or critical systems, including computer, telecommunications or agricultural systems. 
    Emergency government means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions (other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible) to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or by fire, flood or other natural causes. 
    Emergency management means all measures undertaken by or on behalf of the village to prepare for and minimize the effect of a disaster or the imminent threat of a disaster or a public health emergency and make repairs to or restore infrastructure or critical systems that are destroyed or damaged by a disaster. 
(Prior Code, § 3.01A; Ord. No. 00-07) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, Wis. Stats. § 323.02. 
Sec. 14-2. - Findings and intent. 
    By reason of the increasing possibility of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness and to ensure that preparations will be adequate to cope with such disasters, and to provide for the common defense, to protect the public peace, health, safety and general welfare, and to preserve the lives and property of the people, the village board has deemed it necessary to appoint a village emergency government coordinator and provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies. 
(Prior Code, § 3.01B; Ord. No. 00-07) 
Secs. 14-3-14-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL ORGANIZATION AND PLAN 

Sec. 14-23. - Emergency government coordinator. 
(a)  Appointment. The office of coordinator of emergency government is hereby created. The coordinator shall be appointed by the village president subject to confirmation by the village board under the direct supervision of the fire chief and shall receive such salary as may be authorized by the village board. The coordinator shall be the village president if no appointment is made. The coordinator is required to take and file an official oath. Deputy and assistant coordinators may be appointed by the coordinator, subject to the approval of the village board, as may be deemed necessary. Such appointees shall receive such compensation as may be determined by the village board. 
(b)  General duties and authority. The coordinator shall be the executive head of the emergency government organization, and shall have direct responsibility for the organization subject to the direction and control of the village president, the village board and the fire chief. The coordinator shall coordinate all activities for emergency government within the village; shall maintain as liaison, cooperate with emergency government agencies and organizations of other political jurisdictions and of state and federal government; shall participate in county and state emergency government activities upon request; and shall have such additional authority, duties and responsibilities as authorized by this article. 
(c)  Emergency government plan. The coordinator shall prepare a comprehensive general plan for emergency government for the village and shall present such plan to the fire chief for review and to the village board for its approval. When the village board has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty of all municipal agencies and all emergency government forces of the village to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner. 
(d)  Utilization of existing services and facilities. In preparing and executing the emergency government plan, the coordinator shall utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the existing departments and agencies of the village, to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all such departments and agencies are directed to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the coordinator. 
(e)  Emergency regulations. Whenever necessary to meet an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the village board, the coordinator of emergency government may, after review by the fire chief, by proclamation, promulgate and enforce such orders, rules and regulations relating to the conduct of persons and the use of property as shall be necessary to protect the public peace, health and safety, and preserve lives and property and to ensure the cooperation necessary in an identified emergency. Such proclamations shall be posted in two public places, and may be rescinded by the village board by resolution at any time. 
(f)  Mutual aid agreements. The coordinator of emergency government may, subject to review by the fire chief and the approval of the board, enter into mutual aid agreements with other political jurisdictions. Copies of such agreements shall be filed with the state coordinator. 
(Prior Code, §§ 3.02. 3.06) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties related to emergency management, Wis. Stats. § 323.10 et seq.; duties and powers of local governments, Wis. Stats. § 323.14; powers and duties of heads of emergency management, Wis. Stats. § 323.15. 
Sec. 14-24. - Declaration of emergency. 
(a)  Upon the declaration by the governor or the county emergency government coordinator, the local coordinator of emergency government, on the issuance of disaster warnings and the existence of states of emergency, shall be issued as required in the emergency government plan. 
(b)  The emergency government organization shall take action in accordance with the emergency government plan only after the declaration of an emergency and the issuance of official disaster warnings. Such state of emergency shall continue until terminated by the issuing authority, provided that any such declaration not issued by the governor may be terminated at the discretion of the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 3.03) 
Sec. 14-25. - Continuity of government. 
    The village board shall on an annual basis review and update by resolutions designations for each village officer and the head of each village department, who shall perform his duties and have powers only during such period of time as the official or department head is unable to act in his official capacity due to a local emergency. Such written designation shall set forth the name, address and telephone number of each successor and alternate successor; the same shall be filed with the village clerk, and a copy thereof filed with the coordinator of emergency government. 
(Prior Code, § 3.04) 
State Law reference- Emergency location and continuity of government, Wis. Stats. § 323.50 et seq. 
Sec. 14-26. - Joint action ordinance. 
    A joint action ordinance of the board of trustees of the county for the providing of a county municipal joint action emergency government plan of organization was adopted by the county board on January 9, 1979. Such county ordinance is made a part hereof by reference and is ratified and accepted by the village. This ratification and acceptance of the joint action ordinance shall constitute a mutual agreement between the village and county as provided by section 1 of such joint action ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 3.05) 
Sec. 14-27. - Obstruction of enforcement prohibited. 
    No person shall willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency government organization in the enforcement of any order, rule, regulation or plan issued under this article, or do any act forbidden by any order, rule, regulation or plan issued under this article. 
(Prior Code, §§ 3.05, 3.07) 
Secs. 14-28-14-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 14-58. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm means any device that, when actuated by a criminal act or other emergency requiring police or fire response, transmits a signal to a central alarm system or directly to the county sheriff's department or produces an audible or visible signal designed to notify persons within the audible or visual range of the signal. Except where inconsistent, the term "alarm" shall include automatic dialers and on- or off-premises audible alarms. 
    Automatic dialer means any telephone or electronic device or attachment which automatically selects a public primary telephone trunk of the county sheriff's department or village fire or police department and produces any pre-recorded message to report a criminal act, a fire or other emergency. No automatic dialer may be installed onto telephone lines of the village. 
    Control station alarm means any alarm monitored by a private central monitoring station and relayed to the county sheriff's department and any alarm connected directly to and monitored by the county sheriff's department. 
    False or malfunction alarm means a signal from an alarm, telephone or other contact with the county sheriff's department or village police or fire department resulting in response by the department when an emergency does not exist, including, without limitation, the activation of an alarm through negligence of the alarm owner or lessee of their agent or employee, or through mechanical failure. 
    On- or off-premises local alarm means any alarm installed in any business, commercial, industrial form or residential structure located within the village or its fire response district, which is designed to emit a visual or audible on- or off-premises alarm that may be responded to by the village police or fire department. In this article, the term "off premises" is defined as giving a visual or audible alarm to the adjacent area of the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 3.41B; Ord. No. 02-05) 
Sec. 14-59. - Findings and intent. 
    Unregulated alarm systems adversely affect law enforcement and fire protection agencies in the discharge of their duties due to a high incidence of false and malfunction alarms, which reduce the credibility of alarms as detection devices and increase the cost of protective services. This Code is intended to reduce false alarms and control unauthorized systems by regulating alarm systems in order to promote public peace and good order within the village. 
(Prior Code, § 3.41A; Ord. No. 02-05) 
Sec. 14-60. - Regulation authority. 
(a)  The Washington County sheriff's department is designated as the dispatch center for all non-local alarms located in the village. All non-local alarms used in the village shall conform to the Washington County Code of Ordinances, with the exception of any provisions regarding the billing for false alarm response. All non-local alarms shall be registered with the Washington County sheriff's department. No alarm system, automatic dialer or monitoring station shall contact the police department. 
(b)  Local alarms shall be registered with the Jackson police department. 
(Prior Code, § 3.41C; Ord. No. 02-05) 
Sec. 14-61. - Motor vehicle and boat alarms exempted. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles or boats. 
(Prior Code, § 3.41D.9; Ord. No. 02-05) 
Sec. 14-62. - False alarms. 
(a)  Prohibited. False alarms are prohibited and are deemed to be public nuisances. The police and fire departments shall bill alarm users for their responses to false alarms according to the fee schedule adopted by the village board annually. 
(1)  An alarm user who fails to pay said bill may be issued municipal citations for each violation, the forfeitures for which shall be established by the village board, with the alarm fee added as restitution; or 
(2)  The unpaid fees may be added to the property's tax bill as allowed by state statutes. 
(b)  Grace period for new systems. A period of 30 days will be allowed for debugging a newly installed alarm system during which false alarms will not be counted. 
(c)  False non-local alarm notification; disconnection. The police chief shall notify the sheriff's department after the tenth response to a false non-local alarm. The sheriff's department will proceed with disconnection in accordance with county ordinance. 
(d)  False local alarm notification; abatement. The police chief will notify the building inspection department after the tenth response to a false local alarm. The building inspection department will abate the nuisance per chapter 28. 
(Prior Code, § 3.41D.5, D.6; Ord. No. 02-05) 
Sec. 14-63. - Registration. 
(a)  Non-local alarms. Every non-local alarm shall be registered with the Washington County sheriff's department. 
(b)  Local burglar alarms; annual renewal. Every local burglar alarm shall be registered with the Jackson Police Department. Registrations shall be renewed annually by January 31 of each subsequent year, with the fee designated by the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 3.41D.1-D.4, D.7, D.8; Ord. No. 02-05) 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning of wetlands in shorelands, Wis. Stats. § 62.231; construction site erosion control and storm water management zoning, Wis. Stats. § 62.234; groundwater protection standards, Wis. Stats. § 160.001 et seq.; environmental regulation generally, Wis. Stats. § 280.01 et seq.; air pollution generally, Wis. Stats. § 285.01 et seq.; requirements for floodplain regulation, Wis. Stats. § 87.30; flood control, Wis. Stats. § 87.01 et seq.; water conservation and animal waste management, Wis. Stats. § 92.01 et seq.; ground water protection standards, Wis. Stats. § 160.001 et seq.; smoke as health hazard, Wis. Stats. § 254.57; environmental health, Wis. Stats. § 251.04 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD PREVENTION AND DAMAGE CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-19. - Statutory authorization. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and 62.23 for villages and cities; Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69, 59.692, and 59.694 for counties; and the requirements in Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.1.1) 
Sec. 16-20. - Finding of fact. 
    Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.1.2) 
Sec. 16-21. - Statement of purpose. 
    This article is intended to regulate floodplain development to: 
(1)  Protect life, health and property; 
(2)  Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers; 
(4)  Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain; 
(6)  Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain; 
(7)  Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers; 
(8)  Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and 
(9)  Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.1.3) 
Sec. 16-22. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for the Village of Jackson, Wisconsin." 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.1.4) 
Sec. 16-23. - General provisions. 
(a)  Areas to be regulated. This article regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or other maps approved by DNR. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the flood insurance study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO zones. Regional flood elevations (RFE) may be derived from other studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(b)  Official maps and revisions. 
(1)  The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the flood insurance study (FIS) listed below. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA through the letter of map change process (see division 8 of this article) before it is effective. No changes to RFEs on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the village clerk-treasurer. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(2)  Official maps. Based on the FIS: 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers: 55131C0254D, 55131C0258D, 55131C0259D, 55131C0266D, and 551310267D, dated November 20, 2013; with corresponding profiles that are based on the flood insurance study (FIS) dated November 20, 2013, volumes 55131CV001A and 55131CV002A. 
Approved by: The DNR and FEMA. 
(c)  Establishment of floodplain zoning districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows: 
(1)  Floodway district. The floodway district (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters and are contained within AE zones as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  Flood fringe dostrict. The flood fringe district (FF) is that portion between the regional flood limits and the floodway and displayed as AE zones on the FIRM. 
(3)  General floodplain district. The general floodplain district (GFP) is those areas that may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood and does not have a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A, AH and AO zones on the FIRM. 
(d)  Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in subsection (d)(1) or (2) of this section. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to division 8 of this article. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section. Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to section 16-195(3) and the criteria in subsections (d)(1) and (2) of this section. Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to division 8 of this article. 
(1)  If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. 
(2)  Where flood profiles do not exist for projects, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale. 
(e)  Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of this article shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to division 8 of this article. 
(f)  Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this article shall be in compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
(g)  Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the state department of transportation is exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.2022 applies. 
(h)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(1)  This article supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. § 59.69, 59.692 or 59.694 for counties; Wis. Stats. § 62.23 for cities; Wis. Stats. § 61.35 for villages; or Wis. Stats. § 87.30, which relate to floodplains. A more restrictive ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(2)  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(i)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. If a provision of this article, required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this article. 
(j)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in this article are based on engineering experience and research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. This article does not create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this article. 
(k)  Severability. Should any portion of this article be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected. 
(l)  Annexed areas for cities and villages. The county floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116 and 44 CFR 59-72, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the floodway location. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.1.5) 
Sec. 16-24. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this article by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not less than $25.00 and not more than $50.00, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.9.0) 
Sec. 16-25. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A zones means those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A zones. The A zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
    AH zone. See Area of shallow flooding. 
    AO zone. See Area of shallow flooding. 
    Accessory structure or use means a facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building. 
    Alteration means an enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM. 
    Basement means any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
    Building. See Structure . 
    Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11 and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this article. 
    Campground means any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area. 
    Camping unit means any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including, but not limited to, a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use. 
    Certificate of compliance means a certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this article. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water. 
    Crawlways or crawl space means an enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities. 
    Deck means an unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation. 
    Department means the state department of natural resources. 
    Development means any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    Dryland access means a vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles. 
    Encroachment means any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in the floodway. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The overflow or rise of inland waters; 
(2)  The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; 
(3)  The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior; or 
(4)  The sudden increase caused by an unusually high-water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
    Flood frequency means the probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year. 
    Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water. 
    Flood hazard boundary map means a map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A-zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance study and a flood insurance rate map. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means a map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood insurance study means a technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A-zones. Flood insurance rate maps, that accompany the flood insurance study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river. 
    Flood protection elevation means an elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also see Freeboard .) 
    Flood storage means those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge. 
    Floodplain means land which has been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the flood fringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. 
    Floodplain island means a natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood. 
    Floodplain management means policy and procedures to ensure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
    Freeboard means a safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed. 
    Habitable structure means any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation. 
    Hearing notice means publication or posting meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 985. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums. 
    High flood damage potential means damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is either: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Increase in regional flood height means a calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 feet, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
    Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see Development .) 
    Lowest adjacent grade means elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any of the exterior walls of a building. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. 
    Maintenance means the act or process of restoring to original soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment, with equivalent fixtures, systems or structures. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a "mobile recreational vehicle." 
    Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision, existing, means a parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Mobile/manufactured home park, expansion to existing, means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Mobile recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles." 
    Model, corrected effective, means a hydraulic engineering model that corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates more detailed topographic information than that used in the current effective model. 
    Model, duplicate effective, means a copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the effective FIS and referred to as the effective model. 
    Model, effective, means the hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce the current effective flood insurance study. 
    Model, existing (pre-project), means a modification of the duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any manmade modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which the revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the corrected effective model or duplicate effective model. 
    Model, revised (post-project), means a modification of the existing or pre-project conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to reflect revised or post-project conditions. 
    Municipality or municipal means the county, village or village governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing this article. 
    NAVD or North American Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment. 
    New construction, for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    NGVD or National Geodetic Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment. 
    Nonconforming structure means an existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the flood fringe district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.) 
    Nonconforming use means an existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence in the floodway.) 
    Obstruction to flow means any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
    Official floodplain zoning map means that map, adopted and made part of this article, as described in section 16-23(b), which has been approved by the department and FEMA. 
    Open space use means those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
    Ordinary high-water mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
    Person means an individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency. 
    Private sewage system means a sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. The term "private sewage system" also means an alternative sewage system approved by the department of safety and professional services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure. 
    Public utilities means those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines, such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems, such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
    Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in the state. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts. 
    Subdivision has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12). 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either any project for the improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Unnecessary hardship means where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the ordinance. 
    Variance means an authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface profile means a graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
    Watershed means the entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water. 
    Well means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.10.0) 
Secs. 16-26-16-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS 

Sec. 16-50. - Basic requirements. 
(a)  The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a floodprone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant materials; be constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of flooding. 
(b)  Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this article and all other requirements in section 16-193(b). Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.2.0) 
Sec. 16-51. - Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. 
(a)  No floodplain development shall: 
(1)  Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, causing any increase in the regional flood height; or 
(2)  Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of division 8 of this article are met. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.2.1) 
Sec. 16-52. - Watercourse alterations. 
(a)  No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the department and FEMA regional offices, and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The standards of section 16-51 must be met and the flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(b)  As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation and pursuant to division 8 of this article, the community shall apply for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.2.2) 
Sec. 16-53. - Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, development. 
    Development which requires a permit from the department, under Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to division 8 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.2.3) 
Sec. 16-54. - Public or private campgrounds. 
    Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions: 
(1)  The campground is approved by the department of health services; 
(2)  A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator; 
(3)  The character of the river system and the campground elevation are such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants; 
(4)  There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation; 
(5)  This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated, by the officials identified in subsection (4) of this section, to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the state department of health services and all other applicable regulations; 
(6)  Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use are allowed; 
(7)  The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours; 
(8)  All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section; 
(9)  The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to ensure compliance with the terms of this section; 
(10)  All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either division 3, 4 or 5 of this article for the floodplain district in which the structure is located; 
(11)  The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued; and 
(12)  All service facilities, including, but not limited to, refuse collection, electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells, shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.2.4) 
Secs. 16-55-16-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW) 

Sec. 16-82. - Applicability. 
    This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 16-149. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.3.1) 
Sec. 16-83. - Permitted uses. 
    The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the floodway areas of the general floodplain district, if they are not prohibited by any other ordinance, they meet the standards in section 16-84 and 16-85, and all permits or certificates have been issued according to section 16-193. 
(1)  Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips. 
(3)  Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of section 16-84(d). 
(4)  Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that comply with sections 16-84 and 16-85. 
(5)  Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with section 16-84(d). 
(6)  Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31. 
(7)  Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with section 16-83(c). 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.3.2) 
Sec. 16-84. - Standards for developments in the floodway. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Any development in the floodway shall comply with division 2 of this article and have a low flood damage potential. 
(2)  Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to sections 16-51 and 16-193(b)(3): 
a.  A cross section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or 
b.  An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will cause any increase in the flood elevations upstream or downstream, based on the data submitted for subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(b)  Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; 
(3)  Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; 
(4)  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
(5)  Must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood. 
(c)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if: 
(1)  Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and 
(2)  Construction meets the development standards of section 16-51. 
(d)  Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if: 
(1)  The requirements of section 16-51 are met; 
(2)  No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is issued by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 30, and a permit pursuant to section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and all other requirements have been met; 
(3)  The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and 
(4)  The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.3.3) 
Sec. 16-85. - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses not listed as permitted uses in section 16-83 are prohibited, including the following uses: 
(1)  Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with permanent open-space uses; 
(2)  Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life; 
(3)  Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts; 
(4)  Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383; 
(5)  Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812; 
(6)  Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(7)  Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 110.15(3)(b); and 
(8)  Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.3.4) 
Secs. 16-86-16-113. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF) 

Sec. 16-114. - Applicability. 
    This section applies to all flood fringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 16-149. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.4.1) 
Sec. 16-115. - Permitted uses. 
    Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the flood fringe district if the standards in section 16-116 are met, the use is not prohibited by this article or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in section 16-193 have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.4.2) 
Sec. 16-116. - Standards for development in the flood fringe. 
    Section 16-51 shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the flood fringe must meet the requirements of division 6 of this article; 
(1)  Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be newly constructed or moved into the flood fringe, shall meet or exceed the following standards. Any existing structure in the flood fringe must meet the requirements of division 6 of this article: 
a.  The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill unless the requirements of subsection (1)b of this section can be met. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. 
b.  The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation. 
c.  Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in subsection (1)d of this section. 
d.  In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with subsection (1)c of this section impractical, the municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements where roads are below the regional flood elevation, if: 
1.  The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or 
2.  The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation plan. 
(2)  Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be constructed on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation. 
(3)  Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of subsection (1) of this section. Subject to the requirements of subsection (5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(4)  Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the flood fringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in section 16-197. Subject to the requirements of subsection (5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(5)  Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with section 16-197. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding. 
(6)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans; and: 
a.  When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall only be permitted if they are designed to comply with section 16-197. 
b.  Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation. 
(7)  Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system, pursuant to section 16-197(c), to the flood protection elevation and meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(8)  Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system, pursuant to section 16-197(c), to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812. 
(9)  Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in flood fringe areas. 
(10)  Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this article. 
(11)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities. 
b.  In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and 
2.  Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood. 
c.  Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the flood fringe in subsection (1) of this section. 
(12)  Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in subsection (11)b and c of this section. A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.4.3) 
Secs. 16-117-16-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP) 

Sec. 16-146. - Applicability. 
    The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains mapped as A, AO or AH zone. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.5.1) 
Sec. 16-147. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 16-149, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within the floodway or flood fringe. 
(b)  Those uses permitted in the floodway (section 16-83) and flood fringe (section 16-115) districts are allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the standards of section 16-148, provided that all permits or certificates required under section 16-193 have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.5.2) 
Sec. 16-148. - Standards for development in the general floodplain district. 
    Division 3 of this article applies to floodway areas, and division 4 of this article applies to flood fringe areas. The rest of this article applies to either district. 
(1)  In AO/AH zones, the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the conditions listed below, whichever is higher: 
a.  At or above the flood protection elevation; 
b.  Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or 
c.  The depth as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  In AO/AH zones, plans must be provided showing adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters around structures. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.5.3) 
Sec. 16-149. - Determining floodway and flood fringe limits. 
    Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries: 
a.  A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in section 16-193(b)(3). 
b.  Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information. 
c.  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.5.4) 
Secs. 16-150-16-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 16-167. - General standards. 
(a)  Applicability. If these standards conform with Wis. Stats. § 59.69(10) for counties or Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h) for cities and villages, they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived or any amendment thereto. 
(b)  Conditions. The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may continue subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this article. The words "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification; this includes painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not considered maintenance. 
(2)  The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure. 
(3)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon shall conform to the applicable requirements of this article. 
(4)  The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent. 
(5)  No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 16-116(1). The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50 percent provisions of this subsection; 
(6)  No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 16-116(1). 
(7)  If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done under subsections (b)(5) and (6) of this section equals or exceeds 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value, the work shall not be permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 16-116(1). 
(8)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(9) of this section, if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current article requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50 percent of the structure's present equalized assessed value. 
(9)  For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event, provided that the minimum Federal Code requirements below are met and all required permits have been granted prior to the start of construction. 
a.  Residential structures shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must meet the requirements of section 16-197(b). 
2.  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, and shall be constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage. 
3.  Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  In A zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data available from a federal, state or other source. 
5.  In AO zones with no elevations specified, have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in section 16-148(1). 
6.  In AO zones, have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure. 
b.  Nonresidential structures shall: 
1.  Meet the requirements of subsection (b)(9)a of this section. 
2.  Either: 
(i)  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or 
(ii)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, meet the standards in section 16-197(a) or (b). 
3.  In AO zones with no elevations specified, have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in section 16-148(1). 
(c)  Alteration, repair and rehabilitation of historic structure. A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with section 16-84(a), flood-resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with section 16-197 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the development standards of subsection (b)(9)a of this section if it is determined that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.6.1) 
Sec. 16-168. - Floodway district. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the Floodway District, unless such modification or addition: 
(1)  Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all article requirements; 
(2)  Meets the requirements of section 16-167; 
(3)  Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height; 
(4)  Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 16-197, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation; and 
(5)  If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade; 
b.  The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials; 
c.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
d.  The use must be limited to parking, building access or limited storage. 
(b)  No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, section 16-197(c) and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(c)  No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in the floodway district shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, section 16-197(c) and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.6.2) 
Sec. 16-169. - Flood fringe district. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the municipality, and meets the requirements of section 16-116, except where subsection (b) of this section is applicable. 
(b)  Where compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the board of adjustment/appeals, using the procedures established in section 16-195, may grant a variance from those provisions of subsection (a) of this section for modifications or additions using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if: 
(1)  No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures; 
(2)  Human lives are not endangered; 
(3)  Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed; 
(4)  Flood depths shall not exceed two feet; 
(5)  Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and 
(6)  The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as described in section 16-116(5). 
(c)  All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances, section 16-197(c) and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(d)  All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this article, section 16-197(c) and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.6.3) 
Secs. 16-170-16-191. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 16-192. - Officials previously appointed to administer zoning regulations. 
    Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. § 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), these officials shall also administer this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.7.0) 
Sec. 16-193. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)  Duties and powers. The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this article and shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants of the article provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications. 
(2)  Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this article and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate. 
(3)  Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred. 
(4)  Keep records of all official actions, such as: 
a.  All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved. 
b.  Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations. 
c.  Floodproofing certificates. 
d.  Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures, including changes, appeals, variances and amendments. 
e.  All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures. 
f.  List of nonconforming structures and uses. 
(5)  Submit copies of the following items to the department regional office: 
a.  Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments. 
b.  Copies of case-by-case analyses and other required information, including an annual summary of floodplain zoning actions taken. 
c.  Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments. 
(6)  Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this article to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the department regional office. 
(7)  Submit copies of amendments to the FEMA regional office. 
(b)  Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new development; repair, modification or addition to an existing structure; or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the zoning administrator shall include: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor; 
b.  Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification. 
(2)  Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain: 
a.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot; 
b.  Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
c.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street center lines; 
d.  Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
e.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads; 
f.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official floodplain zoning maps; 
g.  The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study-either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD); 
h.  Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of division 3 or 4 of this article are met; and 
i.  Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to section 16-51. This may include any of the information noted in section 16-84(a). 
(3)  Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the state. The study contractor shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and approved by the department. 
a.  Zone A floodplains. 
1.  Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.07(3), Hydrologic analysis: Determination of regional flood discharge. 
2.  Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.07(4), Hydraulic analysis: Determination of regional flood elevation, and the following: 
(i)  Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model shall be based on detailed study information for downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL for the study. 
(ii)  Channel sections must be surveyed. 
(iii)  Minimum four foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used for the development of cross section overbank and floodplain mapping. 
(iv)  A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross sections is allowed in developed areas with additional intermediate cross sections required at transitions in channel bottom slope, including a survey of the channel at each location. 
(v)  The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used. 
(vi)  A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of road is required at each structure. 
(vii)  Additional cross sections are required at the downstream and upstream limits of the proposed development and any necessary intermediate locations based on the length of the reach if greater than 500 feet. 
(viii)  Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used when assigning parameters for the base model, such as flow, Manning's N values, expansion and contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high-water marks to determine the reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data is available, adequate justification shall be provided for any parameters outside standard accepted engineering practices. 
(ix)  The model must extend past the upstream limit of the difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The height difference between the proposed flood profile and the existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet. 
3.  Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be provided, showing all cross section locations, floodway/floodplain limits based on best available topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed development and whether the proposed development is located in the floodway. 
(i)  If the proposed development is located outside of the floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on the regional flood elevation. 
(ii)  If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it must be added to the base model to show the difference between existing and proposed conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients remain the same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification based on standard accepted engineering practices is provided. 
b.  Zone AE floodplains. 
1.  Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be based on Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.07(3), Hydrologic analysis: Determination of regional flood discharge. 
2.  Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.07(4), Hydraulic analysis: Determination of regional flood elevation, and the following: 
(i)  Duplicate effective model. The effective model shall be reproduced to ensure correct transference of the model data and to allow integration of the revised data to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and downstream of the revised reach. If data from the effective model is available, models shall be generated that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations shown in the floodway data table in the FIS report to within 0.1 foot. 
(ii)  Corrected effective model. The corrected effective model shall not include any manmade physical changes since the effective model date, but shall import the model into the most current version of HEC-RAS for department review. 
(iii)  Existing (pre-project conditions) model. The existing model shall be required to support conclusions about the actual impacts of the project associated with the revised (post-project) model or to establish more up-to-date models on which to base the revised (post-project) model. 
(iv)  Revised (post-project conditions) model. The revised (post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the existing model and any proposed changes to the topography caused by the proposed development. This model shall reflect proposed conditions. 
(v)  All changes to the duplicate effective model and subsequent models must be supported by certified topographic information, bridge plans, construction plans and survey notes. 
(vi)  Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the stream reach for which the revision is being requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the effective model and result in water surface elevations and top widths computed by the revised models matching those in the effective models upstream and downstream of the revised reach as required. The effective model shall not be truncated. 
3.  Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted to the department for review which meet the following conditions: 
(i)  Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles, topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or flood boundary floodway maps (FBFMs), construction plans, bridge plans. 
(ii)  Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval, and a planimetric map showing the applicable items. If a digital version of the map is available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM may be more easily revised. 
(iii)  Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised one percent and 0.2 percent annual chance floodplains and floodway boundaries. 
(iv)  If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used, then all supporting documentation or metadata must be included with the data submission along with the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) Projection and state plane coordinate system in accordance with FEMA mapping specifications. 
(v)  The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective floodplain boundaries. 
(vi)  All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled in accordance with the effective map and a cross section lookup table shall be included to relate to the model input numbering scheme. 
(vii)  Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown on the map. 
(viii)  The stream centerline, or profile baseline used to measure stream distances in the model, shall be visible on the map. 
(4)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this article shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The permit may be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient cause. 
(c)  Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, except where no permit is required, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit; 
(3)  If all article provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after written notification that the permitted work is completed; 
(4)  The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the requirements of section 16-197 are met. 
(d)  Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit the applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including, but not limited to, those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.7.1) 
Sec. 16-194. - Plan commission. 
(a)  The plan commission shall: 
(1)  Oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; and 
(2)  Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments to this article, maps and text. 
(b)  The plan commission shall not: 
(1)  Grant variances to the terms of the article in place of action by the board of adjustment/appeals; or 
(2)  Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.7.2) 
Sec. 16-195. - Board of adjustment/appeals. 
    The board of adjustment/appeals, created under Wis. Stats. § 59.694 for counties or Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e) for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this article. The board shall exercise the powers conferred by state statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The zoning administrator shall not be the secretary of the board. 
(1)  Powers and duties. The board of adjustment/appeals shall: 
a.  Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this article; 
b.  Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map; and 
c.  Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the ordinance standards. 
(2)  Appeals to the board. 
a.  Procedure. Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all records regarding the matter appealed. 
b.  Notice and hearing for appeals including variances. 
1.  Notice. The board shall: 
(i)  Fix a reasonable time for the hearing; 
(ii)  Publish adequate notice pursuant to state statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing; and 
(iii)  Ensure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the department regional office at least ten days in advance of the hearing. 
2.  Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The board shall: 
(i)  Resolve boundary disputes according to subsection (3) of this section; 
(ii)  Decide variance applications according to subsection (4) of this section; and 
(iii)  Decide appeals of permit denials according to section 16-196. 
c.  Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall: 
1.  Be made within a reasonable time; 
2.  Be sent to the department regional office within ten days of the decision; 
3.  Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the board; 
4.  State the specific facts which are the basis for the board's decision; 
5.  Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application; and 
6.  Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the board proceedings. 
(3)  Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the board in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries: 
a.  If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined; 
b.  The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the board; and 
c.  If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the board should inform the zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to division 8 of this article. 
(4)  Variances. 
a.  The board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this article if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
1.  Literal enforcement of the article will cause unnecessary hardship; 
2.  The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case the article or map must be amended; 
3.  The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and 
4.  The variance is consistent with the purpose of this article in section 16-21. 
b.  In addition to the criteria in subsection (4)a of this section, to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met: 
1.  The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation; 
2.  Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE; and 
3.  Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the ordinance. 
c.  A variance shall not: 
1.  Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district; 
2.  Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss; 
3.  Be granted for a hardship which is self-created; 
4.  Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area; 
5.  Allow actions without the amendments to this article or map(s) required in division 8 of this article; and 
6.  Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure. 
d.  When a floodplain variance is granted the board shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life, and property and flood insurance premiums could increase up to $25.00 per $100.00 of coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.7.3) 
Sec. 16-196. - To review appeals of permit denials. 
(a)  The zoning agency (section 16-194) or board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include: 
(1)  Permit application data listed in section 16-193(b); 
(2)  Floodway/flood fringe determination data in section 16-149; 
(3)  Data listed in section 16-84(a)(2) where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning administrator; and 
(4)  Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the board with the appeal. 
(b)  For appeals of all denied permits, the board shall: 
(1)  Follow the procedures of section 16-195; 
(2)  Consider zoning agency recommendations; and 
(3)  Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(c)  For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the board shall: 
(1)  Uphold the denial where the board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners as per the requirements of division 8 of this article; and 
(2)  Grant the appeal where the board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase, provided no other reasons for denial exist. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.7.4) 
Sec. 16-197. - Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures or uses. 
(a)  No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA floodproofing certificate. 
(b)  For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either: 
(1)  Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or 
(2)  That meets or exceeds the following standards: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(c)  Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to: 
(1)  Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other regional flood factors; 
(2)  Protect structures to the flood protection elevation; 
(3)  Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; 
(4)  Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and 
(5)  Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.7.5) 
Sec. 16-198. - Public information. 
    To provide information regarding the status of real property, marks shall be placed on structures to show the depth of inundation during a regional flood. In addition, all maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed and real estate transfer should show what floodplain district the transferred property is located in. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.7.6) 
Secs. 16-199-16-219. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 16-220. - Required for obstructions or increases. 
    Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 16-221. 
(1)  In AE zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 16-221. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR. 
(2)  In A zones, increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be permitted if the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 16-221. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.8.0) 
Sec. 16-221. - Events requiring amendment of article and letter of map change. 
    The governing body shall change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this article in the manner outlined in section 16-222. Actions which require an amendment to this article or submittal of a letter of map change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height; 
(2)  Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations on the FIRM; 
(3)  Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in section 16-23(b)(2); 
(4)  Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain; 
(5)  Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain maps; 
(6)  Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.05, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the municipality; and 
(7)  All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood fringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.8.1) 
Sec. 16-222. - Procedures. 
    Article amendments may be made upon petition of any party according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23 for cities and villages, or Wis. Stats. § 59.69 for counties. The petitions shall include all data required by sections 16-149 and 16-193(b). The land use permit shall not be issued until a letter of map revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed changes. 
(1)  The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23 for cities and villages or Wis. Stats. § 59.69 for counties. 
(2)  No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the department. 
(3)  All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be approved by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 13-06, § 23.8.2) 
Chapter 18 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Police and firefighting services generally, Wis. Stats. § 213.01 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, Wis. Stats. § 167.10; regulation of hazardous substances, Wis. Stats. § 167.11; negligent handling of burning material, Wis. Stats. § 941.10; unsafe burning of buildings, Wis. Stats. § 941.11; interfering with firefighting, Wis. Stats. § 941.12; false fire alarms, Wis. Stats. § 941.13; town fire wardens, Wis. Stats. § 26.13; authority of local fire chief and inspector regarding multi-family dwellings, Wis. Stats. § 101.976; town fire companies, Wis. Stats. § 213.05 et seq.; firefighter pay, Wis. Stats. § 213.12; police power of fire chief, Wis. Stats. § 213.095; emergency medical services personnel, Wis. Stats. § 256.15; town fire protection, Wis. Stats. § 60.55; town fire safety regulations, Wis. Stats. § 60.555; reimbursement for fire calls on town highways, Wis. Stats. § 60.557; town ambulance service, Wis. Stats. § 60.565; town police and fire commission, Wis. Stats. § 60.57; town police and fire departments, Wis. Stats. § 61.65; town ambulance service, Wis. Stats. § 61.64; definitions of fire chief, fire department, and fire fighter, Wis. Stats. § 880.01; special inspection warrants, Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    AST means aboveground storage tank. 
    Annunciator panel means a control box for alarm system, which aids in the location of an activated pull station or detection device. 
    Approved means listed or approved by Underwriters Laboratories Inc. factory manual, the National Bureau of Standards, the American Gas Association Laboratories, or other nationally recognized testing authorities, and accepted by the fire chief as a result of his investigation and experience. 
    Area (net) means the occupied or usable floor area in a building but not including space occupied by columns, walls, partitions, stairways, mechanical shafts or ducts. 
    Automatic fire warning system means a supervised system, which automatically detects a fire condition, actuates a fire alarm signal device and indicates the location from which the signal originates. 
    Class A fire means fires involving ordinary combustible materials, such as wood, cloth, paper, rubber and many plastics. 
    Class B fire means fires involving flammable liquids, greases and gases. 
    Class C fire means fires involving energized electrical equipment. 
    Class D fire means fires involving combustible metals, such as magnesium, sodium and potassium. 
    Class K fire means fires involving vegetable oils, animal oils, or fats in cooking appliances. This is for commercial kitchens, including those found in restaurants, cafeterias and caterers. 
    Combustible liquid means a liquid having a flash point at or above 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
    CPR means cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    EMT means emergency medical technician. 
    Explosive means any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term "explosive" includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cord, ignition cord, igniters and display fireworks. 
    Fire district means the village and areas outside the village limits that have contracted for service by the village fire department for fire and emergency medical services. 
    Firefighter means any person performing the powers and duties of a fire department, whether or not that person is engaged in emergency operations, including full-time, part-time and paid-on-call personnel. 
    Flammable liquid means a liquid having a flash point below 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
    Hazardous materials means any substance that, by reason of being explosive, flammable, poisonous, corrosive, oxidizing, irritating or otherwise harmful, is likely to cause injury or death whether the materials are in usable or waste condition. 
    Honorary member means any firefighter who achieves ten years of service and reaches the age of 55 shall be an honorary member, upon honorable retirement. 
    ICC container means any container approved by the interstate commerce commission for shipping any liquid, gaseous or solid material of a flammable, toxic or other hazardous nature. 
    Incident commander (IC) means the first fire department unit or officer to arrive at the scene of multiple unit responses shall assume the role of incident commander and remain in command until command is transferred to a higher ranking officer or until the incident is terminated. 
    Institutional building means the use of a building or structure, or apportion thereof, in which people having physical limitations because of health or age are harbored for medical treatment or other care or treatment, or in which people are detained for penal or correctional purposes or in which the liberty of the occupants is restricted. 
    ISO means insurance service organization. 
    Multifamily dwelling means an apartment building, rowhouses, townhouse, condominium or manufactured building that does not exceed 60 feet in height or six stories and consists of three or more attached dwelling units. 
    NFPA means National Fire Protection Association. 
    Public building means any structure, including exterior parts of such building, such as a porch, exterior platform or steps providing means of ingress or egress, used in whole or in part as a place of resort, assemblage, lodging, trade, traffic, occupancy, or use by the public or by three or more tenants. 
    Residence building, except when classed as an institutional building, means a building in which sleeping accommodations are provided. 
    Standpipe means the riser portion of the piping system that delivers the hose stream water supply vertically from floor to floor. 
    UL means Underwriters Laboratory. 
    UST means underground storage tank. 
(Prior Code, § 3.21) 
Sec. 18-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. This chapter shall be enforced by the fire chief of the village or an authorized agent. The village building, plumbing and electrical inspectors and health officer shall cooperate with the fire department in enforcing this chapter. 
(b)  Orders to eliminate fire hazards. Whenever any of the officers or inspectors of the fire department shall find in any building or upon any premises dangerous conditions as follows, the fire chief, or his designee, shall order such dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or remedied in an appropriate manner. Conditions constituting fire hazards include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive matter. 
(2)  Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive matter. 
(3)  Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings or other highly flammable materials. 
(4)  Accumulations of dust or waste materials in air conditioning systems or of grease in kitchen exhaust ducts. 
(5)  Obstruction of or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire. 
(c)  Service of orders. The service orders under this section shall be made upon the owners, occupant or other person responsible for the conditions, either by delivering a copy of same personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the premises. 
(d)  Premises occupied by person other than property owner. If buildings or other premises are owned by one person and occupied by another under lease or otherwise, the orders issued in connection with the enforcing of this Code shall apply to the occupant thereof, except where the rules or orders require the making of additions to or changes in the premises themselves, such as would immediately become real estate and be the property of the owner of the premises; in such cases, the rules or orders shall affect the owner and not the occupant unless it is otherwise agreed between the owner and the occupant. 
(Prior Code, §§ 3.32H, 3.35) 
Secs. 18-3-18-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-23. - Established; duties of department; regulations. 
    The village has established a village fire department to perform the duties of firefighting, fire prevention and operation of a rescue squad for the village. These services shall be made available to other governmental units and other fire or rescue units. The organization and internal regulation of the department shall be governed by the provisions of this article and by such guidelines adopted by the department and approved by the police and fire commission and by applicable personnel policies of the village, except as otherwise provided by law and ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 3.21A; Ord. No. 08-08; Ord. No. 12-09) 
Sec. 18-24. - Appointment of members. 
(a)  Fire chief. The fire chief shall be appointed by the police and fire commission for an indefinite term, subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of state law. 
(b)  Firefighters and EMTs. The fire chief shall appoint all firefighters and EMTs with confirmation of the police and fire commission. 
(c)  Elected officials may not serve; exception. No elected village official may serve as a member of the village fire department after May 1, 2000, unless both positions are served without interruption. 
(Prior Code, § 3.22B.1; Ord. No. 08-08; Ord. No. 12-09) 
Sec. 18-25. - Maximum number of members. 
    At no time shall the department consist of less than 22 active members or more than 60 active members. The number of non-fire trained individuals (only interested in rescue) on the department will be at the discretion of the fire chief. 
(Prior Code, § 3.22B.2; Ord. No. 08-08; Ord. No. 12-09) 
Sec. 18-26. - Application procedure. 
    Any person of at least 18 years of age desiring to be a member of the village fire department may file with the fire chief an application in such form as the village may require. Prior to permanent appointment each applicant shall also file a certificate of physical fitness from such physicians as the fire chief may designate. The applicant shall be presented to the police and fire commission for confirmation. 
(Prior Code, § 3.22B.3; Ord. No. 08-08; Ord. No. 12-09) 
Sec. 18-27. - Residency requirement; waiver. 
(a)  Upon appointment, firefighters and EMTs shall live or regularly be employed within a seven mile radius of the village fire department. 
(b)  If a member moves from the fire district, the fire chief may grant a waiver of the requirements of this section. In granting or denying a waiver, the fire chief will consider the activity, availability and response record of the individual, plus the needs of the department, in granting any such waiver. 
(c)  The number of individuals who may be granted a residency waiver shall be at the discretion of the village fire chief. 
(Prior Code, § 3.22B.2; Ord. No. 08-08; Ord. No. 12-09) 
Sec. 18-28. - Powers and duties of fire chief. 
(a)  Generally. The fire chief shall enforce all fire prevention ordinances of the village, state laws, and regulations pertaining to fire prevention and suppression and shall keep the citizens informed on fire prevention methods and on the activities of the department. 
(b)  Disciplinary actions. The fire chief may suspend any officer or member of the fire department for neglect or refusal to perform his departmental duties. In the event an officer or firefighter violates the standard operating guidelines, the fire chief may suspend the offending officer or member of the department, or recommend demotion or expulsion of the offending officer or member of the department to the police and fire commission for action. All disciplinary actions may be appealed to the police and fire commission. The police and fire commission shall have the right to remove any member of the village fire department for cause. 
(c)  Fire investigation. The fire chief shall cause to investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the fire district, which is of a suspicious nature or which involves loss of life or injury to persons or by which property has been destroyed or substantially damaged. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire by the fire chief or his designee and, if it appears that such a fire is of suspicious origin, the fire chief or his designee shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case. 
(Prior Code, § 3.22B.3.c, 3.d, C.5; Ord. No. 08-08; Ord. No. 12-09) 
Sec. 18-29. - Police power of fire department personnel. 
(a)  Generally. The officers in command at any fire are vested with full and complete police authority at fires. Any officer of the department may cause the arrest of any person failing to give right-of-way to the fire department responding to a fire. 
(b)  Securing fire scene. The fire chief or his designee may prescribe certain limits in the vicinity of any fire in which no persons, excepting firefighters or police officers and those admitted by order of the department, shall be permitted to enter. 
(c)  Removal and destruction of property. The fire chief or his designee shall have the power to cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from fire or to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect the adjoining property, and during the progress of any fire, he shall have the power to order the removal or destruction of any property necessary to prevent the further progression of fire, including removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all electricity or other services where the same impedes the work of the department during the progress of a fire. 
(d)  Entry into adjacent property. Any firefighter, while acting under the direction of the fire chief or his designee, may enter the premises adjacent to any building or other property for the purpose of extinguishing a fire. 
(Prior Code, § 3.22C.1-C.3; Ord. No. 08-08; Ord. No. 12-09) 
Sec. 18-30. - Duties of bystanders to assist firefighters. 
    Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the fire chief or his designee and may be required to render assistance in fighting the fire or in removing or guarding property. The fire chief or his designee shall have the power to cause the arrest of any persons refusing to obey the orders. 
(Prior Code, § 3.22C.4; Ord. No. 08-08; Ord. No. 12-09) 
Sec. 18-31. - Hindering, resisting or obstructing firefighter prohibited. 
    Any person hindering, resisting or obstructing any firefighter in the discharge of his duty as is herein before provided, shall be deemed guilty of resisting a firefighter in the discharge of his duty. 
(Prior Code, § 3.22C.3; Ord. No. 08-08; Ord. No. 12-09) 
State Law reference- Interfering with firefighting, Wis. Stats. § 941.12. 
Sec. 18-32. - Damage to fire department equipment prohibited. 
    No person shall willfully injure, in any manner, any hose, and hydrant or fire apparatus belonging to the village or of any mutual aid department while assisting the village fire department. No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street, private driveway or other place, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Prior Code, § 3.22C.6; Ord. No. 08-08; Ord. No. 12-09) 
State Law reference- Crossing fire hose, Wis. Stats. § 346.91; tampering, damaging or interfering with firefighting equipment, Wis. Stats. § 941.12. 
Sec. 18-33. - Liability for emergency response. 
    Every person that causes fire apparatus of the village to respond to a scene upon a state highway for the purpose of extinguishing a fire, containing a hazardous product, to standby or perform extrication activities, will be liable for payment of such services. If payment is not received, a claim may be made to the state for such services by the fire chief or designee, so authorized by state statutes. 
(Prior Code, § 3.24H) 
Secs. 18-34-18-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES 

Sec. 18-55. - Temporary and part-time personnel authorized; wages. 
    The fire chief is authorized to employ temporary or part-time emergency medical services personnel. The village board shall establish the rate of pay for temporary or part-time emergency medical services personnel, and such personnel are subject to the personnel policies adopted by the village, as applicable. 
(Prior Code, § 3.23C) 
Secs. 18-56-18-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION AND SUPPRESSION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-84. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of this article to prescribe regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding, to a reasonable degree, of life and property from the hazards of fire, explosion arising from the storage, handling and the use of hazardous substances, materials and devices and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the use or occupancy of buildings within the fire district and the village. 
(Prior Code, § 3.24A.1) 
Sec. 18-85. - State and national codes adopted. 
(a)  In addition to the codes, standards and procedures provided in this chapter, the most recently published state codes and National Fire Protection Association codes are hereby adopted by reference. In the event of conflict between regulations adopted by reference and those of this chapter, the state codes, standards and procedures shall govern. 
(b)  At least one copy each of all codes and standards incorporated in this chapter shall be kept on file and open for public inspection during normal business hours in the office of the village fire department. 
(Prior Code, § 3.24A.2-A.4) 
Sec. 18-86. - Applicability to new and existing conditions. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply equally to new and existing conditions, except the existing conditions not in strict compliance with the terms of this Code shall be permitted to continue where the exceptions do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or adjoining property. 
(Prior Code, § 3.24B) 
Sec. 18-87. - Exceptions for interstate commerce transportation and armed forces. 
    Nothing contained in this Code shall be constructed as applying to the transportation of any article or thing shipped in conformity with the regulations prescribed by the interstate commerce commission, or as applying to the U.S. military forces. 
(Prior Code, § 3.24C) 
Sec. 18-88. - Authority of chief to modify regulations. 
    The fire chief or authorized agent shall have the power to modify provisions of this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or a duly appointed agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this article, provided that the spirit of the article is observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire chief thereon shall be entered upon the records and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 3.24D) 
Sec. 18-89. - Fire inspections. 
(a)  Generally . It shall be the duty of the fire chief or authorized agent to inspect, or cause to be inspected, all buildings and premises, except the interiors of private dwellings, as often as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or any violations of the provisions or intent of this Code, and of any other ordinance affecting the fire hazard, and to ensure compliance in all places of assembly with all laws, regulations and orders dealing with overcrowding, use of decorative materials, maintenance of exit ways, and maintenance of fire alarm and fire detecting systems, and fire extinguishing systems and appliances. 
(b)  Authority to enter premises . The fire chief, or authorized agent, may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises within the fire district for the purpose of making an inspection, or investigation, which, under the provisions of this Code, is deemed necessary to be made. Private dwellings shall not be entered without the consent or permission of an adult occupant. 
(c)  Authorization by written complaint or referral. The fire chief, or authorized agent, upon receipt of a written complaint from any person, referral from another public agency, or, whenever it is deemed necessary, shall inspect any buildings and premises within the fire district. 
(Prior Code, § 3.25) 
Sec. 18-90. - Transport of hazardous and infectious materials; recovery of clean-up costs. 
(a)  Every person using, storing, handling or transporting (whether by rail or on the highways) flammable or combustible liquids, chemicals, gases, hazardous materials or infectious agents shall comply with the current adopted requirements of the governing state agency and state administrative code. 
(b)  Every person using, storing, handling or transporting (whether by rail or on the highways) flammable or combustible liquids, chemicals, gases, hazardous materials or infectious agents shall be liable to the village for the actual cost of labor, personal protective equipment and materials associated with the use of any specialized extinguishing agent, chemical, neutralizer or similar material or equipment employed to extinguish, confine or clean up any such hazardous material that is involved in any accidental spill or in the threat of any fire or accidental spill. 
(c)  Any person who possesses or controls a hazardous material or infectious agent that is discharged or causes the discharge of a hazardous material or infectious agent shall reimburse the village for the actual and necessary expenses incurred by the village or its agent to contain, remove or dispose of the hazardous substance or infectious agent or take any other appropriate action which is deemed appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Prior Code, § 3.24G) 
Sec. 18-91. - Fire lanes. 
    Fire lanes, where required, shall be planned, specified, permitted, installed, tested and maintained pursuant to the applicable national, state and local codes. 
(Prior Code, § 3.28) 
Sec. 18-92. - Aboveground and underground storage tanks. 
(a)  Applicable standards. All installations or removals shall meet the current adopted state administrative code and regulations of the governing state agency and the current adopted National Fire Protection Association codes and standards. 
(b)  Permit required; fees. Prior to the installation or removal of a UST or AST, plans shall be submitted to the fire department or to the governing state agency for approval. Permit fees for plan approval and subsequent inspections are as provided in the village fee schedule. 
(c)  Distribution of plans and specifications; approval required. Three copies of the plans and specifications shall be submitted for review. Approved plans shall be stamped by the fire department or the governing state agency representative granting approval. Two copies shall be returned to the owner/representative and the fire department will keep at least one copy on file. No work may begin on the installation or removal until the plans are approved by the fire department or the governing state agency. 
(d)  Contractor responsible for accuracy of calculations. The village fire department's approval of the installation or removal plans does not confirm the accuracy of any calculations performed by the contractor. Full responsibility for the accuracy of these calculations is the responsibility of the contractor. 
(Prior Code, § 3.33) 
Sec. 18-93. - Emergency lighting. 
    Emergency lighting, where required, shall be planned, specified, permitted, installed, tested and maintained per applicable national, state and local codes. 
(Prior Code, § 3.34) 
Sec. 18-94. - Fire extinguishers. 
    Fire extinguishers, where required, shall be planned, specified, permitted, installed, tested and maintained per applicable national, state and local codes. 
(Prior Code, § 3.29D; Ord. No. 02-14; Ord. No. 06-03; Ord. No. 08-08) 
Sec. 18-95. - Key vaults. 
(a)  When required. All new multifamily, business, commercial, educational, industrial and institutional shall install a key vault in an accessible location as approved by the fire chief or designee. In addition, any additional square footage added to a structure shall require the installation of a key vault. 
(b)  Type. The key vault shall be the type approved by the village fire department. 
(c)  Key requirements. Properly identified and up-to-date keys to gain access to the building and all keyed doors within the building are required to be placed in the key vault. In addition, properly identified and up-to-date keys for the annunciation panel and for the sprinkler system are required to be placed in the key vault. When a change of locks made on or within the building is necessary, the fire chief or designee shall be notified and new keys shall be placed in the key vault. Removal of any key from the key vault, by other than village fire department personnel, shall be in violation of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 3.31) 
Sec. 18-96. - Fireworks permit approval required. 
    No permits shall be issued pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 167.10 unless the permit has been approved for issuance by the village fire and police departments. 
(Prior Code, § 7.01C; Ord. No. 07-11; Ord. No. 12-03) 
Secs. 18-97-18-112. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HYDRANTS 

Sec. 18-113. - Spacing of fire hydrants on public streets. 
    Fire hydrants on public streets shall conform to the following placement requirements: 
(1)  Hydrants on single-family zoned residential streets shall be spaced no more than 500 feet apart. 
(2)  Hydrants on multifamily, business, commercial and industrial zoned streets shall be spaced no more than 250 feet apart. 
(3)  Hydrants spacing on streets zoned PUD shall be determined by the fire chief or authorized representative using the spacing requirements of either subsection (1) or (2) of this section, as appropriate. 
(Prior Code, § 3.27) 
Sec. 18-114. - Ornamental fire hydrant placement on private property restricted. 
    Ornamental fire hydrants may not be placed within the public right-of-way or within 20 feet of any public street or driveway and may not be painted the same color (red or yellow) as any municipal fire hydrant in the county. 
(Prior Code, § 3.24J) 
Sec. 18-115. - Fire hydrants, standpipes and sprinkler systems on private property. 
(a)  Fire chief's approval and permit required. The fire chief or his authorized representative must approve all fire hydrants and stand pipes for commercial, industrial or institutional buildings or properties. A permit must be issued before such equipment may be installed. 
(b)  Maintenance; records. A maintenance and inspection program approved by the village water utility shall be used. Records of the program shall be kept and shall be available for review by the water utility. 
(c)  When water hydrants required. To ensure adequate water supply for firefighting purposes to existing or new structures, buildings, tank farms, lumber yards, commercial or industrial complexes located at extended distances from village water hydrants on private property, any high hazard occupancy shall provide, at the owner's expense, an approved water hydrant located no more than 350 feet from a village water hydrant. 
(d)  Standards and specifications. 
(1)  Fire hydrant placement, number and design. Placement of the hydrant shall be determined by the village fire department and the village water utility. The number of on-site hydrants will be determined by the size and accessibility of the proposed or existing structure. Water main sizing will be determined by the amount of maximum projected fire flow required. Hydrants shall be of the type approved by the village water utility and be consistent with the type universally used in the village. All hydrants shall be painted bright red to match the color of the hydrants of the village water utility. 
(2)  Standpipe system. The hose connection for the Class 1 standpipe system shall be a 21/2 inch diameter. The connection point shall be between three feet and four feet above the finished property grade. 
(Prior Code, § 3.26; Ord. No. 06-03) 
Secs. 18-116-18-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 18-131. - National, state and local codes applicable. 
    The following fire protections systems, including, but not limited to, sprinkler systems, heat and smoke detection systems, commercial cooking hoods and flammable and combustible spray booths, shall be planned, specified, permitted, installed, tested and maintained in accordance with applicable national, state and local codes. 
Sec. 18-132. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  Submission; approval required. Prior to the installation of a sprinkler system, or the alteration of an existing sprinkler system, plans shall be submitted to the fire department, a consultant designated by the fire department, or to the governing state agency for approval. No work may begin on the installation of a sprinkler system or alteration of a sprinkler system until the plans are approved by the fire department, the consultant designated by the fire department or the governing state agency. 
(b)  Distribution of copies. Three copies of the plans and specifications shall be submitted for review. Approved plans shall be stamped by the fire department, a consultant designated by the fire department, or by the DSPS representative granting approval. Two copies shall be returned to the owner/representative, and the fire department will keep one copy on file. 
(c)  Contractor responsible for accuracy of calculations. The village fire department, the consultant designated by the fire department or the DSPS approval of the sprinkler plans does not affirm the accuracy of any calculations performed by the contractor. Full responsibility for the accuracy of these calculations is the responsibility of the contractor. 
(Prior Code, § 3.29C; Ord. No. 02-14; Ord. No. 06-03; Ord. No. 08-08) 
Sec. 18-133. - Fees. 
    Fees associated with this division shall be as provided in the village fee schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 3.29B.7; Ord. No. 02-14; Ord. No. 06-03; Ord. No. 08-08) 
Sec. 18-134. - Maintenance and inspection records. 
    All fire protection systems maintenance inspection records shall be forwarded for filing to the fire department. 
Sec. 18-135. - Additional standards applicable to sprinkler systems. 
(a)  A 30-degree, five storz connection shall be installed as the fire department connection. The connection point shall be between three feet and four feet above the finished property grade. The fire department connection shall be located within 150 feet of a hydrant. 
(b)  Any additional square footage added to a sprinkler structure will require the installation of a horn/strobe combination alarm signaling device. The device shall be located above the fire department connection inside and outside of the building. This device shall be used in place of the water flow alarm apparatus. 
(Prior Code, § 3.29B.1, B.4, B.8; Ord. No. 02-14; Ord. No. 06-03; Ord. No. 08-08) 
Secs. 18-136-18-188. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OUTDOOR OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 18-189. - Prohibited; exceptions. 
    Outdoor burning within the village limits is prohibited except as provided in this division. 
Sec. 18-190. - Recreational fires. 
(a)  No recreational fires may be started or allowed to continue burning unless the recreational fire is fully contained within an approved outdoor appliance. An outdoor appliance is any commercial available appliance designed to contain a wood fire when operated according to the manufacturer's instructions with all lids, screens and spark arresting devices in place, or a permanent structure built entirely of noncombustible materials designed with spark arrestors and screens to contain a wood fire. 
(b)  No recreational fires are allowed in the front setback of any property and shall be 15 feet from any combustible structure and shall be 15 feet of any side or rear lot line. 
(c)  Recreational fires shall consist of natural wood or manufactured fire log material. Standard dry kindling materials may be used in the starting of the recreational fire. No flammable or combustible liquids may be used in the starting of a recreational fire. 
(d)  Recreational fires must be supervised by a competent adult until the fire is completely extinguished. Means of extinguishing a recreational fire must be kept immediately available while the fire is burning. 
(e)  A party that allows a recreational fire to burn out of control shall be responsible for paying any costs associated with the extinguishment of the resulting fire. 
(f)  The heat or smoke created by the recreational fire at no time shall be an annoyance or discomfort to the neighborhood or the traveling public. 
(Prior Code, § 3.32A.5.a, A.5.b) 
Sec. 18-191. - Vegetation burning restricted. 
    Burning is permitted for prairie and meadow landscapes as needed for proper maintenance, upon obtaining permission from the fire chief or designee, provided that burning is conducted using the conditional use or planned unit development process. 
(Prior Code, § 3.32A.1-A.3) 
Sec. 18-192. - Outdoor cooking devices. 
    Outdoor cooking devices may be used for the cooking of food; provided, however, that no grills or other devices used for outdoor cooking shall be used above the first story of any building on a balcony, raised porch or platform. 
(Prior Code, § 3.32A.4) 
Sec. 18-193. - Special event burning. 
(a)  Burning of wood at special events, including, without limitation, ceremonial bonfires and fires used in the preparation of food for a special event, shall be allowed after the fire chief or designee has granted written permission. The fire chief or designee may revoke the written permission at any time in his discretion conditions warrant. 
(b)  Permission for special event burning may be granted after it is shown that it shall be supervised by a competent person, have readily available fire extinguishing equipment, shall not be located within area of structures or combustible materials, and shall be immediately extinguished after the event. 
(c)  No sky lanterns shall be launched within the village limits. 
(Prior Code, § 3.32A.5.e, A.5.f) 
Sec. 18-194. - Fire department training. 
    When done within applicable guidelines and codes, the fire department shall be allowed to perform live fire training exercises. 
Sec. 18-195. - Use of torches or flame producing devices. 
    Torches or other flame producing devices, where required, shall be planned, specified, permitted, installed, tested and maintained in accordance with applicable national, state and local codes. 
(Prior Code, § 3.32B) 
Secs. 18-196-18-213. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS 

Sec. 18-214. - Accumulations restricted. 
    Accumulations of waste paper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind shall not be permitted to remain upon any roof or in any court, yard, vacant lot or open space. All weeds, grass, vines or other growth, when it endangers property, or is liable to be ignited, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the property it is on. 
(Prior Code, § 3.32C.1) 
Sec. 18-215. - Storage methods. 
(a)  Generally. Storage in buildings shall be orderly, shall not be within two feet of the ceiling, and not so located as to endanger exit from the building. Storage in the open shall not be more than 20 feet in height, shall be so located, with respect to adjacent buildings, as to not constitute a hazard, and shall be compact and orderly. 
(b)  Storage and drawing of petroleum products with flash points of less than 100 degrees Fahrenheit. No person shall deliver, place, receive or store in excess of ten gallons, any gasoline (or like product of petroleum which has a flash point of less than 100 degrees Fahrenheit) upon any premises located in any district of the village zoned as a multiple-family residence district. No person shall maintain, use or place any device for drawing, from an underground storage container, gasoline (or any like product of petroleum which has a flash point of less than 100 degrees Fahrenheit) upon any premises located in any district of the village as a multiple-family residence district. 
(Prior Code, § 3.32C.2, E) 
Sec. 18-216. - Handling restrictions. 
    No person making, using, storing or having in charge or under their control any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw or combustible waste materials shall fail at the close of each day to cause all such materials which are not compactly based on and stacked in an orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable vaults or in metal lined, covered, receptacles or bins. 
(Prior Code, § 3.32C.3) 
Sec. 18-217. - Flammable decorative materials in commercial buildings. 
    Cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves, trees or other highly flammable materials shall not be used for decorative purposes in show windows or other parts of commercial or public buildings unless flame-proofed; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be held to prohibit the display of saleable goods permitted and offered for sale. Electric light bulbs shall not be decorated with paper or other combustible materials unless such materials shall first have been rendered flame-proofed. 
(Prior Code, § 3.32C.4) 
Chapter 20 - HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Health and sanitation generally, Wis. Stats. § 250.01 et seq.; local health boards, Wis. Stats. § 62.09; local enforcement of certain food and health regulations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0417; local health officials, Wis. Stats. § 251.001 et seq.; local health department, Wis. Stats. § 251.02. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Milk and milk products. 
    No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale any milk or milk products other than grade pasteurized milk or milk products as those terms are defined in the state administrative code, issued by the state department of agriculture. 
(Prior Code, § 9.04) 
Sec. 20-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty provided by section 1-15. Each violation and each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not preclude the village from taking any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 9.12) 
Secs. 20-3-20-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING 

Sec. 20-23. - State law adopted. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 101.123 relating to the regulation of smoking and clean indoor air, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(Prior Code, § 8.07A) 
Secs. 20-24-20-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-01 , §§ 1-10, adopted Feb. 14, 2017, set out provisions that did not expressly amend the Code. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included herein as a new Art. III, §§ 20-31-20-40. 

Sec. 20-31. - Recitals. 
    The Wisconsin Statutes, including Wis. Stats. chs. 940, 944, and 948 thereof, govern the punishment of individuals who commit sex crimes. The Wisconsin Statutes also govern the release into the community of such individuals. The village is responsible to maintain the public health, safety, and welfare and finds that sex offenders have high recidivism rates that threaten the public health, safety, and welfare, especially that of children. 
(Ord. No. 17-01 , § 1) 
Sec. 20-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare in the village by regulating the residency of sex offenders. 
(Ord. No. 17-01 , § 2) 
Sec. 20-33. - Definitions. 
(a)  Sex offender. A person who has been convicted of, has been found delinquent of, or has been found not guilty of by reason of disease or mental defect of a sexually violent offense or a crime against children. 
(b)  Sexually violent offense. Shall have the meaning set forth in Wis. Stat. § 980.01(6). 
(c)  Crime against children. Shall mean any of the following offenses set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, or in the laws of this or any other state or the federal government having like elements necessary for conviction, respectively: 
Wis. Stat. § 940.225(1) First Degree Sexual Assault. 
Wis. Stat. § 940.225(2) Second Degree Sexual Assault. 
Wis. Stat. § 940.225(3) Third Degree Sexual Assault. 
Wis. Stat. § 940.22(2) Sexual Exploitation by Therapist. 
Wis. Stat. § 940.30 False Imprisonment - Victim was Minor and Not Offender's Child. 
Wis. Stat. § 940.31 Kidnapping - Victim was Minor and Not Offender's Child. 
Wis. Stat. § 944.02 Rape (prior statute, now Wis. Stat. § 940.225). 
Wis. Stat. § 944.06 Incest. 
Wis. Stat. § 944.10 Sexual Intercourse with a Child (prior statute, now Wis. Stat. § 948.02). 
Wis. Stat. § 944.11 Indecent Behavior with a Child (prior statute, now Wis. Stat. § 948.02). 
Wis. Stat. § 944.12 Enticing Child for Immoral Purposes (prior statute, now Wis. Stat. § 948.07). 
Wis. Stat. § 948.02(1) First Degree Sexual Assault of a Child. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.02(2) Second Degree Sexual Assault of a Child. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.025 Engaging in Repeated Acts of Sexual Assault of the Same Child. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.05 Sexual Exploitation of a Child. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.055 Causing a Child to View or Listen to Sexual Activity. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.06 Incest with a Child. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.07 Child Enticement. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.075 Use of a Computer to Facilitate a Child Sex Crime. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.08 Soliciting a Child for Prostitution. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.095 Sexual Assault of a Student by School Instruction Staff. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.11(2)(a) or (am) Exposing a Child to Harmful Material. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.12 Possession of Child Pornography. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.13 Convicted Child Sex Offender Working with Children. 
Wis. Stat. § 948.30 Abduction of Another's Child. 
Wis. Stat. § 971.17 Not Guilty by Reason of Mental Disease or an Included Offense. 
Wis. Stat. § 975.06 Sex Crime Law Enforcement. 
(d)  Residence. A place where a person sleeps, abides, lodges, or resides on a permanent or regular basis. For purposes of this definition, a permanent basis means 14 or more consecutive days and a regular basis means 14 or more aggregate days during any calendar year and four or more days in any month. A person may have more than one residence. 
(Ord. No. 17-01 , § 3) 
Sec. 20-34. - Residency restriction. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a Sex Offender may not reside within 1,500 feet of any real property upon which there exists any of the following uses: 
(1)  A school for children. 
(2)  A public park, park facility, or pathway. 
(3)  A daycare licensed by the State of Wisconsin. 
(4)  A public library. 
(5)  A public playground. 
(6)  A public athletic field used by children. 
(7)  A residential care center for children. 
(8)  A public swimming pool. 
(9)  A public community center 
(b)  For purposes of this section, distance is to be measured in a straight line from the closest boundary line of the real property upon which the sex offender's residence is located to the closest boundary line of the real property of the applicable use. 
(Ord. No. 17-01 , § 4) 
Sec. 20-35. - Residency restriction exceptions. 
    A sex offender residing within an area otherwise prohibited by section 20-34 does not commit an offense if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or other facility located at the otherwise prohibited location. 
(2)  The person had established a residence, as defined in section 20-33 above, at the location prior to the effective date of this article. 
(3)  The use enumerated in section 20-34 was established after the sex offender established a residence at the location and registered that residence as required by law. 
(4)  The sex offender is a minor or ward under guardianship. 
(Ord. No. 17-01 , § 5) 
Sec. 20-36. - Safety zones. 
    No sex offender may enter or be present on any real property upon which there exists any facility used for or which supports the use of: 
(1)  A school for children. 
(2)  A public park, park facility, or pathway. 
(3)  A daycare licensed by the State of Wisconsin. 
(4)  A public library. 
(5)  A public playground. 
(6)  A public athletic field used by children. 
(7)  A residential care center for children. 
(8)  A public swimming pool. 
(9)  A public community center. 
(Ord. No. 17-01 , § 6) 
Sec. 20-37. - Safety zone exceptions. 
    A Sex Offender present in an area otherwise prohibited by section 20-36 does not commit an offense if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The property supporting a use enumerated in section 20-36 also supports a church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or other house of religious worship, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Entrance and presence on the property may occur only during hours of worship or other religious program or service. 
b.  The person may not participate in any religious education programs that include individuals under the age of 18. 
(2)  The property supporting a use enumerated in section 20-36 also supports a use lawfully attended by the sex offender's natural or adopted child or children, which child's use reasonably requires the attendance of the sex offender, provided that entrance and presence on the property occurs only during hours of activity related to the use by the child or children. 
(3)  The property supporting a use enumerated in section 20-36 also supports a polling location in a local, state, or federal election, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The sex offender is eligible to vote. 
b.  The polling location is the designated polling location for the sex offender. 
c.  The sex offender casts his or her ballot with whatever usual and customary assistance is available and vacates the property immediately after voting. 
(4)  The property supporting a use enumerated in section 20-36 also supports a school lawfully attended by the sex offender as a student, provided that the sex offender may only remain on the property at such times that are reasonably required for his or her educational purposes. 
(5)  The property supporting a use enumerated in section 20-36 also supports a police station, Village Hall, or other governmental building, provided that the sex offender vacates the property immediately after completing the activity that required his or her presence at the property. 
(Ord. No. 17-01 , § 7) 
Sec. 20-38. - Original residency restriction. 
    In addition to the other residency restrictions set forth herein and subject to the limitations in section 20-35, no sex offender may establish a residence in the village unless he or she was a resident of Washington County at the time of the most recent offense resulting in the person's most recent conviction, commitment, or placement as a sex offender. This limitation shall not apply to the establishment of a residence at a dwelling that is owned by a member of the sex offender's family at the time the sex offender establishes residence therein. For purposes of this section, a member of a sex offender's family means the sex offender's mother, father, brother, sister, child, or grandparent. 
(Ord. No. 17-01 , § 8) 
Sec. 20-39. - Sale or rental of property for use by sex offenders. 
    No person may sell or rent any place, structure, or part thereof with knowledge that it will be used as a residence by any sex offender that is prohibited from establishing residence therein by this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-01 , § 9) 
Sec. 20-40. - Enforcement. 
    A person violating this article shall be subject to forfeitures in an amount of not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 for each violation plus the costs of prosecution (including reasonable attorneys' fees). For purposes of calculating forfeitures, each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Violations of this article are also deemed public nuisances, and the village may bring an action in circuit court to enjoin or abate any violation. 
(Ord. No. 17-01 , § 10) 
Chapter 22 - HUMAN RELATIONS AND SOCIAL SERVICES 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 24 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal officers, including police chief, Wis. Stats. § 62.09; municipal police and fire departments, Wis. Stats. § 62.13; definitions of police chief, police department, and police officer, Wis. Stats. § 990.01; law enforcement officer defined, Wis. Stats. § 967.02; Law Enforcement Officers' Bill of Rights, Wis. Stats. § 164.01 et seq.; police and firefighting services generally, Wis. Stats. § 213.01 et seq.; police relief association, Wis. Stats. § 213.11; authority to arrest with warrant, Wis. Stats. § 345.21; authority to arrest without warrant, Wis. Stats. § 345.22; traffic officers not to profit from arrests, Wis. Stats. § 345.55. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Abandoned and seized property. 
(a)  The police chief is authorized to dispose of all personal property which has been abandoned or which has been unclaimed for 30 days and which has a value of less than $500.00 in one of the following manners: 
(1)  By transfer to the police department for the department's use; 
(2)  By transfer to another village department for the department's use; 
(3)  As a trade-in on any item of personal property needed by any village department; 
(4)  By sale; 
(5)  By donation to a nonprofit organization. 
This subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers and mobile homes, which shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(b)  Personal property in excess of $500.00 in value shall be disposed of in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0139. 
(c)  Property seized by the police department pursuant to a search warrant or seized without a search warrant shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 968.20 and as amended from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 2.10; Ord. No. 95-22) 
State Law reference- Disposal of abandoned property, Wis. Stats. § 66.0139; return of seized property, Wis. Stats. § 968.20. 
Secs. 24-2-24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 24-21. - Organization and structure. 
(a)  Personnel . The police department shall consist of the police chief and such officers as the village board may prescribe by ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  Appointments . The police chief shall be appointed by the police and fire commission and hold office during good behavior, subject to suspension or removal by the commission for just cause. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.13, the chief of police shall appoint and promote sworn officers to their positions subject to the approval of the police and fire commission. 
(c)  Salary. The police chief and the police officers shall receive a salary as fixed by the village board and shall not be entitled to any other compensation. 
(Prior Code, § 3.11A; Ord. No. 94-13; Ord. No. 00-05; Ord. No. 00-06; Ord. No. 10-01) 
Sec. 24-22. - Police chief's duties and powers. 
    The police chief shall: 
(1)  Supervise all personnel of his department and formulate rules and regulations for their conduct, subject to the approval of the village board. The chief shall obey all lawful written orders of the village board. 
(2)  Possess the powers, enjoy the privileges, and be subject to the liabilities conferred and imposed by law upon marshals and constables. 
(3)  Keep an accurate and complete record of all complaints, arrests, and violations. 
(4)  Submit a written monthly report to the village board of all activities and transactions of the department during the preceding month. 
(Prior Code, § 3.11B; Ord. No. 94-13; Ord. No. 00-05; Ord. No. 00-06; Ord. No. 10-01) 
Sec. 24-23. - Powers and duties of officers. 
(a)  Generally . Each officer of the department shall possess the powers conferred on marshals and constables by law, shall preserve and protect the health, safety, public peace and order of the village and shall enforce the laws and ordinances of the state and village subject to the orders, rules and regulations of the chief of police. 
(b)  Power of arrest. The chief of police and every police officer shall have full power and authority, and it shall be their duty to arrest all persons within the village found in the act of violating any law of the state or ordinance of the village, or aiding or abetting in such violation, and to arrest without warrant any person who they have reason to believe has violated any law or ordinance and who will not be apprehended unless immediately arrested, and shall take all arrested persons in charge and confine them, and shall within a reasonable time bring such persons before the court having jurisdiction. 
(Prior Code, § 3.11C; Ord. No. 94-13; Ord. No. 00-05; Ord. No. 00-06; Ord. No. 10-01) 
Sec. 24-24. - Service fees. 
(a)  Assessed. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 814.70, 814.705 and 814.71, the village police department shall charge a service fee in the amount provided in the village fee schedule when the police serve a warrant or commitment order upon a person. The person served with the warrant or commitment order shall be responsible for the payment of the warrant or commitment order service fee. 
(b)  Multiple warrants. The village police department shall charge a separate fee for each warrant or commitment order served on a person. 
(c)  Disposition of fees. Upon collection by the court, all warrant or commitment order service fees shall be forwarded to the village treasurer. 
(Prior Code, § 3.11B; Ord. No. 94-13; Ord. No. 00-05; Ord. No. 00-06; Ord. No. 10-01) 
State Law reference- Sheriff's fees, Wis. Stats. § 814.70; authority to establish higher fees, Wis. Stats. § 814.705; fees of village police, constables and village marshals, Wis. Stats. § 814.71. 
Chapter 26 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Manufactured or mobile homes, Wis. Stats. § 101.91 et seq.; property taxation of mobile and manufactured homes, Wis. Stats. § 70.043; modular home code, Wis. Stats. § 101.70 et seq.; local regulation of manufactured or mobile home communities, Wis. Stats. § 66.0435; local ordinances regarding home to conform to state law regarding installations, Wis. Stats. § 101.96. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Driveway means a minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on a mobile home lot or used for common access to a small group of lots or facilities. 
    License means a written license issued by the village board allowing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued under this chapter. 
    Manufactured home means any of the following: 
(1)  A structure that is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation and that is certified by the federal department of housing and urban development as complying with the standards established under 42 USC §§ 5401 to 5425. 
(2)  A mobile home, unless specifically otherwise provided. With regard to mobile home parks, "mobile home" is synonymous with "manufactured home." 
    Mobile home means a vehicle manufactured or assembled before June 15, 1976, designed to be towed as a single unit or in sections upon a highway by a motor vehicle and equipped and used, or intended to be used, primarily for human habitation, with walls of rigid uncollapsible construction, which has an overall length in excess of 45 feet. The term "mobile home" includes the mobile home structure, its plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems, and all appliances and all other equipment carrying a manufacturer's warranty. 
    Mobile home lot means a parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
    Mobile home park means a contiguous parcel of land which has been developed for the placement of mobile homes and is owned by an individual, a firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation. 
    Mobile home stand means that part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of one mobile home unit. 
    Park management means the person who owns or has charge, care or control of the mobile home park. 
    Park street means a private way which affords principal means of access to individual home lots or auxiliary buildings. 
    Permit means a written permit or certification issued by the village board permitting the construction, alteration and extension of a mobile home park under the provisions of this article and regulations issued under this chapter. 
    Service building means a structure housing toilet, lavatory and such other facilities as may be required by this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.01) 
Sec. 26-2. - Mobile home parking permits. 
    The owner or occupant of every mobile home shall pay and be jointly and severally liable for the payment of a monthly parking permit fee to the village. Such monthly parking permit fees shall be collected by the permittee, who is primarily liable for the payment thereof. The determination of the amount of such fee, the review thereof, and the enforcement of the payment and the disposition of such fee shall be in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. 
(Prior Code, § 6.05) 
Secs. 26-3-26-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-23. - Board may impose additional rules and regulations. 
    The village board may from time to time ordain and impose such rules, regulations and requirements regarding the construction and maintenance of mobile home parks and the operation and use thereof as the village board shall deem necessary or advisable for the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the park and of the village generally. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.03(7)) 
Sec. 26-24. - Exemptions. 
    If the village board finds that compliance with provisions of this article would result in undue hardship, an exemption may be granted by the village board without impairing the intent and purpose of this article. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.06) 
Sec. 26-25. - Pre-existing parks. 
    Deviations from design, construction and installation provisions shall be brought into compliance with this article within a reasonable period of time based on economic feasibility of the improvement, nature, significance and extent of deviation, depreciation of material, improvement, and layout in use and other similar factors. Such period shall begin after the village board has given notice of a certain and specific deviation from this article to the person to whom the permit or certification was issued. Gradual improvements to a higher degree of conformity shall be permissive, provided that there shall be complete conformity at the end of a period prescribed by the village board. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.06) 
Sec. 26-26. - Attorney-in-fact to be appointed; post office address to be registered. 
    Every permittee and licensee under this article shall register his official post office address with the village clerk-treasurer and shall execute and irrevocably appoint an attorney-in-fact, who shall at all times be a bona fide resident of the county, upon whom may be served any summons, complaint, pleadings, process, order or notice in any action, proceedings or matter concerning the mobile home park and arising out of the construction, maintenance or use of the mobile home park. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.26) 
Secs. 26-27-26-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION AND EXTENSION PERMITS 

Sec. 26-56. - Required. 
    No person shall construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the village limits unless he holds a valid permit issued by the village board in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.02(1)) 
Sec. 26-57. - Conditions and considerations for issuance. 
(a)  Determination of public interest required. No permit for the construction, alteration or extension of any mobile home park shall be issued by the village board unless the issuance thereof shall first be determined to be in the best interests of the village. 
(b)  Minimum number of home sites. No permit shall be issued unless the same shall be for the construction of not less than 100 mobile home sites. 
(c)  Discretionary environmental health consideration. In issuing a permit, the village board may consider the discussion and recommendations as contained in the environmental health guide for mobile home parks, as prepared by the federal department of health, education and welfare, as amended from time to time, but the village board shall not be limited to or be bound by any such discussions or recommendations. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.02(2), (6), (7)) 
Sec. 26-58. - Applications. 
    All applications for permits shall contain the applicant's name and address, the location and legal description of the proposed park, and complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed park including at least the following minimum information: 
(1)  The area and dimensions of the tract of land. 
(2)  The number, location, and size of all mobile home lots. 
(3)  The location and width of roadways and walkways. 
(4)  The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes. 
(5)  The water supply and refuse and sewage disposal facilities. 
(6)  All buildings constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park. 
(7)  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the village board. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.02(3)) 
Sec. 26-59. - Deposit. 
    Applications for a permit shall be accompanied by the deposit in the amount provided in the village fee schedule, plus such amount as is otherwise normally required for the construction of buildings within the mobile home park. The applicant shall also agree to pay to the village such amounts as may be reasonably expended from time to time by the village during construction for engineering inspections of all services and other facilities so as to verify compliance with this article and with the proposed plans and specifications of such mobile home park. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.02(4)) 
Sec. 26-60. - Public site fee; acceptance of land dedication in lieu of fee. 
(a)  In addition, and as a condition to the issuing of a mobile home park permit, a fee per mobile home site in the amount provided in the village fee schedule shall be paid to the village for public site purposes. 
(b)  The village, in its sole discretion, may accept land dedicated as a public site in lieu of the public site fee. The market value of the land dedicated in lieu of the public site fee shall be equal to the fee per home provided in the village fee schedule multiplied by the number of mobile home sites as determined by the village assessor. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.12) 
Sec. 26-61. - Assignment. 
    No permit, once issued, shall be assignable without the written consent of the village board. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.02(5)) 
Secs. 26-62-26-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARK LICENSES 

Sec. 26-81. - Required. 
    No person shall operate any mobile home park with the village unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the village board in the name of such person for the specific mobile home park. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.03(1)) 
Sec. 26-82. - Conditions and considerations for issuance. 
(a)  Determination of public interest required. No license for the operation of a mobile home park shall be issued by the village board unless the issuance thereof shall first be determined to be in the best interests of the village. 
(b)  Discretionary environmental health consideration. In issuing a license, the village board may consider the discussion and recommendations as contained in environmental health guide for mobile home parks, as prepared by the federal department of health, education and welfare, as amended from time to time, but the village board shall not be limited to or bound by any such discussions or recommendations. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.03(2), (9)) 
Sec. 26-83. - Application; site plan; fee. 
    The application for an original license shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application, and by the deposit of a fee for each 50 mobile home lots, or fraction thereof, in the amount provided in the village fee schedule and shall contain the name and address of the applicant and the location and legal description of the mobile home park, together with a site plan of the mobile home park showing all mobile home lots, structures, roads, walkways, and other service facilities, showing compliance with the construction permit and such other matters as may have been required by the village board. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.03(3)) 
Sec. 26-84. - Hearing on rejection. 
    Any person whose application for a license under this article has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the village board under the procedure provided by section 26-187. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.03(6)) 
Sec. 26-85. - Renewals; deposit. 
    Applications for renewals of licenses shall be made in writing by the holders of the licenses, and shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee for each 50 mobile home lots, or fraction thereof, in the amount provided in the village fee schedule and shall contain any change in the information submitted since the original license was issued or the latest renewal was granted. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.03(4)) 
Sec. 26-86. - Additional monthly parking permit fee. 
    In addition to the license fees mentioned in this article, the licensee, or the owner, or the occupant of every mobile home shall pay and be jointly and severally liable for the payment of a monthly parking permit fee to the village. Such monthly parking permit fees shall be collected by the licensee, who is primarily liable for the payment thereof. The determination of the amount of such fee, the review thereof, and the enforcement of the payment and the disposition of such fee shall be in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.03(10)) 
Sec. 26-87. - Assignment requires board approval; notice of transfer of interest; license transfer. 
    No license, once issued, shall be assignable without the written consent of the village board. Any person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the village board within three days after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of any interest in or control of any mobile home park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such mobile home park. Upon application in writing for transfer of the license and deposit of a fee in the amount provided in the village fee schedule, the license may be transferred if the mobile home park is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this article and if the transfer shall be in the best interests of the village. The transfer of any license shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.03(5), (8)) 
Secs. 26-88-26-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MINIMUM DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 26-118. - General environmental restrictions. 
    Conditions of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.07) 
Sec. 26-119. - Soil and ground cover requirements. 
    Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be paved, or covered with stone screenings, or other solid materials, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.08) 
Sec. 26-120. - Site drainage requirements. 
    The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.09) 
Sec. 26-121. - Homes to conform to standards. 
    The park management shall not permit the admission into the park of any home unless such mobile home shall meet the requirements of MHMA-TCA standards, built in conformity to federal standard A119-1. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.23) 
Sec. 26-122. - Separation between homes. 
    Each home unit and each accessory or service building shall be located not less than five feet from a mobile home unit lot line and not less than 15 feet from another home unit or accessory building. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.11) 
Sec. 26-123. - Park areas to be used for residential purposes only; exceptions. 
    No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well-being of park residents and for the management and maintenance of the park. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a home located on a mobile home stand and connected to the pertinent utilities. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.10) 
Sec. 26-124. - Recreation area required. 
    There shall be one or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents. The aggregate size of such recreation areas shall be not less than 100 square feet multiplied by the number of homes for which the park or additions thereto is designed to accommodate. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.12) 
Sec. 26-125. - Setbacks, buffer strips and screening. 
    All homes shall be located at least 25 feet from any park property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway and at least 15 feet from other park property boundary lines. There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between the mobile home stand and abutting park street. All proposed landscaping and screening shall be as required and approved by the village board as part of the original plans and specifications. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.13) 
Sec. 26-126. - Barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves and incinerators. 
    Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces, wood burning stoves and incinerators shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities provided. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.14) 
Sec. 26-127. - Refuse handling. 
(a)  The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. 
(b)  Refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers, which shall be located not more than 150 feet from any mobile home lot. Containers shall be provided by the park management in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. 
(c)  Refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least weekly. Where suitable collection service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the park operator shall provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers. 
(d)  If municipal or private disposal service is not available, the park operator shall dispose of the refuse by incineration or transporting to a disposal site approved by the village board. 
(e)  Refuse incinerators, if provided, shall be constructed in accordance with engineering plans and specifications which shall be reviewed and approved by the village board. 
(f)  Incinerators shall be operated only when attended by some person specifically authorized by the owner or operator of the park. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.15) 
Sec. 26-128. - Insects and rodents. 
(a)  Generally. The park management shall keep the grounds, buildings and structures free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform to the requirements of the village board. 
(b)  Storage areas maintenance to prevent rodent harborage. Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage; lumber, pipe and other building materials shall be stored at least one foot above the ground. 
(c)  Screening to prevent infestation. Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials. 
(Prior Code, §§ MH-17.16, 17.18, 17.19) 
Sec. 26-129. - Parks to be free of accumulations of debris. 
    Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.17) 
Sec. 26-130. - Control of weeds and grass. 
    The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.20) 
Sec. 26-131. - Fire extinguishers. 
    Portable fire extinguishers, as prescribed by law and rated for Class B and Class C fires, shall be kept in service buildings and at other locations conveniently and readily accessible for use by all occupants and shall be maintained in good operating condition. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.21) 
Secs. 26-132-26-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OPERATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 26-161. - Occupancy must exceed 90 days. 
    The park management shall not enter into any lease or otherwise permit any mobile home occupancy in the park for any period of less than 90 days, excusable emergencies only accepted. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.22) 
Sec. 26-162. - Registration required of guests. 
    The park management shall require the registration of all overnight guests and of their motor vehicles. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.24) 
Sec. 26-163. - Leases to incorporate village rules. 
    The park management shall adopt and include into their leases, by reference, such rules and regulations as shall be reasonably required by the village board for the general health, safety and welfare of such mobile home park and of the village, and shall cause the eviction of any tenants of the mobile home park who violate the same. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.25) 
Sec. 26-164. - Responsibilities of the park management. 
(a)  Operation; supervision. The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall operate the park in compliance with this article and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Duty to inform occupants. The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this article and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this article. 
(c)  Placing of mobile homes. The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home stand, which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections. 
(d)  Park register. The park management shall maintain a register containing the names of all park occupants identified by lot number or street address, the motor vehicle license numbers and the places of employment. A true copy of such register, listing all of such information and all monthly changes as of the first day of each month, shall be mailed to the village clerk-treasurer by the park management on or before the tenth day of each month. 
(e)  Notice of communicable or contagious diseases . The park management shall notify the village board immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the park. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.27) 
Sec. 26-165. - Responsibilities of park occupants. 
(a)  Compliance; maintenance of lots. The park occupant shall comply with all applicable requirements of this article and shall maintain his mobile home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Placing of home; installation of utility connections. The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his mobile home on its mobile home stand and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the park management. 
(c)  Pets . Pets shall not be permitted to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home lot. 
(d)  Additions . Skirting, porches, awnings, and other additions shall be installed only if permitted and approved by the park management. When installed, they shall be maintained in good repair. 
(e)  Storage area. The space immediately underneath a mobile home shall be used for storage only if permitted by the park management. If permitted, the storage area shall be provided with a base of impervious material, stored items shall be located so as not to interfere with the underneath inspection of the mobile home and the storage area shall be enclosed by skirting. 
(f)  Disposal of rubbish and garbage. The park occupant shall store and dispose of all his rubbish and garbage in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. The garbage container shall be rodent proof, insect proof and watertight. 
(g)  Fire extinguishers. First aid fire extinguishers for Class B and Class C fires shall be kept at the premises and maintained in working condition. 
(h)  Electrical connections. Each mobile home unit shall have a minimum of 100 ampere service, consisting of two four-prong 50 ampere receptacles and one 20 ampere duplex receptacle. Each receptacle shall have its own separate means for disconnection, without electrical inter-connection other than for grounding purposes. There shall be housed in one weatherproof piece of equipment. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.28) 
Secs. 26-166-26-183. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 26-184. - Inspections; right of entry. 
(a)  Authority of village board. The village board or its designee shall make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this article. 
(b)  Free access to inspect and repair. The village board and its authorized agents shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspection and investigation conditions relating to the enforcement of this article. The park management shall give the village board and their agents free access to all lots at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. In addition, every occupant of a mobile home park shall give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such mobile home park at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this article. 
(c)  Inspection and copying of park register. The village board and their authorized agents may inspect and copy the register containing a record of all residents of the mobile home park. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.04) 
Sec. 26-185. - Violation; notice of violation and order to discontinue. 
(a)  If the village board determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this article, the village board may order the discontinuance of such violation and shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit or license was issued. 
(b)  The notice and order shall be in writing, include a statement for the reasons of its issuance, allow a reasonable time for the performance of the act it requires, and contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will cure the violation and effect compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The notice and order shall be deemed properly served when a copy has been sent by registered federal mail to the last registered post office of the permittee or licensee as registered with the village clerk, or when the same has been personally served upon the attorney-in-fact of such permittee or licensee, or when the same shall have been served in any other manner as provided by state law for the service of process. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.05(1)) 
Sec. 26-186. - Emergency orders. 
    If the village board finds that an emergency exists that requires immediate action to protect the public health, it may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as it may deem necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the village board shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. Request for hearing does not act as a stay with regard to emergency orders. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.05(5)) 
Sec. 26-187. - Hearing. 
(a)  Right to request; time within which request must be filed. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provisions of this article, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the village board, provided such person shall file in the office of the village board a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten days after the day such notice or order was served. Upon receipt of such petition, the village board shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. 
(b)  Stay of order pending hearing; exception. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the order except in the case of an order other than an emergency order. 
(c)  Time of hearing; procedure. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice and order should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided, upon application of the petitioner, the village board may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period when in his judgment the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reasons for such postponement. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.05(2), (3)) 
Sec. 26-188. - Final determination; suspension and revocation for failure to comply. 
(a)  Upon the expiration of the time required in such notice and order, or after such hearing, as the case may be, the village board shall make findings as to the compliance with the provisions of this article and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice and order which shall be served in the same manner as the notice and order. 
(b)  Upon failure to comply with such final determination, either as sustained or modified, the license of the mobile home park affected by the order may be suspended or revoked. 
(Prior Code, § MH-17.05(4)) 
Chapter 28 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisances generally, Wis. Stats. § 823.01 et seq.; municipal authority regarding nuisances, Wis. Stats. § 823.01; local regulation of wild animals, Wis. Stats. § 29.038; noxious weeds, Wis. Stats. § 66.0407; removal of rubbish, Wis. Stats. § 66.0405; dangerous buildings, Wis. Stats. § 66.0413; unlicensed places serving alcoholic beverages as nuisance, Wis. Stats. § 125.14; village authority regarding captive wildlife, Wis. Stats. § 169.01; storage of junked vehicles as nuisance, Wis. Stats. § 175.25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public nuisance means a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property that continues for such length of time as to: 
(1)  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public; 
(2)  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property; 
(3)  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way or the use of public property. 
(Prior Code, § 8.02.1; Ord. No. 99-24) 
Sec. 28-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or permit or cause a public nuisance shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-15 in addition to all other applicable penalties and remedies. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06; Ord. No. 03-13; Ord. No. 07-01; Ord. No. 10-05) 
Sec. 28-3. - Public nuisances prohibited. 
    No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the village. 
(Prior Code, § 8.01) 
Sec. 28-4. - Conditions considered nuisances impacting public health. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are specifically declared to be public health nuisances: 
(1)  All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public. 
(2)  Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human consumption or foods, which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death. 
(3)  Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed. 
(4)  All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply. 
(5)  Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not flytight. 
(6)  All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation. 
(7)  All animals running at large. 
(8)  The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash, industrial dust or other atmospheric pollutants within the village limits or within one mile therefrom in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensitiveness or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property in the village. 
(9)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other circumstances. 
(10)  Any use of property, substances or things within the village emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the village. 
(11)  All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public use. 
(12)  Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome liquid or substances to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place within the village. 
(Prior Code, § 8.02.2; Ord. No. 99-24) 
Sec. 28-5. - Specific acts and conditions deemed nuisances affecting peace and safety. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety: 
(1)  All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety. 
(2)  All buildings erected, repaired or altered within the village in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the village, relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures within the district. 
(3)  All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which because of its color, location, brilliance or manner of operation interferes with the effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal. 
(4)  All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(5)  All limbs of trees which project over and less than ten feet above the surface of a public sidewalk or street or other public place. 
(6)  All use or display of fireworks except as provided by state law and village ordinances. 
(7)  All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated, or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, and unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use. 
(8)  All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 18 feet above the surface thereof. 
(9)  All loud, discordant and unnecessary noises or vibrations of any kind. 
(10)  All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the village or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished. 
(11)  All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk. 
(12)  All abandoned refrigerators, iceboxes or other containers, which have airtight doors from which the doors and other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside. 
(13)  Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks. 
(14)  Repeated or continuous violations of state law or village ordinances relating to the storage of flammable liquids. 
(15)  Depositing of any material on public rights-of-way, parks, storm sewer system, or publicly owned property. Material shall include, but are not limited to, sand, stone, concrete, wood, grass, dirt, garbage, petroleum products, and toxins. 
(Prior Code, § 8.02.3; Ord. No. 99-24) 
Secs. 28-6-28-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES 

Sec. 28-29. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chronic nuisance property means any parcel of land or structure which has generated three or more calls for police service for nuisance activities on separate days during one month, or six or more calls during a period of 12 months. 
    Nuisance activity. 
(1)  The term "nuisance activity" means any of the following activities resulting in a call for assistance requesting law enforcement services related to: 
a.  Harassment as defined in Wis. Stats. § 947.013. 
b.  Disorderly conduct as defined in Wis. Stats. § 947.01. 
c.  Crimes against life and bodily security as defined in Wis. Stats. §§ 940.01 to 940.32. 
d.  Theft as defined in Wis. Stats. § 943.20. 
e.  Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled substances, drug paraphernalia and related offenses in Wis. Stats. ch. 961. 
f.  Commercial gambling as defined in Wis. Stats. § 945.03. 
g.  Underage and intoxicated person alcohol violations as defined in Wis. Stats. § 125.07. 
h.  Violations of any provision of this Code that results in police dispatch, with or without arrest. 
(2)  The term "nuisance activity" does not include activities, behaviors or conduct that results in a call for assistance made by the owner or occupant requesting law enforcement services related to: 
a.  Domestic abuse restraining orders and injunctions as defined in Wis. Stats. § 813.12(1)(am). 
b.  Sexual assault as described in Wis. Stats. §§ 940.225, 948.02, and 948.025. 
c.  Stalking as described in Wis. Stats. § 940.32. 
    Person associated with a premises means any person who enters, patronizes, visits or attempts to enter, patronize or visit a property, including any officer, director, customer, agent, employee or independent contractor of a property owner, tenant, or occupant. 
    Property means any parcel of land or structure, regardless of zoning, residential or business classification. 
    Verifiable event means an event that is initially observed by a police officer, or a call for service that is reported to the police department by a known person who is identifiable to support the event, or a call for service that is reported to the police department by an unknown person if the event is substantiated by a police officer or a witness. 
(Prior Code, § 7.16B) 
Sec. 28-30. - Findings and intent. 
    The village board finds that any premises within the village that generates three or more calls for police service for nuisance activities has received more than the level of general and adequate police services and has placed an undue and inappropriate burden on the other taxpayers of the village. The board also finds that owners who chronically fail to control the use of their property substantially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life, health and safety of the public. The village believes it is necessary to recoup these costs as a special charge to the property for services provided. 
(Prior Code, § 7.16A) 
Sec. 28-31. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner, operator, tenant, occupant, or person associated with a property to allow the establishment of, keep, maintain, or fail to abate a chronic nuisance property. 
(Prior Code, § 7.16C) 
Sec. 28-32. - Procedure. 
(a)  Written warning. Whenever the police chief determines that two nuisance activities have occurred at a property on separate days during any 12-month period, the police chief may notify the property owner that the property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property. 
(b)  Notice of chronic nuisance property status. Whenever the police chief determines that three nuisance activities have occurred at a property on separate days during any month, or six nuisance activities have occurred at a property during a period of 12 months, and the nuisance activities are verifiable events, the police chief shall notify the property owner in writing that the property is a chronic nuisance property and any further violations within the month or 12-month period will be cause for levying a special charge against the property pursuant to this section in addition to any forfeitures that may apply. 
(c)  Content of notice. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property. 
(2)  A description of the nuisance activities that have occurred at the property and a statement indicating that the cost of future enforcement or abatement will be assessed as a special charge against the property. 
(3)  A statement that the property owner shall within ten days respond to the police chief to propose a written course of action to abate the nuisance activities which is acceptable to the chief. 
(4)  Notification that, in addition to the special charges, the property owner may be cited for failure to comply with the article. 
(5)  A notice of the owner's right to appeal. 
(6)  A statement that each subsequent incident of a nuisance activity may be deemed a separate violation. 
(d)  Service of notice. The notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered if sent either by first class mail to the property owner's last known address or if delivered in person to the property owner. If the property owner cannot be located, the notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered if a copy is left at the property owner's usual place of abode in the presence of a competent member of the family at least 14 years of age or a competent adult currently residing there and who shall be informed of the contents of the notice. If a current address cannot be located, it shall be deemed sufficient if a copy of the notice is sent by first class mail to the last known address of the owner as identified by the records of the tax roll. 
(Prior Code, § 7.16D) 
Sec. 28-33. - Cost recovery. 
    Upon notification from the police chief that a chronic nuisance property has been identified, the village clerk-treasurer shall charge any property owner found to be in violation of this article the costs of enforcement and abatement, including administrative costs, in full or in part. All costs so charged are a lien upon such property and may be assessed and collected as a special charge. The village shall establish a reasonable charge for the costs of administration and enforcement imposed hereunder. 
(Prior Code, § 7.16F) 
Sec. 28-34. - Violation and enforcement. 
    Each nuisance activity that is a verifiable event following issuance of the notice provided pursuant to this article and occurring within the month or 12-month period in which the notice is provided shall constitute a separate violation of this section. Whenever a property owner has been billed pursuant to this article on three or more occasions within a 12-month time period for the costs of enforcement, that person shall also be subject to a forfeiture as established by resolution occurring after the third bill is sent to the property owner for failure to abate the nuisance activity. 
(Prior Code, § 7.16E) 
Sec. 28-35. - Appeal. 
    The determination of the police chief issued pursuant to this article or the levying of any special charges pursuant to this article may be appealed to the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 7.16G) 
Secs. 28-36-28-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Abatement procedure generally, Wis. Stats. § 823.01 et seq. 

Sec. 28-59. - Applicability. 
    The procedure for abatement of public nuisances provided in this article shall apply to all nuisances within the village, regardless of whether enumerated in this chapter, unless the village board has provided a specific abatement procedure applicable to specific nuisances. 
Sec. 28-60. - Enforcement officials; duty and authority to inspect. 
(a)  The police chief, the chief of the fire department, the building inspector and health officer shall enforce those provisions of this chapter that come within the jurisdiction of their offices, and they shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that provisions are not violated. 
(b)  No action shall be taken under this article to abate a public nuisance unless the officer shall have inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and have satisfied himself that a nuisance does in fact exist. 
(Prior Code, § 8.04A) 
Sec. 28-61. - Summary abatement. 
    If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists within the village and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the officer shall cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. 
(Prior Code, § 8.04B) 
Sec. 28-62. - Abatement after notice. 
    If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall serve notice on the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the same within ten days. If such nuisance is not removed within such ten days, the proper officer shall cause the nuisances to be removed as provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 8.04C) 
Sec. 28-63. - Other methods not excluded. 
    The village or its officials, in accordance with state law, shall construe nothing in this chapter as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances. 
(Prior Code, § 8.04D) 
Sec. 28-64. - Court order. 
    Except when necessary as provided in this article, no officer hereunder shall use force to obtain access to private property to abate a public nuisance but shall request permission to enter upon private property if such premises are occupied, and, if such permission is denied, shall apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order assisting the abatement of the public nuisance. 
(Prior Code, § 8.04E) 
Sec. 28-65. - Cost of abatement. 
    In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the village shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. 
(Prior Code, § 8.05) 
Chapter 30 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes generally, Wis. Stats. § 938.01 et seq.; municipal authority to prohibit certain criminal conduct, Wis. Stats. § 66.0107; penalties under county and municipal ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0109; local regulation of firearms, Wis. Stats. § 66.0409; local regulation, impoundment, seizure, and forfeiture of sound-producing devices, Wis. Stats. § 66.0411; authority of municipalities to prohibit criminal conduct, Wis. Stats. § 66.0107. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture. 
    The following statutes defining offenses against the peace and good order of the state are adopted by reference to define offenses against the peace and good order of the village. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated in this section are intended to be made part of this section. 
(1) Wis. Stats. § 134.65 Cigarette and retail license violations (2) Wis. Stats. § 134.66 Tobacco sales to underage persons (3) Wis. Stats. § 175.60(2g)(b), (c) Failure to display/carry firearms permit (4) Wis. Stats. § 175.60(16) Firearms violations by licensee (5) Wis. Stats. § 254.92 Purchase, possession, furnishing of tobacco to underage person (6) Wis. Stats. § 287.81 Littering (7) Wis. Stats. § 450.11(7) Prescription drugs and devices-prohibited acts (8) Wis. Stats. § 939.05 Parties to crime (9) Wis. Stats. § 939.22 Words and phrases defined (10) Wis. Stats. § 939.32(1)(b) Attempt (11) Wis. Stats. § 940.19(1) Battery (12) Wis. Stats. § 941.01 Negligent operation of vehicle (13) Wis. Stats. § 941.10 Negligent handling of burning material (14) Wis. Stats. § 941.12(2) and (3) Interfering with firefighting (15) Wis. Stats. § 941.13 False alarms, intentional (16) Wis. Stats. § 941.20(1) Endangering safety by use of dangerous weapon (17) Wis. Stats. § 941.23 Carrying concealed weapon (18) Wis. Stats. § 941.231 Possession of concealed knife by prohibited person (19) Wis. Stats. § 941.235 Carrying firearm in public building (20) Wis. Stats. § 941.237 Carrying handgun where alcohol beverages may be sold and consumed (21) Wis. Stats. § 941.24 Possession of switchblade knife (22) Wis. Stats. § 941.2965 Restrictions on use of facsimile firearms (23) Wis. Stats. § 941.297 Sale or distribution of imitation firearms (24) Wis. Stats. § 943.01 Damage to property (25) Wis. Stats. § 943.07(1), (2) and (3) Criminal damage to railroad (26) Wis. Stats. § 943.07(4) Intentionally depositing debris on railroad (27) Wis. Stats. § 943.017 Graffiti (28) Wis. Stats. § 943.11 Entry into locked vehicle (29) Wis. Stats. § 943.125 Entry into locked coin box (30) Wis. Stats. § 943.13 Trespass to land (31) Wis. Stats. § 943.14 Criminal trespass to dwelling (32) Wis. Stats. § 943.20 Theft ($2,500.00 or less) (31) Wis. Stats. § 943.21 Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper ($1,000.00 or less) (32) Wis. Stats. § 943.24 Issue of worthless checks (less than $2,500.00) (33) Wis. Stats. § 943.34(1) Receiving stolen property ($2,500.00 or less) (34) Wis. Stats. § 943.37 Alteration of property identification marks (35) Wis. Stats. § 943.41 Financial transaction card crimes (36) Wis. Stats. § 943.46 Theft of cable television services (37) Wis. Stats. § 943.50 Retail theft ($2,500.00 or less) (38) Wis. Stats. § 945.01 Definitions relating to gambling (39) Wis. Stats. § 945.02 Gambling (40) Wis. Stats. § 945.03 Commercial gambling (41) Wis. Stats. § 946.06 Improper use of flag (42) Wis. Stats. § 946.40 Refusing to aid officer (43) Wis. Stats. § 946.41 Resisting or obstructing officer (44) Wis. Stats. § 946.42(1) Escape (45) Wis. Stats. § 946.66 False complaint of police misconduct (46) Wis. Stats. § 946.69 Falsely assuming to act as public officer (47) Wis. Stats. § 946.70(1) Impersonating peace officer (48) Wis. Stats. § 946.72(2) Tampering with public records and notices (49) Wis. Stats. § 947.01 Disorderly conduct (50) Wis. Stats. § 947.012 Unlawful use of telephone (51) Wis. Stats. § 947.0125 Unlawful use of computerized communications systems (52) Wis. Stats. § 947.013(1m) Harassment (53) Wis. Stats. § 947.06 Unlawful assemblies (54) Wis. Stats. § 948.45(1) Contributing to truancy (55) Wis. Stats. § 951.02 Crimes against animals (56) Wis. Stats. § 951.095 Harassment of police and fire animals (57) Wis. Stats. ch. 961 Controlled substances, to the extent applicable (58) Wis. Stats. § 961.573(2) Possession of drug paraphernalia (61) Wis. Stats. § 961.574(2) Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia (62) Wis. Stats. § 961.575(2) Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor (63) Wis. Stats. § 968.075(5)(a) 72-Hour No-Contact Violation (64) Wis. Stats. § 948.63 Pawnshop Receiving Property from Child  
  
(Prior Code, § 7.13; Ord. No. 02-09; Ord. No. 03-05; Ord. No. 03-07; Ord. No. 03-18; Ord. No. 09-04; Ord. No. 10-10; Ord. No. 12-05; Ord. No. 15-01, § I; Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Penalties. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter or by state law, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-15. In addition to any penalty imposed for violation of Wis. Stats. § 943.01(1), any person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable for the costs of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property. The parent of any unemancipated minor child who violates Wis. Stats. § 943.01(1) may also be held liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 895.035. 
(Prior Code, § 7.10) 
Sec. 30-3. - Obstructing streets and sidewalks prohibited. 
    No person shall stand, sit, loaf, loiter or engage in any sport or exercise on any public street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground within the village in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or to prevent or hinder free ingress or egress to or from any place of business or amusement, church, public hall or meeting place. 
(Prior Code, § 7.01D; Ord. No. 07-11; Ord. No. 12-03) 
Sec. 30-4. - Loud and unnecessary noise restricted. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall make or cause to be made any loud, disturbing or unnecessary sounds or noises such as may tend to annoy or disturb another in or about any public or any private place. 
(b)  Unreasonable noise with vehicles . No person shall make or cause to be made any unreasonable noise, which disturbs the peace or quiet of any person in the vicinity through the use of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or other motorized vehicle. 
(c)  Compression brakes prohibited. No person shall operate motor vehicle brakes so as to cause unreasonable and excessive noise levels. No person shall use motor vehicle brakes which are in any way activated or operated by the compression of the engine or which utilize engine exhaust, except under emergency conditions. 
(d)  Lawn movers, leaf blowers, and similar devices. The operation of blowers, power fans, lawn mowers, chain saws and other internal combustion engines shall be prohibited in residential areas between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except in emergencies, provided that the noise is unreasonably loud and disruptive and can be heard across the property line of the property from which it emanates. 
(e)  Construction, repair, or excavations. The construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation of any street, sidewalk, or property, is prohibited between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except in emergencies. 
(Prior Code, §§ 4.08C, 7.02B, D) 
Sec. 30-5. - Hazardous operation of vehicles prohibited. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause dirt, stones, rubber or other debris to be thrown by the wheels. 
(Prior Code, § 7.02E) 
Sec. 30-6. - Loitering or prowling. 
    No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner that warrants alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police or peace officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a police or peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. 
(Prior Code, § 7.03C; Ord. No. 10-02) 
State Law reference- Vagrancy, Wis. Stats. § 947.02. 
Sec. 30-7. - Indecent conduct and language prohibited. 
    No person shall use any indecent, vile, profane or obscene language or conduct himself in any indecent, lewd, lascivious or obscene manner within the village. 
(Prior Code, § 7.03D; Ord. No. 10-02) 
Sec. 30-8. - Alcohol possession in public places prohibited. 
(a)  No person may consume or possess an open container of any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage upon public highways, roads, alleys, sidewalks, road crossings, bridges, public parking lots or upon premises held out to the public for use of their motor vehicles, whether such premises are publicly or privately owned, except for municipally approved community functions or events where authorized by specific resolution of the village board. 
(b)  No person shall bring upon, use, consume, sell or convey any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in or upon any property, building or other structure which is owned or under the control of the village, except in such places as may be designated by the village and in accordance with the rules and regulations as may be from time to time adopted by the village board. 
(c)  All purchases of intoxicating liquor, wine or fermented malt beverages by the glass or in open containers shall be consumed on the licensed premises where served and shall not be removed from the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 7.02F) 
Sec. 30-9. - Hotel and motel registration for transient lodging. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hotel and motel are synonymous and mean all places wherein sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to transients, in five or more rooms, and all places used in connection therewith. 
    Operator means the owner and its agents, including the manager or any person in charge of the hotel, including desk clerks. 
    Registrant means the person registering for a room and claiming responsibility for any bills associated with such lodging. 
(b)  Duties of hotel and motel guests. 
(1)  False identity information of registrant. It is unlawful for any person to register at any hotel, or cause any other person or persons to be registered in any hotel, under any false name or address, or assumed name or address or under any other than their true name or address. 
(2)  False information regarding occupants. It is unlawful for a registrant, if asked by the operator, to misrepresent the number or names of other persons in the party who will also be occupying the room for which registration is being sought. Further, registrants shall not allow any other persons who have not been designated in the registration as persons intended to occupy such room, to occupy same. 
(3)  Responsibility of registrant to provide information. Every person, upon arriving at any hotel and applying for guest accommodations, shall furnish to the operator the registration information necessary to complete the registration in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(4)  Responsibility of registrant for charges and damages. The registrant shall be responsible for room charges and any damages incurred by the hotel because of the registrant's or the registrant's guests' behavior during the period listed for the occupancy. 
(c)  Duties of hotel and motel operators. 
(1)  Guest register required. Every hotel shall provide and keep there a suitable guest register, or equivalent, for the registration of all guests provided with sleeping accommodations or other overnight stopping accommodations therein, and every such guest shall be registered. The hotel operator shall record the name and address of the registrant, and if traveling by motor vehicle shall record its make, registration number, and state of registration. 
(2)  Verification of identity required. The hotel operator shall verify the identity of the registrant by requiring that person to display a valid driver's license, government-issued identification card, or other identification sufficient to verify the guest's name and home address. The operator shall either enter the identification number and issuing authority of this identification number and issuing authority of this identification into its register, or retain a photocopy of the document. 
(3)  Owners and agents liable. Violations by hotels are subject to citation against the owners or its agents. 
(Prior Code, § 7.14; Ord. No. 15-11; Ord. No. 15-03, § I) 
Sec. 30-10. - Gambling, fraudulent devices and practices prohibited. 
    All forms of gambling and fraudulent devices and practices are prohibited within the village, except those forms of gambling specifically permitted by state law. Any police officer of the village shall seize anything devised solely for gambling or found in actual use for gambling within the village and dispose thereof after a judicial determination that such device was used solely for gambling or found in actual use for gambling. With regard to enforcement for the possession of five or fewer video gambling machines on a Class B licensed premises, the village shall defer to the state department of revenue. 
(Prior Code, § 7.03A; Ord. No. 10-02) 
State Law reference- Gambling, Wis. Stats. § 945.01 et seq. 
Sec. 30-11. - Misuse of 9-1-1. 
(a)  No person shall utilize the 9-1-1 emergency telephone number system for any purpose other than to report an emergency. 
(b)  It is unlawful to report an alleged emergency knowing that the fact situation, which he reports, does not exist. An "emergency" under this section exists when the person reasonably believes that immediate response by public safety personnel is essential due to the risk or actual occurrence of death or great bodily harm, property damage or any other situation that requires the immediate response of public safety personnel. 
(Prior Code, § 7.01E; Ord. No. 07-11; Ord. No. 12-03) 
Sec. 30-12. - Throwing or shooting dangerous objects. 
    No person shall throw, shoot or propel a missile, pellet, stone, metal or other similar substance or object capable of causing physical harm to persons or property, in or on any public place, in or on the property of another. This section does not apply to supervised archery ranges or instruction or when otherwise lawfully authorized. 
(Prior Code, § 7.01B; Ord. No. 07-11; Ord. No. 12-03; Ord. No. 14-01, § II) 
Sec. 30-13. - Possession and discharge of dangerous weapons. 
(a)  The term "dangerous weapon" means any firearm, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 167.31(c), whether loaded or unloaded; any device designed as a weapon and capable of producing death or great bodily harm; any electric weapon, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 941.295(4); or any other device or instrumentality which, in the manner it is used or intended to be used, is calculated or likely to produce death or great bodily harm. The following are dangerous per se: blackjack; slingshot; firearms; bow and arrow; crossbow; air gun; BB gun; brass knuckles; straightedge razor; and martial arts weapons, including, but not limited to, throwing stars, kung fu sticks; and chukka sticks. The previous list is illustrative only, and instruments not specifically enumerated are dangerous weapons if they fall within the terms of the above definition. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided by law, no person may carry or have within reach a dangerous weapon, at or upon any public place. 
(c)  Discharge. No person shall fire or discharge within the village any firearm, air rifle, spring or air gun or any instrument that impels a missile or pellet by compressed air, spring or other means. This subsection shall not apply to a duly authorized law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties, a supervised firing range authority by the village board or school district, or during special events (including, but not limited to, parades, funerals and historic re-creations) with the prior approval of the chief of police. 
(d)  Shooting or hunting with bow and arrow or crossbow. Persons firing a bow and arrow or crossbow shall discharge the arrow or bolt from the weapon toward the ground. Use of bows and arrows and crossbows is further limited as follows: 
(1)  On village property. Use of a bow and arrow or crossbow on village owned or leased property is prohibited except as part of a program supervised by the parks and recreation department or as part of an organized activity with the consent of the village administrator or his designee and if the arrows are equipped with a foam tip. 
(2)  On private property. It is unlawful to shoot or hunt with a bow and arrow or crossbow within 100 yards of a building location on another person's land unless the person who owns the land on which the building is located has given express permission. For purposes of this subsection, the term "building" means a permanent structure used for human occupancy and includes manufactured and mobile homes with or without permanent foundation. 
(Prior Code, § 7.01A; Ord. No. 07-11; Ord. No. 12-03; Ord. No. 14-01, § I; Ord. No. 16-02, § I(7.01)) 
State Law reference- Local regulation of firearms restricted, Wis. Stats. § 66.0409; license to carry a concealed weapon, Wis. Stats. § 175.60. 
Secs. 30-14-30-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINORS 

Sec. 30-45. - Curfew. 
(a)  Imposed; curfew hours. It is unlawful for any person under the age of 17 to congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, places of employment, vacant lots, or any public places in the village, either on foot or in or upon any vehicle being driven or parked thereon, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, legal guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by same; while pursuing employment; or returning from night school or from a public function. This section shall not apply when the minor was exercising first amendment rights protected by the state or federal constitutions, including freedom of speech, the free exercise of religion, and the right of assembly. Unless flight by the minor or other circumstances make it impractical, a police officer shall, prior to issuing a citation for an offense under this section, afford the minor an opportunity to explain his reasons for being present in the public place. 
(c)  Responsibility of parent, guardian or other supervising adult. It is unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult having the care and custody of a person under the age of 17, to permit or allow such person to violate the provisions of subsection (a) of this section unless that adult has made a missing person report to the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction. 
(Prior Code, § 7.05; Ord. No. 05-16) 
Sec. 30-46. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Child means a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Custodial parent means a parent or legal guardian or a minor child who has custody of the child. 
    Custody means physical custody of a minor child as ordered by a court under Wis. Stats. § 767.225, or custody of a child by stipulation under Wis. Stats. § 767.41, or actual physical custody of the child. Custody does not include legal custody, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 48.02(12), by an agency or a person other than a child's birth or adoptive parent. In determining which parent has custody of a child for purposes of this section, the court shall consider which parent had responsibility for caring for and supervising the child at the time that the child's violations occurred. 
(b)  Duty to supervise; failure to properly supervise. Every custodial parent has a duty to properly supervise his child. Any custodial parent whose child is convicted of violations of the village municipal code or state law, other than traffic offenses, which violations occur twice in a six-month period or three or more times within a 12-month period, is guilty of failing to properly supervise the child. 
(c)  Defenses. It is a defense to violation of this section that the custodial parent is not legally responsible for the supervision of the minor child at the time the misconduct occurred or the custodial parent has a physical or mental disability or incompetency rendering him incapable of supervising the juvenile at the time the misconduct occurred. It is not a defense where the parent assigns their parental responsibility to another, except pursuant to legal proceedings that result in a court order effectuating the same. The custodial parent has the burden of proving any defense by clear and convincing evidence. 
(Prior Code, § 7.15; Ord. No. 09-06) 
Sec. 30-47. - Truancy. 
    No person under 18 years of age shall be a truant or a habitual truant as defined in Wis. Stats. § 118.163. If a person is found to have violated this section, all of the dispositions set forth in that statute are available to the court. 
(Prior Code, § 7.01G; Ord. No. 07-11; Ord. No. 12-03; Ord. No. 16-01, § I(7.17)) 
State Law reference- Municipal truancy and school dropout ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 118.163. 
Sec. 30-48. - Offenses against public and private property. 
    No person shall willfully injure or intentionally deface, destroy or lawfully remove, take or meddle with any public or private property of any kind without the consent of the owner or proper authority. 
(Prior Code, § 7.04) 
Sec. 30-49. - Damage to public property. 
    No person shall break or otherwise injure any tree, shrub or plant; break, soil or deface any fountain, street light, street sign, statue or other ornamental structure; or in any way injure, soil or deface any square, sidewalk or ground in the village or any public property in any public park or any other public place, whether the same shall be owned, leased or held in trust by the village without consent of the owner or proper authority. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06) 
Sec. 30-50. - Adoption of state law. 
    Wis. Stats. ch. 167, regulating the sale and use of fireworks, exclusive of any penalty imposed thereby, is adopted by reference and made part of this Code as though set forth in full. 
(Prior Code, § 7.01C; Ord. No. 07-11; Ord. No. 12-03) 
Chapter 31 - RESERVED 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK USE 

Sec. 32-19. - Glass beverage containers prohibited. 
    No person shall enter upon or be upon park premises in the village with glass soda or beer beverage containers. The village shall post notices at the entrances to each park stating: "Glass beverage containers prohibited in park. Violators subject to fine." 
(Prior Code, § 7.08) 
Sec. 32-20. - Park hours. 
    All parks shall be closed to the general public from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., except for the participants or spectators in an organized event, or as part of a park facility rental. All parks are closed to the participants or spectators one-half hour after the completion of the organized event or rental. 
(Prior Code, § 7.09A; Ord. No. 06-04; Ord. No. 07-09; Ord. No. 09-11) 
Sec. 32-21. - Authority of police chief to ban persons from use of park. 
    The police chief may ban from village parks any person who, in the opinion of the chief, is disorderly or otherwise creates a disturbance. Violation of the ban shall subject the person to a penalty in accordance with the village ordinances. The ban shall be for no more than 90 days. Each violation of the ban shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 7.09L; Ord. No. 06-04; Ord. No. 07-09; Ord. No. 09-11) 
Sec. 32-22. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited; exception. 
    No person shall bring, possess, consume, dispense, convey, or give away any alcoholic beverages during authorized events, except as permitted by the parks and recreation department. 
(Prior Code, § 7.09L; Ord. No. 06-04; Ord. No. 07-09; Ord. No. 09-11) 
Sec. 32-23. - Use of water resources. 
    No person shall swim or bathe in any area not designated for such purpose. No person shall wash any object or animal in any stream or pond or adjacent to any park or in any public water feature, e.g., a "splash park". 
(Prior Code, § 7.09K; Ord. No. 06-04; Ord. No. 07-09; Ord. No. 09-11) 
Sec. 32-24. - Amusement and related activities restricted. 
(a)  Park wildlife protected. No person shall be permitted to hunt, capture, seine, net or harm any living creature or possess any such devices designed for such purpose in any park. 
(b)  Restraint of domestic animals required; feces removal. All animals brought to park property must be attached to a leash of sufficient strength to hold the animal, not more than ten feet in length, and which is held by a person capable of controlling the animal. The owner or handler shall be responsible for the proper disposal of the animal's waste. 
(c)  Removal of park property prohibited. No person shall remove or appropriate anything from any park without village authorization. 
(d)  Operation of small motorized vehicles prohibited; exception. No person shall operate any snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, go-cart, or similar motorized vehicle anywhere within any park without permission. 
(e)  Amusement devices and camping structures prohibited; exception. Amusement devices, tents, trailers, or any similar structures shall not be permitted without village authorization. 
(f)  Bicycles, scooters and skating devices restricted. Skateboards, roller blades, scooters, roller skates and bicycles are only permitted on paved paths and in the wheel park. 
(g)  Interference with activities of other users prohibited. No persons shall engage in any activity that interferes with the activities of others already in progress or scheduled by obtaining prior authorization from the village. 
(h)  Sales, raffles and fundraising activities prohibited; exception. All sales, raffles, or other fundraising activities (including sports tournaments) are prohibited unless approved by the parks and recreation committee and the village board. 
(i)  Fires restricted. No fires shall be built except in fireplaces or grills designed for such purpose. All embers shall be disposed of in a proper manner. 
(j)  Littering prohibited; proper waste disposal required. All refuse and waste shall be disposed of in proper containers. 
(k)  Misuse of park property. No person shall climb, walk or sit upon any fence, sign, wall or building. Persons shall use playground equipment in a manner for which it is intended and shall refrain from using playground equipment in a manner which threatens harm to the person or others, or threatens to damage park property. 
(l)  Obedience to park personnel. No person shall resist or interfere with any park employee or volunteer in the discharge of their official duties. 
(Prior Code, § 7.09B-I; Ord. No. 06-04; Ord. No. 07-09; Ord. No. 09-11) 
Sec. 32-25. - Vehicle use restricted. 
    No person shall operate a motorized vehicle in a village park except upon established drives or roadways therein and in compliance with any posted restrictions. 
(Prior Code, § 4.08D; Ord. No. 01-07; Ord. No. 01-14) 
Chapter 33 - RESERVED 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bi-metal container means a container for carbonated or malt beverages that are made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum. 
    Container board means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of shipping containers and related products. 
    Foam polystyrene packaging means packaging made primarily from foam polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Designed for serving food or beverages. 
(2)  Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container. 
(3)  Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container. 
    Garbage means discarded materials resulting from the handling, processing, storage, and consumption of food. 
    HDPE means high-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 2. 
    LDPE means low-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 4. 
    Magazines means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper. 
    Major appliance means a residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, refrigerator or stove. 
    Multiple-family dwelling means a property containing three or more residential units, including those that are occupied seasonally. 
    Newspaper means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint. 
    Nonresidential facilities and properties means commercial, retail, industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. The term "nonresidential facilities and properties" includes any locations at which goods or services are provided or manufactured, including locations under construction, demolition, or remodeling, or used for special events such as, but not limited to, fairs, festivals, sport venues, conferences, and exhibits. 
    Office paper means high-grade printing and writing papers from offices in nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer printouts are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. The term "official paper" does not include industrial process waste. 
    Other resins or multiple resins means plastic resins labeled by the SPI Code No. 7. 
    Person includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, local government unit as defined in Wis. Stats. § 287.01(5m), state agency or authority or federal agency. 
    PETE means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI Code No. 1. 
    Plastic container means an individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale. 
    Post-consumer waste means solid waste other than solid waste generated in the production of goods, hazardous waste as defined in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(7), waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles, or high volume industrial waste as defined in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(17). 
    PP means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 5. 
    PS means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 6. 
    PVC means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI Code No. 3. 
    Recyclable materials includes lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bi-metal containers. 
    Refuse means all matters produced from industrial or community life, subject to decomposition, not defined as sewage. 
    Solid waste means any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other discarded or salvageable materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community activities, but does not include solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits under Wis. Stats. ch. 283, or source material, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 254.31(10), special nuclear material, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 254.31(11), or byproduct material, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 254.31(1). 
    Solid waste facility has the meaning specified in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(35). 
    Solid waste treatment means any method, technique or process which is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of solid waste. The term "solid waste treatment" includes incineration. 
    Waste tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in diameter. The term "yard waste" does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls. 
(Prior Code, § 9.01; Ord. No. 06-07) 
Sec. 34-2. - Littering. 
(a)  Prohibited. A person who does any of the following is guilty of the offense of littering: 
(1)  Deposits or discharges any solid waste on or along any road, in any waters of the state, on the ice of any waters of the state, or on any other public or private property. 
(2)  Permits any solid waste to be thrown from a vehicle operated by the person. 
(3)  Fails to remove within 30 days or otherwise abandons any automobile, boat or other vehicle in the waters of the state. 
(4)  Deposits any solid waste into a refuse container on private property without permission. 
(b)  Exception. This section does not apply to a person who places solid waste into a receptacle designed for it, and intended for use by the public. 
(Prior Code, § 5.03; Ord. No. 01-03) 
Sec. 34-3. - Materials not acceptable for landfills or incinerators. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, residential or commercial air conditioners, clothes dryers, clothes washers, dishwashers, freezers, microwave ovens, ovens, refrigerators or stoves are not permitted to be placed in landfills or incinerators and will not be accepted by the village for disposal. 
(Prior Code, § 9.01; Ord. No. 06-07) 
Secs. 34-4-34-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-25. - Preparation for disposal. 
    Garbage placed for collection under this article must comply with the following restrictions: 
(1)  Garbage must be placed in a proper trash disposal or recycling container as required by this article. 
(2)  Garbage must be drained and wrapped or placed in a plastic bag before placement in the trash container. 
(3)  Disposable diapers and animal waste must be wrapped in plastic bags before placement in the trash container. 
(4)  No garbage may be placed for collection in cardboard boxes. 
(5)  Ashes, sawdust, construction dust, vacuum cleaner dust, or similar material shall be double bagged and sealed before placement in the trash container. 
(6)  Newspaper, magazines, cardboard, office paper, books, envelopes, and any junk mail shall be bundled together in a paper or plastic bag or bundled with string, and placed in the recycling container. Cardboard must be no longer than 24 inches by 24 inches. Cardboard or paper contaminated by oil, grease, or food are not recyclable and shall be placed in the trash container, but unstained pizza and other food boxes are recyclable and may be disposed in the recycling container. 
(7)  Bulk waste, such as furniture, rolled carpeting, fixtures, small televisions, microwaves, lumber, and similar items, will be collected as long as the item fits into the trash container. 
(8)  Paint cans must be in a dry or hardened state before placing into the trash container. Floor dry or kitty litter may be used to increase the drying process. 
(9)  No shrubbery, lawn clippings, tree trimmings, brush, tires, waste liquids, batteries, or recyclables shall be placed in the trash container provided. 
(Prior Code, § 9.08A, C; Ord. No. 09-09) 
Sec. 34-26. - Trash containers for multifamily dwellings. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to solid waste removed from any building housing more than two families. 
(b)  Container type; owner to purchase container from village. The village will provide a maximum of one 96-gallon container for each unit and the trash collection will be part of the village collection contract to the property containing the eligible building. The eligible building will be determined during the approval process of a conditional use permit or PUD plan approval. The property owner shall purchase the container from the village, at the current price provided in the village fee schedule. If additional containers are needed for the property, or the property does not have an eligible building, then the property shall contract directly with their own waste hauler. 
(c)  Placement of container; screening. In industrial, commercial and multifamily residential properties, all the containers shall be placed in a containment area shielded by landscaping or fence. The solid waste container containment area shall be so constructed that it can be readily and easily used with the waste collection equipment used by the contracted waste hauler. 
(d)  Maintenance; damaged and nonconforming containers. Solid waste containers shall be maintained by the property owner (keeping the container in good repair, including the lids, wheels, and handles). Property owners of nonconforming or damaged trash containers shall be notified in writing of any such conditions. Refuse and waste collection shall cease in 30 days if alterations or repairs are not implemented. 
(Prior Code, § 9.07A; Ord. No. 09-09) 
Sec. 34-27. - Placement of containers for collection. 
(a)  Trash and recycling containers shall be placed between the curb and sidewalk for collection. The containers shall not be placed on snow banks or streets and shall be placed so as to have sufficient room on either side for the truck to grasp the containers properly. Containers shall not be placed on sidewalks unless the residence has attached sidewalks. 
(b)  The containers and any other permitted recyclables shall not be placed out for collection before dusk on the day preceding the scheduled collection day set by the village or later than 6:30 a.m. on the day of collection. 
(Prior Code, § 9.08B, E; Ord. No. 09-09) 
Sec. 34-28. - Collection schedule. 
    A once weekly collection will be made under normal conditions for the 96-gallon trash container. The 96-gallon recycling container will be collected bi-weekly. 
(Prior Code, § 9.08B; Ord. No. 09-09) 
Sec. 34-29. - Chipping of lawn waste; placement of lawn waste for chipping; schedule. 
(a)  Tree trimmings, shrubbery pruning, or brush will not be chipped unless placed at the curb, with the butt ends of the material facing the street. Other arrangements for chipping may be made for exceptional circumstances if agreed to by the village. 
(b)  The village will not chip tree, shrub, or brush trimmings greater than six feet in length and six inches in diameter. 
(c)  The village will only chip and collect yard waste (minus grass clippings) in the spring season beginning the last week in April to May 31. In the fall season, pick-up will start the second week of October and go through the second week of November. During the summer (June, July, August, and September), the village will only chip on the third Monday of each month, weather permitting. 
(Prior Code, § 9.08D; Ord. No. 09-09) 
Secs. 34-30-34-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECYCLING 

Sec. 34-47. - Purpose; interpretation; conflicts of law. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to promote recycling, composting and resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program as provided in Wis. Stats. § 287.11 and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 544. 
(b)  This section does not repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law, but whenever this section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
(c)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this section shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other granted by state law. 
(d)  Where any terms or requirements of this section may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a provision of this section is required by state statute or by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 544 and where the provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of state law and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 544 standards in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 9.10A; Ord. No. 95-05) 
Sec. 34-48. - Separation of certain recyclable materials. 
(a)  Occupants of single-family and two to four unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall separate the following materials from garbage: 
(1)  Lead acid batteries. 
(2)  Major appliances. 
(3)  Waste oil. 
(4)  Yard waste. 
(5)  Office paper. 
(6)  Aluminum containers. 
(7)  Bi-metal cans. 
(8)  Corrugated paper or other container board. 
(9)  Glass containers. 
(10)  Magazines. 
(11)  Newspaper. 
(12)  Rigid plastic containers made of PETE (#1) and HDPE (#2). 
(13)  Steel containers. 
(14)  Waste tires. 
(15)  Residential and commercial furnaces, boilers, dehumidifiers, and water heaters. 
(b)  This section does not apply: 
(1)  To occupants of single-family and two to four unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties that send their post-consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the state department of natural resources that recovers the materials specified in this section from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible. 
(2)  If less than 30 percent of the heat input to a facility is derived from the solid waste that is burned as a supplemental fuel at that facility in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 287.078(7)(bg). 
(3)  To foam polystyrene packaging and rigid plastic containers made of PVC No. 3, LDPE No. 4, PP No. 5, PS No. 6 and other resins or multiple resins (No. 7). These items have been granted a separation variance by the department of natural resources under Wis. Stats. § 287.07(7)(h). 
(Prior Code, § 9.10C, D; Ord. No. 95-05) 
Sec. 34-49. - Care of separated recyclable materials. 
    To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in accordance with this division shall be clean and kept free of contaminants such as food or product residue, oil, or grease, or other nonrecyclable materials, including, but not limited to, household hazardous waste, medical waste, and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain, and other weather conditions that could reduce the marketability of the recyclable materials. 
(Prior Code, § 9.10E; Ord. No. 95-05) 
Sec. 34-50. - Management of lead acid batteries, major appliances, and waste oil. 
    All residents and occupants of all residential and nonresidential properties in the village shall properly recycle lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil, and office paper at their own expense. 
(Prior Code, § 9.01; Ord. No. 06-07) 
Sec. 34-51. - Yard wastes. 
(a)  The property owner or occupant who chooses to recycle grass clippings rather than mulch shall dispose of the clippings at his own expense. The village will not recycle or provide curbside pick-up for grass clippings. 
(b)  Leaves, weeds, and garden debris shall be placed at the curb in a biodegradable paper bag. 
(c)  Tree and shrub pruning debris may be placed and picked up at the curb by the village in accordance with this article. 
(Prior Code, § 9.01; Ord. No. 06-07) 
Sec. 34-52. - Preparation and collection of recyclable materials. 
(a)  Preparation. All residents and occupants of all residential and nonresidential properties in the village shall prepare and collect all other recyclable materials as provided in this article regarding garbage preparation, as directed by the village board, or as directed by village recycling contractor. 
(b)  Containers. All residents and occupants of all residential and nonresidential properties in the village shall provide adequate containers for the recyclable materials unless otherwise provided by the village or a village contractor. 
(c)  Responsibilities of multiple-family dwelling owners and agents. Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in this division: 
(1)  Provide adequate containers for the recyclable materials unless otherwise provided by the village or a village contractor. 
(2)  Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling and at least semi-annually thereafter about the established recycling program in the village. 
(3)  Provide for the collection of materials separated from the solid waste by the tenant unless provided by the village or a village contractor. 
(4)  Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing requirements, and collection methods. 
(d)  Responsibilities of nonresidential facilities and property owners and agents. Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities or properties shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in this division: 
(1)  Provide adequate containers for the recyclable materials unless otherwise provided by the village or a village contractor. 
(2)  Notify, in writing, all users, tenants, and occupants of the property about the established recycling program in the village. 
(3)  Provide for the collection of materials separated from the solid waste by the users, tenants, and occupants and the delivery to the recycling facility unless provided by the village or a village contractor. 
(4)  Notify users, tenants, and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing requirements, and collection methods. 
(Prior Code, § 9.10F; Ord. No. 95-05) 
Sec. 34-53. - Theft of recyclables. 
    All recyclables placed at the curb for pickup shall become the property of the village and their recycling contractor. The removal of any recyclables by any unauthorized persons shall be a violation of this division and subject to a penalty as prescribed in section 1-15. 
(Prior Code, § 9.10G; Ord. No. 95-05) 
Secs. 34-54-34-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 34-80. - Administrator. 
    The public works director shall administer the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 9.10A; Ord. No. 95-05) 
Sec. 34-81. - Inspections; right of entry. 
    For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this article, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the village may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multifamily dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized representative of the village, who requests access for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such an inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 9.10I.1; Ord. No. 95-05) 
Sec. 34-82. - Citations for violations; other remedies. 
    Any person who violates a provision of this article may be issued a citation by the village and shall be subject to a forfeiture. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this section. 
(Prior Code, § 9.10I.2; Ord. No. 95-05) 
Chapter 35 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 35-1-35-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 

Sec. 35-19. - Authority. 
(a)  This article is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 61.354. This article supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stats. § 61.35, that relate to construction site erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stats. § 61.354, Wis. Stats. § 61.35, applies to this article and to any amendments to this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body. 
(c)  The village board hereby designates the village engineer to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The requirements of this article do not pre-empt more stringent erosion and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any of the following: 
(1)  The state department of natural resources administrative rules, permits or approvals, including those authorized under Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16 and 283.33. 
(2)  Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the state department of natural resources under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 151.004. 
Sec. 35-20. - Findings of fact. 
    The village board acknowledges that runoff from land disturbing construction activity carries a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the waters of the state in the village. 
Sec. 35-21. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to maintain safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; prevent and control soil erosion and sediment discharge; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth by minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from land disturbing construction activity to waters of the state in the village. 
Sec. 35-22. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Except as provided under subsection (b) of this section, this article applies to any construction site as defined under section 35-23. 
(2)  This article does not apply to the following: 
a.  Transportation facilities, except transportation facility construction projects that are part of a larger common plan of development such as local roads within a residential or industrial development. 
b.  A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or regulations from the requirement to have a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued under 40 CFR 122, for land disturbing construction activity. 
c.  Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices. 
d.  Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities. 
e.  Routine maintenance for project sites that have less than five acres of land disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in subsection (a) of this section, this article applies to construction sites of any size that, as determined by the village engineer, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, or that increases water pollution by scouring or transporting of particulate. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. This article applies to land disturbing construction activities on lands within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the village as well as all lands located within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the village, even if plat approval is not involved. 
(c)  Exclusions. This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 227.01(1). 
Sec. 35-23. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administering authority means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under Wis. Stats. § 61.354, that is designated by the village board to administer this article. 
    Agricultural facilities and practices has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.16(1). 
    Best management practice or BMP means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state. 
    Business day means a day the office of the village engineer is routinely and customarily open for business. 
    Cease and desist order means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit or in violation of a permit issued by the village engineer. 
    Construction site means an area upon which one or more land disturbing construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules but under one plan. A long-range planning document that describes separate construction projects, such as a 20-year transportation improvement plan, is not a common plan of development. 
    Design storm means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency and total depth of rainfall. 
    Division of land means the creation from one parcel of five or more parcels or building sites of 1.5 or fewer acres each in area where such creation occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a five-year period. 
    Erosion means the process by which the land's surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan means a comprehensive plan developed to address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil particles or rock fragments during construction. 
    Extraterritorial means the unincorporated area within three miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village. 
    Final stabilization means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures. 
    Governing body means town board of supervisors, county board of supervisors, city council, village board of trustees or village council. 
    Land disturbing construction activity means any manmade alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. The term "land disturbing construction activity" includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities. 
    Landowner means any person holding fee title, an easement or other interest in property, which allows the person to undertake cropping, livestock management, land disturbing construction activity or maintenance of stormwater BMPs on the property. 
    Maximum extent practicable means the highest level of performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a performance standard identified in this article as determined in accordance with section 35-24. 
    Performance standard means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice. 
    Permit means a written authorization made by the village engineer to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state. 
    Pollutant has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 283.01(13). 
    Pollution has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.01(10). 
    Responsible party means the landowner or any other entity performing services to meet the requirements of this article through a contract or other agreement. 
    Runoff means stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow. 
    Sediment means settleable solid material that is transported by runoff, suspended within runoff or deposited by runoff away from its original location. 
    Silviculture activity means activities including tree nursery operations, tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burning, and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction site is not a silviculture activity. 
    Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing construction activity is proposed in the permit application. 
    Stop work order means an order issued by the village engineer which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped. 
    Technical standard means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method. 
    Transportation facility means a highway, a railroad, a public mass transit facility, a public-use airport, a public trail or any other public work for transportation purposes such as harbor improvements under Wis. Stats. § 85.095(1)(b). The term "transportation facility" does not include building sites for the construction of public buildings and buildings that are places of employment that are regulated by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.33. 
    Waters of the state includes those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within the boundaries of this state, and all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within this state or its jurisdiction. 
Sec. 35-24. - Applicability of maximum extent practicable. 
    The term "maximum extent practicable" applies when a person who is subject to a performance standard of this article demonstrates to the village engineer's satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable and that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the assertion that a performance standard is not achievable and that a level of performance different from the performance standard is the maximum extent practicable, the responsible party shall take into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing interests such as protection of public safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic properties. Determination by the village engineer that the maximum extent practicable is appropriate for a performance standard does not exempt an applicant from the village board plan approval process. 
Sec. 35-25. - Technical standards. 
    All BMPs required for compliance with this article shall meet design criteria, standards and specifications based on any of the following: 
(1)  Design guidance and technical standards identified or developed by the state department of natural resources under Wis. Admin. Code subch. V of ch. NR 151. 
(2)  Soil loss prediction tools (such as the Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE)) when using an appropriate rainfall or runoff factor (also referred to as the R-factor) or an appropriate design storm and precipitation distribution, and when considering the geographic location of the site and the period of disturbance. 
Note to permittees: The USLE and its successors RUSLE and RUSLE2, utilize an R-factor which has been developed to estimate annual soil erosion, averaged over extended time periods. The R-factor can be modified to estimate monthly and single-storm erosion. 
(3)  Technical standards and methods approved by the village engineer. 
Sec. 35-26. - Performance standards for construction sites under one acre. 
(a)  Responsible party. The responsible party shall comply with this section. 
(b)  Erosion and sediment control practices. Erosion and sediment control practices at each site where land disturbing construction activity is to occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following: 
(1)  The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles. 
(2)  The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site stormwater inlets. 
(3)  The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the state. 
(4)  The discharge of sediment from drainageways that flow off the site. 
(5)  The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities. 
(6)  The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than seven days. 
(7)  The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals, cement, and other building compounds and materials on the construction site during the construction period. However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this subdivision. 
(c)  Location. The BMPs shall be located so that treatment occurs before runoff enters waters of the state. 
(d)  Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be implemented as follows: 
(1)  Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or installed before land disturbing construction activities begin. 
(2)  Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until final stabilization. 
(3)  Final stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities cease and final grade has been reached on any portion of the site. 
(4)  Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities have temporarily ceased and will not resume for a period exceeding 14 calendar days. 
(5)  BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment control shall be removed by the responsible party. 
Sec. 35-27. - Performance standards for construction sites of one acre or more. 
(a)  Responsible party. The responsible party shall comply with this section and implement the erosion and sediment control plan developed in accordance with section 35-29. 
(b)  Erosion and sediment control plan. A written site-specific erosion and sediment control plan shall be developed in accordance with section 35-29 and implemented for each construction site. 
(c)  Erosion and other pollutant control requirements. The erosion and sediment control plan required under subsection (b) of this section shall include the following: 
(1)  Erosion and sediment control practices. Erosion and sediment control practices at each site where land disturbing construction activity is to occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following: 
a.  The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles. 
b.  The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site stormwater inlets. 
c.  The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the state. 
d.  The discharge of sediment from drainageways that flow off the site. 
e.  The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities. 
f.  The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than seven days. 
g.  The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in downstream channels. 
h.  The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals, cement, and other building compounds and materials on the construction site during the construction period. However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this subdivision. 
i.  The transport by runoff into waters of the state of untreated wash water from vehicle and wheel washing. 
(2)  Sediment performance standards. In addition to the erosion and sediment control practices under subsection (c)(1) of this section, the following erosion and sediment control practices shall be employed: 
a.  BMPs that, by design, discharge no more than five tons per acre per year, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the sediment load carried in runoff from initial grading to final stabilization. 
b.  No person shall be required to employ more BMPs than are needed to meet a performance standard in order to comply with maximum extent practicable. Erosion and sediment control BMPs may be combined to meet the requirements of this subsection. Credit may be given toward meeting the sediment performance standard of this subsection for limiting the duration or area, or both, of land disturbing construction activity, or for other appropriate mechanisms. 
c.  Notwithstanding subsection (c)(2)a of this section, if BMPs cannot be designed and implemented to meet the sediment performance standard, the erosion and sediment control plan shall include a written, site-specific explanation of why the sediment performance standard cannot be met and how the sediment load will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
(3)  Preventive measures. The erosion and sediment control plan shall incorporate all of the following: 
a.  Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to surface waters whenever possible. 
b.  Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of topsoil. 
c.  Minimization of land disturbing construction activity on slopes of 20 percent or more. 
d.  Development of spill prevention and response procedures. 
(4)  Location. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located so that treatment occurs before runoff enters waters of the state. 
(d)  Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be implemented as follows: 
(1)  Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or installed before land disturbing construction activities begin in accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan developed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until final stabilization. 
(3)  Final stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities cease and final grade has been reached on any portion of the site. 
(4)  Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities have temporarily ceased and will not resume for a period exceeding 14 calendar days. 
(5)  BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment control shall be removed by the responsible party. 
Sec. 35-28. - Permitting requirements, procedures and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No responsible party may commence a land disturbing construction activity subject to this article without receiving prior approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for the site and a permit from the village engineer. 
(b)  Permit application and fees. The responsible party that will undertake a land disturbing construction activity subject to this article shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion and sediment control plan that meets the requirements of section 35-29, and shall pay an application fee to the village engineer in the amount specified in section 35-30. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the village engineer to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(c)  Permit application review and approval. The village engineer shall review any permit application that is submitted with an erosion and sediment control plan, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used: 
(1)  Applications, control plans, and control plan statements shall be submitted to the village at least 21 days in advance of the plan commission meeting at which action is expected. 
(2)  Within three days of receipt of the application, a copy thereof together with a copy of the control plan for activities covering more than one acre shall be delivered to the village engineer for initial review. Within three days of the village receipt of the application, a copy thereof together with a copy of the control plan statement for activities covering less than one acre, shall be delivered to the village building inspector for initial review. If the village engineer or village building inspector finds the application or control plan or statement to be lacking necessary information or not in compliance with this Code, the applicant shall be notified of the inadequacy as soon as practical after review. 
(3)  All initial reviews shall be filed with the village seven days in advance of the plan commission meeting, along with the application and control plans or control plan statements. 
(4)  Within 45 days of the filing deadline for the application, control plan, or control plan statement and fee for the plan commission meeting, as required by subsection (b) of this section, the village engineer shall inform the applicant whether the application and erosion and sediment control plan are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this article. 
(5)  If the permit application and erosion and sediment control plan are approved, the village engineer shall issue the permit. 
(6)  If the permit application or erosion and sediment control plan is disapproved, the village engineer shall state in writing the reasons for disapproval. 
(7)  The village engineer may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the village engineer shall have 45 days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the erosion and sediment control plan is either approved or disapproved. 
(8)  Failure by the village engineer to inform the permit applicant of a decision within 45 days of a required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued. 
(d)  Surety bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the village engineer may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any permit conditions. 
(e)  Permit requirements. All permits shall require the responsible party to: 
(1)  Notify the village engineer 48 hours in advance of commencing any land disturbing construction activity. 
(2)  Notify the village engineer of completion of any BMPs within 14 days after their installation. 
(3)  Obtain permission in writing from the village engineer prior to any modification pursuant to section 35-29(c) of the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(4)  Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment control plan. 
(5)  Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, BMPs and other facilities identified in the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(6)  Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainageways resulting from land disturbing construction activities and document repairs in a site inspection log. 
(7)  Inspect the BMPs within 24 hours after each rain of 0.5 inches or more which results in runoff during active construction periods, and at least once each week. Make needed repairs and install additional BMPs as necessary, and document these activities in an inspection log that also includes the date of inspection, the name of the person conducting the inspection, and a description of the present phase of the construction at the site. 
(8)  Allow the administering authority to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan. Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment control plan at the construction site. 
(f)  Permit conditions. Permits issued under this section may include conditions established by village engineer in addition to the requirements set forth in subsection (e) of this section, where needed to ensure compliance with the performance standards in sections 35-26 and 35-27. 
(g)  Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for a period of 180 days, or the length of the building permit or other construction authorizations, whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The village engineer may grant one or more extensions not to exceed 180 days cumulatively. The village engineer may require additional BMPs as a condition of an extension if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(h)  Maintenance. The responsible party throughout the duration of the construction activities shall maintain all BMPs necessary to meet the requirements of this article until the site has undergone final stabilization. 
Sec. 35-29. - Erosion and sediment control plan, statement and amendments. 
(a)  Erosion and sediment control plan statement. For each construction site identified under section 35-22(a)(3), an erosion and sediment control plan statement shall be prepared. This statement shall be submitted to the village engineer. The erosion and sediment control plan statement shall briefly describe the site, the development schedule, and the BMPs that will be used to meet the requirements of the article. A site map shall also accompany the erosion and sediment control plan statement. 
(b)  Erosion and sediment control plan requirements. 
(1)  An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and submitted to the village engineer. 
(2)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to meet the performance standards in sections 35-26 and 35-27 and other requirements of this article. 
(3)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall address pollution caused by soil erosion and sedimentation during construction and up to final stabilization of the site. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include, at a minimum, the following items: 
a.  Name and address of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm. The application shall also include start and end dates for construction. 
b.  Description of the construction site and the nature of the land disturbing construction activity, including representation of the limits of land disturbance on a United States Geological Service 7.5-minute series topographic map. 
c.  Description of the intended sequence of major land disturbing construction activities for major portions of the construction site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
d.  Estimates of the total area of the construction site and the total area of the construction site that is expected to be disturbed by land disturbing construction activities. 
e.  Calculations to show the compliance with the performance standard in section 35-27(c)(2)a. 
f.  Existing data describing the surface soil as well as subsoils. 
g.  Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources Conservation Service soil information where available. 
h.  Name of the immediate named receiving water from the United States Geological Service 7.5-minute series topographic maps. 
(4)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall include a site map. The site map shall include the following items and shall be at a scale not greater than 100 feet per inch and at a contour interval not to exceed five feet: 
a.  Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and engineered drainage systems, roads and surface waters. Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site shall be shown. Any identified 100-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways shall also be shown. Location of predominant soil types shall also be shown. 
b.  Boundaries of the construction site. 
c.  Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major grading activities. 
d.  Areas of soil disturbance. 
e.  Location of major structural and non-structural controls identified in the erosion and sediment control plan. 
f.  Location of areas where stabilization BMPs will be employed. 
g.  Areas which will be vegetated following land disturbing construction activities. 
h.  Area and location of wetland on the construction site, and locations where stormwater is discharged to a surface water or wetland within one-quarter mile downstream of the construction site. 
i.  Areas used for infiltration of post-construction stormwater runoff. 
j.  An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire construction site map. 
(5)  Each erosion and sediment control plan shall include a description of appropriate control BMPs that will be installed and maintained at the construction site to prevent pollutants from reaching waters of the state. The erosion and sediment control plan shall clearly describe the appropriate erosion and sediment control BMPs for each major land disturbing construction activity and the timing during the period of land disturbing construction activity that the erosion and sediment control BMPs will be implemented. The description of erosion and sediment control BMPs shall include, when appropriate, the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Description of interim and permanent stabilization practices, including a BMP implementation schedule. The erosion and sediment control plan shall ensure that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized. 
b.  Description of structural practices to divert flow away from exposed soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site. Unless otherwise specifically approved in writing by the administering authority, structural measures shall be installed on upland soils. 
c.  Management of overland flow at all areas of the construction site, unless otherwise controlled by outfall controls. 
d.  Trapping of sediment in channelized flow. 
e.  Staging land disturbing construction activities to limit exposed soil areas subject to erosion. 
f.  Protection of downslope drainage inlets where they occur. 
g.  Minimization of tracking at all vehicle and equipment entry and exit locations of the construction site. 
h.  Clean up of off-site sediment deposits. 
i.  Proper disposal of building and waste material. 
j.  Stabilization of drainageways. 
k.  Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as possible after final grading. 
l.  Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practicable. 
(6)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall require that velocity dissipation devices be placed at discharge locations and along the length of any outfall channel as necessary to provide a non-erosive flow from the structure to a watercourse so that the natural physical and biological characteristics and functions are maintained and protected. 
(c)  Erosion and sediment control plan amendments. The applicant shall amend the erosion and sediment control plan if any of the following occur: 
(1)  There is a change in design, construction, operation or maintenance at the site which has the reasonable potential for the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and which has not otherwise been addressed in the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(2)  The actions required by the erosion and sediment control plan fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants carried by construction site runoff. 
(3)  The village engineer notifies the applicant of changes needed in the erosion and sediment control plan. 
Sec. 35-30. - Fee schedule. 
    The fees referred to in other sections of this article shall be established by the village engineer and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the village engineer shall be available for review in the office of the village clerk-treasurer. 
Sec. 35-31. - Inspection. 
    If land disturbing construction activities are occurring without a permit required by this article, the village engineer may enter the land pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0119(1) through (3). 
Sec. 35-32. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The village engineer may post a stop work order if any of the following occurs: 
(1)  Land disturbing construction activity regulated under this article is occurring without a permit. 
(2)  The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in good faith. 
(3)  The conditions of the permit are not being met. 
Note to permittees: The village engineer should inspect any construction site that holds a permit under this chapter at least once a month between March 1 and October 31, and at least two times between November 1 and February 28 to ensure compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan. 
(b)  If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a stop work order posted under this section or fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan or permit conditions, the village engineer may revoke the permit. 
(c)  If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued or the permit has been revoked, does not cease the activity after being notified by the village engineer, or if a responsible party violates a stop work order posted under subsection (a) of this section, the village engineer may request the village attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction. 
(d)  The village engineer may retract the stop work order issued under subsection (a) of this section or the permit revocation under subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  After posting a stop work order under subsection (a) of this section, the village engineer may issue a notice of intent to the responsible party of its intent to perform work necessary to comply with this article. The village engineer may go on the land and commence the work after issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work performed under this subsection by the village engineer, plus interest at the rate authorized by village engineer shall be billed to the responsible party. In the event a responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. subchapter VII of ch. 66. 
(f)  Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings. 
Sec. 35-33. - Appeals. 
(a)  Board of appeals. The board of appeals created pursuant to section 2-182, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.354(4)(b): 
(1)  Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the village engineer in administering this article except for cease and desist orders obtained under section 35-32(c); 
(2)  May authorize, upon appeal, variances from the provisions of this article which are not contrary to the public interest and where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship; and 
(3)  Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances. 
(b)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by any office, department, board, or bureau of the village affected by any decision of the village engineer. 
Secs. 35-34-35-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 35-55. - Authority. 
(a)  This article is adopted by the village board under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 61.354. This article supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stats. § 61.35, that relate to stormwater management regulations. Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stats. § 61.354, Wis. Stats. § 61.35 applies to this article and to any amendments to this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body. 
(c)  The village board hereby designates the village engineer to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The requirements of this article do not pre-empt more stringent stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any of the following: 
(1)  The state department of natural resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16 and 283.33. 
(2)  Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the state department of natural resources under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 151.004. 
Sec. 35-56. - Findings of fact. 
    The village board acknowledges that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and general welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can: 
(1)  Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature. 
(2)  Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria, pathogens and other urban pollutants. 
(3)  Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads. 
(4)  Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading. 
(5)  Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by overtaxing storm sewers, drainageways, and other minor drainage facilities. 
Sec. 35-57. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The general purpose of this article is to establish long-term, post-construction runoff management requirements that will diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic environment. Specific purposes are to: 
(1)  Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions. 
(2)  Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent and control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth. 
(3)  Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; and control increases in the scouring and transportation of particulate matter. 
(4)  Minimize the amount of pollutants discharged from the separate storm sewer to protect the waters of the state. 
(b)  Intent. It is the intent of the village board that this article regulates post-construction stormwater discharges to waters of the state. This article may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The village board recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving the stormwater performance standards set forth in this article is through the preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systems-level stormwater management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may prescribe regional stormwater devices, practices or systems, any of which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in conformance with the performance standards developed under Wis. Stats. § 281.16 for regional stormwater management measures and have been approved by the village board, it is the intent of this article that the approved stormwater management plan be used to identify post-construction management measures acceptable for the community. 
Sec. 35-58. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Except as provided under subsection (b) of this section, this article applies to a post-construction site whereupon one acre or more of land disturbing construction activity occurs during construction. 
(2)  A site that meets any of the criteria in this subsection is exempt from the requirements of this article: 
a.  A post-construction site with less than ten percent connected imperviousness, based on the area of land disturbance, provided the cumulative area of all impervious surfaces is less than one acre. However, the exemption of this subsection does not include exemption from the protective area standard of this article. 
b.  Agricultural facilities and practices. 
c.  Underground utility construction, but not including the construction of any above ground structures associated with utility construction. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in subsection (a)(1) of this section, this article applies to post-construction sites of any size that, as determined by the village engineer, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, causes undue channel erosion, or increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. This article applies to post construction sites within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the village, as well as all lands located within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the village, even if plat approval is not involved. 
(c)  Exclusions. This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 227.01(1). 
Sec. 35-59. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover means maintenance of sufficient vegetation types and densities such that the physical integrity of the streambank or lakeshore is preserved. The term "self-sustaining vegetative cover" includes grasses, forbs, sedges and duff layers of fallen leaves and woody debris. 
    Administering authority means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under Wis. Stats. § 61.354, that is designated by the village board to administer this article. 
    Agricultural facilities and practices has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.16(1). 
    Atlas 14 means the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14 Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Volume 8 (Midwestern States), published in 2013. 
    Average annual rainfall means a typical calendar year of precipitation as determined by the state department of natural resources for users of models such as WinSLAMM, P8 or equivalent methodology. The average annual rainfall is chosen from a department publication for the location closest to the municipality. 
    Best management practice or BMP means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state. 
    Business day means a day the office of the village engineer is routinely and customarily open for business. 
    Cease and desist order means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit or in violation of a permit issued by the village engineer. 
    Combined sewer system means a system for conveying both sanitary sewage and stormwater runoff. 
    Connected imperviousness means an impervious surface connected to the waters of the state via a separate storm sewer, an impervious flow path, or a minimally pervious flow path. 
    Design storm means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency and total depth of rainfall. 
    Development means residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land uses and associated roads. 
    Direct conduits to groundwater means wells, sinkholes, swallets, fractured bedrock at the surface, mine shafts, non-metallic mines, tile inlets discharging to groundwater, quarries, or depressional groundwater recharge areas over shallow fractured bedrock. 
    Division of land means the creation from one parcel of five or more parcels or building sites of 1.5 or fewer acres each in area where such creation occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a five-year period. 
    Effective infiltration area means the area of the infiltration system that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms or pretreatment. 
    Erosion means the process by which the land's surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Exceptional resource waters means waters listed in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 102.11. 
    Extraterritorial means the unincorporated area within three miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village. 
    Filtering layer means soil that has at least a three-foot deep layer with at least 20 percent fines; or at least a five-foot deep layer with at least ten percent fines; or an engineered soil with an equivalent level of protection as determined by the regulatory authority for the site. 
    Final stabilization means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures. 
    Financial guarantee means a performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted to the village engineer by the responsible party to ensure that requirements of the article are carried out in compliance with the stormwater management plan. 
    Governing body means town board of supervisors, county board of supervisors, city council, village board of trustees or village council. 
    Impervious surface means an area that releases as runoff all or a large portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, gravel or paved parking lots and streets are examples of areas that typically are impervious. 
    In-fill means an undeveloped area of land located within an existing urban sewer service area, surrounded by development or development and natural or manmade features where development cannot occur. 
    Infiltration means the entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the soil. 
    Infiltration system means a device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices such as swales or road side channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only. 
    Land disturbing construction activity means any manmade alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. The term "land disturbing construction activity" includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities. 
    Landowner means any person holding fee title, an easement or other interest in property, which allows the person to undertake cropping, livestock management, land disturbing construction activity or maintenance of stormwater BMPs on the property. 
    Maintenance agreement means a legal document that provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
    Maximum extent practicable means the highest level of performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a performance standard identified in this article as determined in accordance with section 35-60. 
    New development means development resulting from the conversion of previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses. 
    NRCS MSE3 or MSE4 distribution means a specific precipitation distribution developed by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, using precipitation data from Atlas 14. 
    Off-site means located outside the property boundary described in the permit application. 
    On-site means located within the property boundary described in the permit application. 
    Ordinary high-water mark has the meaning given in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 115.03(6). 
    Outstanding resource waters means waters listed in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 102.10. 
    Percent fines means the percentage of a given sample of soil, which passes through a No. 200 sieve. 
    Performance standard means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice. 
    Permit means a written authorization made by the village engineer to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state. 
    Permit administration fee means a sum of money paid to the village engineer by the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the permit. 
    Pervious surface means an area that releases as runoff a small portion of the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious. 
    Pollutant has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 283.01(13). 
    Pollution has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.01(10). 
    Post-construction site means a construction site following the completion of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization. 
    Pre-development condition means the extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation of land disturbing construction activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are managed in an environmentally sound manner. 
    Preventive action limit has the meaning given in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 140.05(17). 
    Protective area means an area of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. 
    Redevelopment means areas where development is replacing older development. 
    Responsible party means the landowner or any other entity performing services to meet the requirements of this article through a contract or other agreement. 
    Runoff means stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow. 
    Separate storm sewer means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff. 
(2)  Is not part of a combined sewer system. 
(3)  Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or more stringent treatment. 
(4)  Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state. 
    Silviculture activity means activities including tree nursery operations, tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burning, and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction site is not a silviculture activity. 
    Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing construction activity occurred. 
    Stop work order means an order issued by the village engineer which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped. 
    Stormwater management plan means a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from stormwater, after the site has under gone final stabilization, following completion of the construction activity. 
    Stormwater management system plan is a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale. 
    Technical standard means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method. 
    Top of the channel means an edge, or point on the landscape landward from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state, where the slope of the land begins to be less than 12 percent continually for at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is 12 percent or less continually for the initial 50 feet landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high-water mark. 
    Total maximum daily load or TMDL means the amount of pollutants specified as a function of one or more water quality parameters, that can be discharged per day into a water quality limited segment and still ensure attainment of the applicable water quality standard. 
    TP-40 means Technical Paper No. 40, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the United States, published in 1961. 
    TR-55 means the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986, which is incorporated by reference for this chapter. 
    Transportation facility means a highway, a railroad, a public mass transit facility, a public-use airport, a public trail or any other public work for transportation purposes such as harbor improvements under Wis. Stats. § 85.095(1)(b). The term "transportation facility" does not include building sites for the construction of public buildings and buildings that are places of employment that are regulated by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.33. 
    TSS means total suspended solids. 
    Type II distribution means a rainfall type curve as established in the "United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149, published in 1973." 
    Waters of the state includes those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within the boundaries of this state, and all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within this state or its jurisdiction. 
Sec. 35-60. - Applicability of maximum extent practicable. 
    Maximum extent practicable applies when a person who is subject to a performance standard of this article demonstrates to the village engineer's satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable and that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the assertion that a performance standard is not achievable and that a level of performance different from the performance standard is the maximum extent practicable, the responsible party shall take into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing interests such as protection of public safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic properties. Determination by the village engineer that the maximum extent practicable is appropriate for a performance standard does not exempt an applicant from the village board plan approval process. 
Sec. 35-61. - Technical standards. 
    The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality, peak discharge, and infiltration components of stormwater practices needed to meet the water quality standards of this article: 
(1)  Consistent with the technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the state department of natural resources under Wis. Admin. Code subch. V of ch. NR 151. 
(2)  Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the state department of natural resources, other technical standards may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the village engineer. 
Note to permittees: Pollutant loading models such as DETPOND, WinSLAMM, P8, or equivalent methodology may be used to evaluate the efficiency of the design in reducing total suspended solids. Use the most recent version of the model and the rainfall files and other parameter files identified for state users unless directed otherwise by the regulatory authority. 
Sec. 35-62. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Responsible party. The responsible party shall comply with this section. 
(b)  Stormwater management plan. A written stormwater management plan in accordance with section 35-64 shall be developed and implemented for each post-construction site. 
(c)  Maintenance of effort. For redevelopment sites where the redevelopment will be replacing older development that was subject to post-construction performance standards of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 151 in effect on or after October 1, 2004, the responsible party shall meet the total suspended solids reduction, peak flow control, infiltration, and protective areas standards applicable to the older development or meet the redevelopment standards of this article, whichever is more stringent. 
(d)  Requirements. The stormwater management plan required under subsection (b) of this section shall include the following: 
(1)  Total suspended solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to control total suspended solids carried in runoff from the post-construction site as follows: 
a.  Design. BMPs shall be designed in accordance with Table 1 or to the maximum extent practicable as provided in subsection (d)(1)b of this section. The design shall be based on an average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls. 
Table 1. TSS Reduction Standards 
Development Type TSS Reduction New development 80 percent In-fill development 80 percent Redevelopment 40 percent of load from parking areas and roads  
b.  Maximum extent practicable. If the design cannot meet a total suspended solids reduction performance standard of Table 1, the stormwater management plan shall include a written, site-specific explanation of why the total suspended solids reduction performance standard cannot be met and why the total suspended solids load will be reduced only to the maximum extent practicable. 
Note to permittees: Pollutant loading models such as DETPOND, WinSLAMM, P8 or equivalent methodology may be used to evaluate the efficiency of the design in reducing total suspended solids. Use the most recent version of the model and the rainfall files and other parameter files identified for state users unless directed otherwise by the regulatory authority. 
c.  Off-site drainage. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from off-site shall be taken into account in determining the treatment efficiency of the practice. Any impact on the efficiency shall be compensated for by increasing the size of the BMP accordingly. 
(2)  Peak discharge. 
a.  By design, BMPs shall be employed to maintain or reduce the one-year, 24-hour, five-year, 24-hour; and the 100-year, 24-hour post-construction peak runoff discharge rates to the one-year, 24-hour, two-year, 24-hour; and the five-year, 24-hour pre-development peak runoff discharge rates respectively, or to the maximum extent practicable. The runoff curve numbers in Table 2 shall be used to represent the actual pre-development conditions. Peak discharges shall be calculated using TR-55 runoff curve number methodology, Atlas 14 precipitation depths, and the appropriate NRCS Wisconsin MSE3 or MSE4 precipitation distribution. On a case-by-case basis, the village engineer may allow the use of TP-40 precipitation depths and the Type II distribution. 
Note to permittees: For determining compliance with the peak flow requirement, the department recommends use of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14 Precipitation Frequency Estimates for precipitation depth. The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) -Wisconsin has calculated county-specific Atlas 14 precipitation depths and they are to be used in combination with the appropriate NRCS MSE3 or MSE4 precipitation distribution. The NRCS calculated county-specific Atlas 14 precipitation depths and MSE3 and MSE4 precipitation distributions are available at: 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/wi/technical/engineering/?cid=nrcs142p2_025417. 
Table 2. Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve 
Numbers 
Runoff Curve Number Hydrologic Soil Group A B C D Woodland 30 55 70 77 Grassland 39 61 71 78 Cropland 55 69 78 83  
Note to permittees: Where the pre-development condition is a combination of woodland, grassland, or cropland, the runoff curve number should be pro-rated by area. 
b.  This subsection of the article does not apply to any of the following: 
1.  A post-construction site where the discharge is directly into a lake over 5,000 acres or a stream or river segment draining more than 500 square miles. 
2.  Except as provided under subsection (c) of this section, a redevelopment post-construction site. 
3.  An in-fill development area less than five acres. 
(3)  Total phosphorus. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to control total phosphorus carried in runoff from the post-construction site as follows: 
a.  BMPs shall be designed to achieve 60 percent reduction in total phosphorus or to the maximum extent practicable as provided in subsection (d)(3) of this section. The design shall be based on an average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls. 
b.  Sizing and design of the nutrient pond shall be based on the Walker Pond Net model, SLAMM, DET POND, P8 or other appropriate water quality model. 
c.  The village may, at its own discretion, require the construction of one or more ponds even when such ponds do meet the 60 percent phosphorus removal efficiency criteria. The village shall require said ponds when it is determined that they are necessary to maintain the integrity of water quality in downstream priority water bodies. In priority districts, additional water quality treatment ponds may be required if necessary to maintain the integrity of the downstream priority water body. 
(4)  Infiltration. 
a.  Best management practices. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate runoff in accordance with the following or to the maximum extent practicable: 
1.  Low imperviousness. For development up to 40 percent connected imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries, and low density residential development, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 90 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than one percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
2.  Moderate imperviousness. For development with more than 40 percent and up to 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as medium and high density residential, multifamily development, industrial and institutional development, and office parks, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 75 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than two percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
3.  High imperviousness. For development with more than 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as commercial strip malls, shopping centers, and commercial downtowns, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 60 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than two percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
b.  Pre-development. The pre-development condition shall be the same as specified in Table 2 of subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
c.  Source areas. 
1.  Prohibitions. Runoff from the following areas may not be infiltrated and may not qualify as contributing to meeting the requirements of this section unless demonstrated to meet the conditions identified in subsection (d)(3) of this section: 
(i)  Areas associated with a tier 1 industrial facility identified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 216.21(2)(a), including storage, loading and parking. Rooftops may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory authority. 
(ii)  Storage and loading areas of a tier 2 industrial facility identified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 216.21(2)(b). 
Note to permittees: Runoff from the employee and guest parking and rooftop areas of a tier 2 facility may be infiltrated but runoff from the parking area may require pretreatment. 
(iii)  Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Runoff from rooftops of fueling and vehicle maintenance areas may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory authority. 
2.  Exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirement when infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate runoff from these source areas is optional: 
(i)  Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for commercial development. 
(ii)  Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for industrial development not subject to the prohibitions under subsection (d)(4)c of this section. 
(iii)  Except as provided under subsection (c) of this section, redevelopment post-construction sites. 
(iv)  In-fill development areas less than five acres. 
(v)  Roads on commercial, industrial and institutional land uses, and arterial residential roads. 
d.  Location of practices. 
1.  Prohibitions. Infiltration practices may not be located in the following areas: 
(i)  Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet downgradient of direct conduits to groundwater. 
(ii)  Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.16(4) or within the separation distances listed in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 812.08 for any private well or non-community well for runoff infiltrated from commercial, including multifamily residential, industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices for one- and two-family residential development. 
(iii)  Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 720.03(2), are present in the soil through which infiltration will occur. 
2.  Separation distances. 
(i)  Infiltration practices shall be located so that the characteristics of the soil and the separation distance between the bottom of the infiltration system and the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock are in accordance with Table 3: 
Table 3. Separation Distances and Soil Characteristics 
Source Area Separation Distance Soil Characteristics Industrial, commercial, institutional parking lots and roads Five feet or more Filtering layer Residential arterial roads Five feet or more Filtering layer Roofs draining to subsurface infiltration practices One foot or more Native or engineered soil with particles finer than coarse sand Roofs draining to surface infiltration practices Not applicable Not applicable All other impervious source areas Three feet or more Filtering layer  
(ii)  Notwithstanding subsection (d)(4)d.2 of this section, applicable requirements for injection wells classified under Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 815 shall be followed. 
3.  Infiltration rate exemptions. Infiltration practices located in the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirements under the following conditions, but the decision to infiltrate under these conditions is optional: 
(i)  Where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at the proposed bottom of the infiltration system is less than 0.6 inches per hour using a scientifically credible field test method. 
(ii)  Where the least permeable soil horizon to five feet below the proposed bottom of the infiltration system using the U.S. Department of Agriculture method of soils analysis is one of the following: sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay. 
e.  Alternate use. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet flushing, laundry, or irrigation or storage on green roofs where an equivalent portion of the runoff is captured permanently by rooftop vegetation, such alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by this section. 
f.  Groundwater standards. 
1.  Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this section shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of standards application in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 140. However, if site specific information indicates that compliance with a preventive action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum extent practicable. 
2.  Notwithstanding subsection (d)(4)f.1 of this section, the discharge from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard at the point of standards application. 
g.  Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance with subsection (d)(4)f of this section. Pretreatment options may include, but are not limited to, oil and grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips. 
h.  Maximum extent practicable. Where the conditions of subsection (d)(4)c. and d of this section limit or restrict the use of infiltration practices, the performance standard of subsection (d)(3) of this section shall be met to the maximum extent practicable. 
(5)  Protective areas. 
a.  Definition. In this section, the term "protective area" means an area of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. However, in this section, the term "protective area" does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, so that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location. 
1.  For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters: 75 feet. 
2.  For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a U.S. Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever is more current: 50 feet. 
3.  For lakes: 50 feet. 
4.  For wetlands not subject to subsection (d)(5)a.5 or 6 of this section: 50 feet. 
5.  For highly susceptible wetlands: 75 feet. Highly susceptible wetlands include the following types: calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open and coniferous bogs, low prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland hardwood swamps, and ephemeral ponds. 
6.  For less susceptible wetlands: ten percent of the average wetland width, but no less than ten feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include: degraded wetland dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass; cultivated hydric soils; and any gravel pits, or dredged material or fill material disposal sites that take on the attributes of a wetland. 
7.  In subsection (d)(5)a.4 through 6 of this section, determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the standards and criteria in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 103.03. 
8.  Wetland boundary delineation shall be made in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 103.08(1m). This subsection does not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured from the wetland boundary delineation after a fill has been placed. Where there is a legally authorized wetland fill, the protective area standard need not be met in that location. 
9.  For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than 130 acres: ten feet. 
10.  Notwithstanding subsections (d)(5)a.1 through 9 of this section, the greatest protective area width shall apply where rivers, streams, lakes and wetlands are contiguous. 
Note to permittees: A stream or lake is not eligible for a lower protective area width even if contiguous to a less susceptible wetland. 
b.  Applicability. This section applies to post-construction sites located within a protective area, except those areas exempted pursuant to subsection (d)(5)d of this section. 
c.  Requirements. The following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area entirely or to the maximum extent practicable. If there is no practical alternative to locating an impervious surface in the protective area, the stormwater management plan shall contain a written, site-specific explanation. 
2.  Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within a protective area, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70 percent or greater shall be established and maintained where no impervious surface is present. The adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish habitat, and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Non-vegetative materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent erosion such as on steep slopes or where high velocity flows occur. 
Note to permittees: It is recommended that seeding of non-invasive vegetative cover be used in the protective areas. Some invasive plants that should not be used are listed in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 40. Flood and drought-tolerant vegetation that can provide long-term bank stability because of an extensive root system is preferable. Vegetative cover may be measured using the line transect method described in the University of Wisconsin extension publication number A3533, titled "Estimating Residue Using the Line Transect Method." 
3.  BMPs such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention ponds, that are designed to control pollutants from nonpoint sources, may be located in the protective area. 
Note to permittees: Other laws, such as Wis. Stats. ch. 30 and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 103, 115, 116 and 117, and their associated review and approval processes may apply in the protective area. 
d.  Exemptions. This section does not apply to any of the following: 
1.  Except as provided under subsection (c) of this section, redevelopment post-construction sites. 
2.  In-fill development areas less than five acres. 
3.  Structures that cross or access surface water such as boat landings, bridges, and culverts. 
4.  Structures constructed in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 59.692(1v). 
5.  Areas of post-construction sites from which the runoff does not enter the surface water, including wetlands, without first being treated by a BMP to meet the local ordinance requirements for total suspended solids and peak flow reduction, except to the extent that vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability. 
Note to permittees: A vegetated protective area to filter runoff pollutants from post-construction sites described in subsection (d)(5)d.5 of this section is not necessary since the runoff at that location is treated prior to entering the surface water. Other practices necessary to meet the requirements of this section, such as a swale or pond, will need to be designed and implemented to reduce runoff pollutants prior to runoff entering a surface water of the state. 
(6)  Fueling and maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas shall have BMPs designed, installed, and maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, so that the runoff that enters waters of the state contains no visible petroleum sheen, or to the maximum extent practicable. 
Note to permittees: A combination of the following BMPs may be used: oil and grease separators, canopies, petroleum spill cleanup materials, or any other structural or non-structural method of preventing or treating petroleum in runoff. 
(7)  Swale treatment for transportation facilities. 
a.  Requirement. Except as provided in subsection (d)(7)b of this section, transportation facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance and pollutant removal are exempt from the requirements of local ordinance requirements for peak flow control, total suspended solids control, and infiltration, if the swales are designed to do all of the following or to the maximum extent practicable: 
1.  Swales shall be vegetated. However, where appropriate, non-vegetative measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or check dams. 
Note to permittees: It is preferred that tall and dense vegetation be maintained within the swale due to its greater effectiveness at enhancing runoff pollutant removal. 
2.  Swales shall comply with sections V.F. (velocity and depth) and V.G. (swale geometry criteria) with a swale treatment length as long as that specified in section V.C. (pre-treatment) of the state department of natural resources technical standard 1005 "Vegetated Infiltration Swales," dated May 2007, or a superseding document. Transportation facility swale treatment does not have to comply with other sections of technical standard 1005. 
b.  Other requirements. 
1.  Notwithstanding subsection (d)(7)a of this section, the village engineer may, consistent with water quality standards, require that other requirements, in addition to swale treatment, be met on a transportation facility with an average daily traffic rate greater than 2,500 and where the initial surface water of the state that the runoff directly enters is one of the following: 
(i)  An outstanding resource water. 
(ii)  An exceptional resource water. 
(iii)  Waters listed in section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water Act that are identified as impaired in whole or in part, due to nonpoint source impacts. 
(iv)  Water where targeted performance standards are developed pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § NR 151.004. 
2.  The transportation facility authority shall contact the village engineer to determine if additional BMPs beyond a water quality swale are needed under this subsection. 
(e)  General considerations for stormwater management measures. The following considerations shall be observed in on-site and off-site runoff management: 
(1)  Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream property or public safety. 
(f)  BMP location. 
(1)  To comply with the performance standards required under this section, BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional stormwater device, practice or system, but shall be installed in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 151.003. 
(2)  The village engineer may approve off-site management measures provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The village engineer determines that the post-construction runoff is covered by a stormwater management system plan that is approved by the village and that contains management requirements consistent with the purpose and intent of this article. 
b.  The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions: 
1.  The facility is in place. 
2.  The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the performance standards of this article. 
3.  The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and maintenance. 
(3)  Where a regional treatment option exists such that the village engineer exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum on-site stormwater management requirements, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with the village engineer. In determining the fee for post-construction runoff, the village engineer shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land, engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the regional treatment option. 
(g)  Additional requirements. The village engineer may establish stormwater management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this article if the village engineer determines that the requirements are needed to control stormwater quantity or control flooding, comply with federally approved total maximum daily load requirements, or control pollutants associated with existing development or redevelopment. 
Sec. 35-63. - Permitting requirements, procedures and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No responsible party may undertake a land disturbing construction activity without receiving a post-construction runoff permit from the village prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Permit application and fees. Unless specifically excluded by this article, any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the village engineer a permit application on a form provided by the village engineer for that purpose. 
(1)  Unless otherwise excluded by this article, a permit application must be accompanied by a stormwater management plan, a maintenance agreement and a non-refundable permit administration fee. 
(2)  The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of sections 35-62 and 35-64, the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 35-65, the financial guarantee shall meet the requirements of section 35-66, and fees shall be those established by the village board as set forth in section 35-67. 
(c)  Permit application review and approval. The village engineer shall review any permit application that is submitted with a stormwater management plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used: 
(1)  Applications, control plans, and control plan statements shall be submitted to the village at least 21 days in advance of the plan commission meeting at which action is expected. 
(2)  Within three days of receipt of the application, a copy thereof together with a copy of the stormwater management plan shall be delivered to the village engineer for initial review. Within three days of the village's receipt of the application, a copy thereof together with a copy of the stormwater management plan shall be delivered to the village building inspector for initial review. If the village engineer or village building inspector finds the application or stormwater management plan or statement to be lacking necessary information or not in compliance with this Code, the applicant shall be notified of the inadequacy as soon as practical after review. 
(3)  All initial reviews shall be filed with the village seven days in advance of the plan commission meeting, along with the application and control plans or control plan statements. 
(4)  Within 45 days of the filing deadline for the application, control plan, or control plan statement and fee for the plan commission meeting, including all items as required by subsection (b) of this section, the village engineer shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this article. 
(5)  If the stormwater permit application, stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement are approved, or if an agreed upon payment of fees in lieu of stormwater management practices is made, the village engineer shall issue the permit. 
(6)  If the stormwater permit application, stormwater management plan or maintenance agreement is disapproved, the village engineer shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval. 
(7)  The village engineer may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the village engineer shall have 45 days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved. 
(8)  Failure by the village engineer to inform the permit applicant of a decision within 45 days of a required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued. 
(d)  Permit requirements. All permits issued under this article shall be subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this article shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The village engineer may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification of the responsible party. An action by the village engineer to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in accordance with section 35-69. 
(1)  Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(2)  The responsible party shall design and install all structural and non-structural stormwater management measures in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and this article. 
(3)  The responsible party shall notify the village engineer at least 48 hours before commencing any work in conjunction with the stormwater management plan, and within 14 days upon completion of the stormwater management practices. If required as a special condition under subsection (e) of this section, the responsible party shall make additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the village engineer so that practice installations can be inspected during construction. 
(4)  Practice installations required as part of this article shall be certified "as built" or "record" drawings by a licensed professional engineer. Completed stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection by the village engineer or its designee to determine if they are in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and ordinance. The village engineer or its designee shall notify the responsible party in writing of any changes required in such practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of this article. 
(5)  The responsible party shall notify the village engineer of any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved stormwater management plan. The village engineer may require that the proposed modifications be submitted to it for approval prior to incorporation into the stormwater management plan and execution by the responsible party. 
(6)  The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater management practices in accordance with the stormwater management plan until the practices either become the responsibility of the village board, or are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified in the approved maintenance agreement. 
(7)  The responsible party authorizes the village engineer to perform any work or operations necessary to bring stormwater management measures into conformance with the approved stormwater management plan, and consents to a special assessment or charge against the property as authorized under Wis. Stats. subchapter VII of chapter 66, or to charging such costs against the financial guarantee posted under section 35-66. 
(8)  If so directed by the village engineer, the responsible party shall repair at the responsible party's own expense all damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainageways caused by runoff, where such damage is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(9)  The responsible party shall permit property access to the village engineer or its designee for the purpose of inspecting the property for compliance with the approved stormwater management plan and this article. 
(10)  Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from a site, the village engineer may require the responsible party to make appropriate legal arrangements with affected property owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or public safety. 
(11)  The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and penalties detailed in section 35-68, if the responsible party fails to comply with the terms of this article. 
(e)  Permit conditions. Permits issued under this subsection may include conditions established by village engineer in addition to the requirements needed to meet the performance standards in section 35-62 or a financial guarantee as provided for in section 35-66. 
(f)  Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the village engineer notifies the responsible party that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under subsection (d)(4) of this section. 
Sec. 35-64. - Stormwater management plan. 
(a)  Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan required under section 35-62(b) shall contain at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice design and certification; person responsible for installation of stormwater management practices; and person responsible for maintenance of stormwater management practices prior to the transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party. 
(2)  A proper legal description of the property proposed to be developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat. 
(3)  Pre-development site conditions, including: 
a.  One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. The site maps shall show the following: site location and legal property description; predominant soil types and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition; topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed two feet; topography and drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be affected by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used in hydrology determinations to show compliance with performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; limits of the 100-year floodplain; location of wells and wellhead protection areas covering the project area and delineated pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.16. 
b.  Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with performance standards. All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map. 
(4)  Post-development site conditions, including: 
a.  Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography and land cover features to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and wetlands. 
b.  Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management measures in the development area imposed by wellhead protection plans and ordinances. 
c.  One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet showing the following: post-construction pervious areas including vegetative cover type and condition; impervious surfaces including all buildings, structures, and pavement; post-construction topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed two feet; post-construction drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; locations and dimensions of drainage easements; locations of maintenance easements specified in the maintenance agreement; flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; location and type of all stormwater management conveyance and treatment practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area; location and type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the drainage and treatment practices to the nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural drainageway; watershed boundaries used in hydrology and pollutant loading calculations and any changes to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site. 
d.  Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with performance standards. The computations shall be made for each discharge point in the development, and the geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map. 
e.  Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for the placement and design of stormwater management measures. Detailed drawings including cross-sections and profiles of all permanent stormwater conveyance and treatment practices. 
(5)  A description and installation schedule for the stormwater management practices needed to meet the performance standards in section 35-62. 
(6)  A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater management practice including the required maintenance activities and maintenance activity schedule. 
(7)  Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of each stormwater management practice. 
(8)  Other information requested in writing by the village engineer to determine compliance of the proposed stormwater management measures with the provisions of this article. 
(9)  All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer to be prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and requirements of this article. 
(b)  Alternate requirements. The village engineer may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site stormwater management performance standards under section 35-62(e). 
Sec. 35-65. - Maintenance agreement. 
(a)  Maintenance agreement required. The maintenance agreement required under section 35-63(b) for stormwater management practices shall be an agreement between the village engineer and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of stormwater practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the county register of deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the stormwater management practices. 
(b)  Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following information and provisions and be consistent with the maintenance plan required by: 
(1)  Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the drainage area served by the facilities. 
(2)  A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater management plan required under section 35-63(b). 
(3)  Identification of the responsible party, organization or city, county, town or village responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater management practices identified in the stormwater management plan required under section 35-63(b). 
(4)  Requirement that the responsible party, organization, or city, county, town or village shall maintain stormwater management practices in accordance with the schedule included in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(5)  Authorization for the village engineer to access the property to conduct inspections of stormwater management practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement. 
(6)  A requirement on the village engineer to maintain public records of the results of the site inspections, to inform the responsible party responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the stormwater management practice into proper working condition. 
(7)  Agreement that the party designated under subsection (b)(3) of this section, as responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater management practices, shall be notified by the village engineer of maintenance problems which require correction. The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable time frame as set by the village engineer. 
(8)  Authorization of the village engineer to perform the corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the responsible party designated under subsection (b)(3) of this section does not make the required corrections in the specified time period. The village engineer shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the money as a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. subch. VII of ch. 66. 
Sec. 35-66. - Financial guarantee. 
(a)  Establishment of the guarantee. The village engineer may require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be acceptable to the village engineer. The financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the village engineer to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of the stormwater management practices during the period which the designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give the village engineer the authorization to use the funds to complete the stormwater management practices if the responsible party defaults or does not properly implement the approved stormwater management plan, upon written notice to the responsible party by the village engineer that the requirements of this article have not been met. 
(b)  Conditions for release. Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are as follows: 
(1)  The village engineer shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section, less any costs incurred by the village engineer to complete installation of practices, upon submission of "as built plans" or "record" drawings by a licensed professional engineer. The village engineer may make provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various development stages. 
(2)  The village engineer shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section to ensure maintenance of stormwater practices, less any costs incurred by the village engineer, at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance agreement. 
Sec. 35-67. - Fee schedule. 
    The fees referred to in other sections of this article shall be established by the village engineer and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the village engineer shall be available for review in the office of the village clerk-treasurer. 
Sec. 35-68. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff initiated after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived by any person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the article provisions shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The village engineer shall notify the responsible party by certified mail of any non-complying land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and additional enforcement action which may be taken. 
(c)  Upon receipt of written notification from the village engineer under subsection (b) of this section, the responsible party shall correct work that does not comply with the stormwater management plan or other provisions of this article. The responsible party shall make corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the village engineer in the notice. 
(d)  If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this article are likely to result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state, the village engineer may enter the land and take emergency actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the village engineer plus interest and legal costs shall be billed to the responsible party. 
(e)  The village engineer is authorized to post a stop work order on all land disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this article, or to request the municipal attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction. 
(f)  The village engineer may revoke a permit issued under this article for non-compliance with article provisions. 
(g)  Any permit revocation, stop work order, or cease and desist order shall remain in effect unless retracted by the village engineer or by a court with jurisdiction. 
(h)  The village engineer is authorized to refer any violation of this article, or a stop work order or cease and desist order issued pursuant to this article, to the municipal attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction. 
(i)  Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings. 
(j)  When the village engineer determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article has failed to follow practices set forth in the stormwater management plan, or has failed to comply with schedules set forth in said stormwater management plan, the village engineer or a party designated by the village engineer may enter upon the land and perform the work or other operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into conformance with requirements of the approved stormwater management plan. The village engineer shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial security posted pursuant to section 35-66. Where such a security has not been established, or where such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is completed. 
Sec. 35-69. - Appeals. 
(a)  Board of appeals. The board of appeals, created pursuant to section 2-182, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.354(4)(b), shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the village engineer in administering this article. The board shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the board may authorize variances from the provisions of this article that are not contrary to the public interest, and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the article will result in unnecessary hardship. 
(b)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the village affected by any decision of the village engineer. 
Secs. 35-70-35-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE PROHIBITION AND DISCONNECTION 

Sec. 35-97. - Authority. 
(a)  This article is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 61.354. This article supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stats. § 61.35 that relate to illicit discharge prohibition and disconnection. Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stats. § 61.354, Wis. Stats. § 61.35 applies to this article and to any amendments to this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body. 
(c)  The village board hereby designates the village engineer to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The requirements of this article do not pre-empt more stringent illicit discharge prohibition and disconnection requirements that may be imposed by any other lawful regulatory power. 
Sec. 35-98. - Findings of fact. 
    The village board acknowledges that illicit discharges have potential to deteriorate water quality of waters of the state in the village. 
Sec. 35-99. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. 
Sec. 35-100. - Applicability of article. 
    This section shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the village engineer. 
Sec. 35-101. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The village engineer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this section. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon may be delegated to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the village. 
Sec. 35-102. - Illicit discharge. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited, to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
(b)  Exemptions. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this section: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from potable water sources, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated, typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the village as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the village prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
Sec. 35-103. - Illicit connection prohibitions. 
    The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
Sec. 35-104. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The village may, without prior notice, immediately suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the village may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this section may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The village will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator has a maximum of 72 hours (or less if the village engineer believes necessary) from written notification to correct the illicit discharge before access is terminated. 
Sec. 35-105. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  The village (or appointed representative) shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this section as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this section. 
(b)  Facility operators shall allow the village (or appointed representative) ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(c)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the village (or appointed representative) access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this section. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the village (or appointed representative) reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this section. 
(d)  If the village (or appointed representative) has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this section or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the village may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 35-106. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. 
Sec. 35-107. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
Sec. 35-108. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S., said person, shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the village in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the village within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. If the spill threatens waters of the state, the spill hotline should be notified at 1-800-943-0003. 
Sec. 35-109. - Notice of illicit discharge/connection violation. 
(a)  Whenever the village finds that a person (or entity) has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the village may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall immediately cease and desist; 
(4)  The immediate abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed within 72 hours of notification. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in section 1-15, and the village may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this section, including sampling and monitoring expenses. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 35-110. - Appeals. 
(a)  Board of appeals. The board of appeals, created pursuant to section 2-182, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.354(4)(b) shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the village engineer in administering this article. The board shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the board may authorize variances from the provisions of this article that are not contrary to the public interest, and where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the article will result in unnecessary hardship. 
(b)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the village affected by any decision of the village engineer. 
Chapter 36 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to establish street grades, Wis. Stats. § 62.16; widening to streets, Wis. Stats. § 66.1031; authority for municipalities to open or change streets, Wis. Stats. § 62.22; privileges in streets, Wis. Stats. § 66.0425; street barriers, Wis. Stats. § 66.0429. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Sidewalk construction and repair. 
(a)  Standards and specifications; state law adopted. Wis. Stats. § 66.0907 relating to the construction and repair of sidewalks is adopted by reference and made a part of this section. Specifications for sidewalks to be constructed are on file with the village engineer. Any variation from the standard specifications shall be approved by the village engineer. 
(b)  Village sidewalk system. The village shall have the discretion on a case-by-case basis to determine costs for sidewalks constructed, repaired, or replaced on private property required for inclusion as part of the village public sidewalk system. The village engineer shall determine what constitutes the village sidewalk system, as adopted by resolution. 
(c)  Costs. 
(1)  Repair and replacement. The village will provide 50 percent of the repair or replacement costs of sidewalks in the village that have lasted their expected service life. The balance of the costs shall be borne by the property owner. In the event of sidewalks damaged prematurely due to property owner or contractor error, the property owner will be responsible for 100 percent of the replacement costs. The need for replacements will be at the discretion of the village engineer. 
(2)  New sidewalks. The property owner shall provide 100 percent of the costs of new sidewalk construction in the village. 
(3)  Authority of property owner to alter; approval required. Property owners may, at their expense, construct, repair, or replace sidewalks, provided the village engineer approves the alignment, grade, thickness, concrete mix, base and timing. 
(Prior Code, § 5.02) 
State Law reference- Sidewalks, Wis. Stats. § 66.0907. 
Sec. 36-2. - Snow and ice. 
(a)  Sidewalk clearing required. The owner and occupant of each lot or part of lot shall be responsible for removing all snow and ice which may have fallen or accumulated upon the full width of the sidewalk in front of his premises not later than 24 hours after the snowfall has ceased to fall or accumulate. In the event ice has so formed upon any sidewalk that it cannot be removed, the owner and occupant shall be responsible for keeping the same sprinkled with sand, salt or other suitable substance in such manner as to permit safe travel by pedestrians. 
(b)  Deposit in certain areas prohibited. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice taken and removed from his premises or elsewhere upon any sidewalk, alley, parkway, public place or street in the village, except in those circumstances where permission has been granted by the village. Snow shall not be piled at or near street intersections so as to obstruct the view of pedestrians or operators of motor vehicles. 
(c)  Unlawful deposit constitutes nuisance. The deposit of any snow or ice upon any sidewalk, alley or street of the village contrary to the provisions of this section shall be a nuisance, and, in addition to the penalty provided for violation of this section, the village may summarily remove any snow or ice so deposited and cause the cost of the removal to be charged as a lien against the property from which the snow or ice has been removed. 
(Prior Code, § 5.04; Ord. No. 99-18) 
Sec. 36-3. - Obstructions and encroachments prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  General regulation. No person shall encroach or in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated to public use, or any part thereof, or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which he is the owner or occupant, except as specifically provided in this section. 
(b)  Littering during construction-related operations. Any person who shall cause the littering of any public street, alley, thoroughfare, right-of-way or public land during the course of performing any construction, demolition, remodeling or related work shall clean and remove such litter at the end of the workday when such litter was deposited or upon completion of the construction operation, whichever occurs first, in a manner satisfactory to the director of facilities or his designee. For purposes of this subsection, the term "litter" means earth, rock, construction material or other organic or inorganic material. If the person causing such littering does not meet the cleanup and removal requirement of this section, the director of facilities or his designee may cause the cleanup and removal of such litter to be performed with the cost billed to the property owner. 
(c)  Exceptions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Signs or clocks attached to buildings which project more than six feet from the face of such building and which do not extend below any point 12 feet above the sidewalk, street or alley. 
(2)  Awnings that do not extend below any point seven feet above the sidewalk, street or alley. 
(3)  Public utility encroachments authorized by state law or the village. 
(4)  Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded which do not extend more than three feet on the sidewalk, provided such goods, wares, etc., do not remain thereon for a period of more than three hours. 
(5)  Building materials placed upon the street, alley or sidewalk upon conditions prescribed by the public works director or his designee, who may require these materials to be protected by barricades or appropriate lights. 
(6)  Mailboxes mounted upon a single vertical pole or support without any other structure or material attached to or abutting the vertical support, except horizontal members to accommodate more than one required mailbox, above the existing grade of the tree border or terrace and not encroaching closer than eight inches to the travelable portion of the street right-of-way. 
(7)  Steps, stairs, or a landing flush with the surface of the ground where the grade or topography of the lot requires the same for access purposes. 
(d)  Storage uses by permission. The use of street rights-of-way, including sidewalks or other public properties, for storage of building materials, equipment, excavated material, landscape material, placement of PODS or other storage containers or dumpsters, may be granted by the public works director or his designee subject to the following: 
(1)  Permission shall be for no longer than five days but may, upon proof of necessity, be extended by the public works director or his designee. 
(2)  If, in the opinion of the public works director or his designee, the materials, equipment, or dumpsters can be placed on the applicant's property without unduly damaging the property, then permission to use the street rights-of-way shall be denied. 
(3)  The material, equipment or containers must not unduly interfere with traffic. No portion of a street right-of-way, including sidewalks or other public properties, other than that directly abutting on the premises on which work is being done shall be used except with the consent of the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the portion of the street right-of-way where the material, equipment, or containers will be stored. 
(4)  Every person to whom permission for use is granted under this subsection (d) shall provide and maintain a sufficient barricade and, during the night time, sufficient warning lights, around or on such materials, equipment, or containers so as to effectively protect persons or property. 
(5)  All materials, equipment, or dumpsters shall be located so as to allow for an adequate vision corner from the materials, equipment, or dumpsters to the nearest driveway or street intersection. It is preferred that materials, equipment, and dumpsters be located on the applicant's property. 
(6)  The requesting person shall be responsible for any damage to the street right-of-way or public property used for the storage of materials, equipment, or dumpsters. 
(7)  The public works director or his designee may order removal of the obstruction if a violation of this subsection (d) has occurred. The department of public works is authorized to remove the obstruction if it remains more than 48 hours after an order to remove or immediately if the obstruction poses a hazard to vehicles or pedestrians. The cost of removal will be billed to the property owner. 
(Prior Code, § 5.06) 
Secs. 36-4-36-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 36-25. - Street improvements to be recorded on official map. 
    No public sewer or other municipal street utility or improvement shall be constructed in any street, highway, or parkway within the jurisdictional area of this article until such street, highway, or parkway is duly placed on the official village map designated in section 2-2. 
(Prior Code, § 5.07G; Ord. No. 08-07) 
Sec. 36-26. - Street grades. 
(a)  Establishment . The grade of all streets and alleys shall be established by the village and shall be recorded in the office of the village clerk. No street or alley shall be constructed until the grade thereof is established. 
(b)  Altering prohibited. No person shall alter the grade of any street or alley or public ground or any part thereof unless authorized and instructed to do so by the village. 
(Prior Code, § 5.01) 
Sec. 36-27. - Minimum required right-of-way required. 
    The following right-of way is required for the village streets designated: 
Street Type Minimum Width Designated Streets and Areas Arterial, general 120 feet Main Street from the west corporate limits to Industrial Drive, and from a point approximately 550 feet west of the centerline of Ridgeway Drive to the east corporate limit County Trunk P Sherman Road Arterial, urban 66 feet Main Street from Industrial Drive to a point approximately 550 feet west of the centerline of Ridgeway Drive Collector 80 feet Eagle Drive Hickory Lane South Jackson Drive North Jackson Drive Ridgeway Drive Industrial Drive North Center Street South Center Street East and West Highland Road Local 66 feet All streets not specified above  
(Prior Code, § 5.07K; Ord. No. 08-07) 
Secs. 36-28-36-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-58. - Street closure permits for special events. 
(a)  Required; application; fee. Closing of public streets for the use of private citizens or organizations is prohibited except as otherwise provided in this section. Public streets may be closed for the use of private citizens and nonprofit organizations upon application for and issuance of a street closing permit from the village clerk. Applications must be submitted at least 14 days prior to the scheduled event. The permit fee will be as provided in the village fee schedule. 
(b)  Barricades. The street department shall deliver and pick up barricades to close off the street. It shall be the responsibility of the person requesting the temporary closure of the street to put in place and maintain the barricades during the hours of the street closing. 
(c)  Duties of permit holder. The permit holder must ensure compliance with: 
(1)  Provisions of the Code and state law prohibiting offenses against public peace and order. 
(2)  Provisions of the Code and state law prohibiting alcohol in public areas, including sidewalks, streets, and alleys. 
(3)  All rules established by the village board and incorporated into the permit. 
(d)  Permit revocation; street reopening. The public works director, fire chief, or police chief is authorized to immediately revoke a permit issued under this section and to reopen any street when, in his opinion, it is necessary for the protection of the public. 
Sec. 36-59. - Block party permits. 
(a)  Street closures prohibited for non-village-sponsored events. Except for village-sponsored events or as provided under subsection (b) of this section, the closing of public streets for the use of private citizens or organizations is prohibited. 
(b)  Permit required; application; fee. Public streets may be closed for the use of private citzens and non-profit organizations provided said individual or organization applies for and obtains a street closing permit from the village clerk. Applications must be submitted at least 14 days prior to the scheduled event. The permit fee will be established annually by the village board. 
(c)  Barricades. The street department shall deliver and pick up barricades to close off the street. It shall be the responsibility of the person requesting the temporary closure of the street to put in place and maintain said barricades during the hours of the street closing. 
(d)  Duties of applicant. Applicants must comply with the following: 
(1)  Provisions of the Code and state law prohibiting offenses against public peace and order. 
(2)  Provisions of the Code and state law prohibiting alcohol in public areas, including sidewalks, streets, and alleys. 
(3)  All rules established by the village board and incorporated into the permit. 
(e)  Violation, forfeiture. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as established annually by the village board. 
(f)  Permit revocation; street reopening. The director of public works, fire chief, or police chief is authorized to immediately revoke a permit issued under this chapter and reopen any street when, in his opinion, it's necessary for the protection of the public. 
Secs. 36-60-36-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARADES 

Sec. 36-90. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the village. 
    Parade permit means a permit as required by this division. 
Sec. 36-91. - Permit required; exemptions. 
    No person shall engage in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit has been obtained from the police chief, except that funeral processions and events sponsored by the village shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this division. 
Sec. 36-92. - Application. 
(a)  A person seeking a parade permit shall file application with the police chief not less than 14 or more than 60 days before the date of the proposed parade; provided, however, that the police chief for good cause shown may consider an application filed at least ten days before the date of the proposed parade. 
(b)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the police chief a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on their behalf. 
(c)  The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
(5)  The route to be traveled, including the starting point and the termination point. 
(6)  The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles that will constitute such parade, the type of animals and the description of the vehicles. 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
(8)  The extent to which the parade will occupy the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
(9)  The location of streets of any assembly areas for such parade. 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas. 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
(12)  Any additional information that the police chief shall find reasonably necessary in determining whether a permit should be issued. 
Sec. 36-93. - Review by police chief; denial or issuance. 
(a)  Time for review. The police chief shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three days after the filing thereof. 
(b)  Notice of denial. If the police chief disapproves the application, the police chief shall mail to the applicant notice of and the reasons for denial within five days after the date upon which the application was filed. 
(c)  Authority to provide alternatives. The police chief, in denying an application for a private permit, is authorized to approve the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternative permit shall, within three days after notice of the action of the police chief, file a written acceptance with the police chief. 
(d)  Factors to be considered in granting a permit application. The police chief shall issue a permit under this division when, from consideration of the application and all other available information, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of such a great number of police officers of the village to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection of the village. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of such a great number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the village other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly area. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delay en route. 
(8)  The parade is not being held for the sole purpose of advertising any product. 
(9)  Warning lights, sirens and other warning devices normally associated with emergency vehicles shall not be used. 
(e)  Distribution of permit copies. Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the police chief shall send a copy thereof to the village board, the village administrator, the fire chief, the public works director and the postmaster. 
(f)  Permit contents. Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  The starting time. 
(2)  Minimum and maximum speeds. 
(3)  Maximum interval of space between the units of the parade. 
(4)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(5)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(6)  Such other information as the police chief shall find necessary for the enforcement of this division. 
Sec. 36-94. - Revocation. 
    The police chief shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this division after applying the standards for issuance as set forth in this division. 
Sec. 36-95. - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by a denial of issuance or revocation of a permit shall have the right to appeal to the village board at its next scheduled meeting following such denial or revocation. Written notice of such appeal shall be given to the village clerk-treasurer no later than the last Wednesday before the next scheduled village board meeting. 
Sec. 36-96. - Conduct of parade. 
(a)  Compliance with applicable regulations. A permittee, and any person working or volunteering under the permittee's direction, shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Driving between parade elements prohibited. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Obstructing prohibited. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(d)  Parking along parade route. The police chief shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The police chief shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicles in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street that is not posted pursuant to this subsection. 
Chapter 37 - RESERVED 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Statutory authority. 
    These regulations are adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.45. 
(Prior Code, § 15.01A) 
Sec. 38-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the division of land within the corporate limits and extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the village in order to promote the public health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the community. 
(Prior Code, § 15.01B) 
Sec. 38-3. - Intent. 
    It is the general intent of this chapter to: 
(1)  Regulate division of land so as to obtain the wise use, conservation, protection and proper development of the village soil, water, wetland, and wildlife resources and attain a proper adjustment of land use and development to the supporting and sustaining and natural base; 
(2)  Lessen congestion in the streets and highways; 
(3)  Further the orderly layout and appropriate use of land; 
(4)  Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
(5)  Provide adequate light and air; avoid undue concentration of population; facilitate adequate provisions for housing, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public requirements; 
(6)  Secure safety from flooding, water pollution, disease and other hazards, prevent flood damage to persons and properties and minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects; 
(7)  Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of surface and subsurface water; 
(8)  Preserve natural vegetation and cover and promote the natural beauty of the village; 
(9)  Restrict building sites of flood lands, shorelands, areas covered by poor soils or in other areas poorly suited for development; 
(10)  Facilitate the further division of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land; 
(11)  Ensure adequate legal description and proper survey monumentation of subdivided land; 
(12)  Provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter; 
(13)  Provide penalties for its violation and implement those municipal, county, watershed or regional comprehensive plans or their components adopted by the village; and 
(14)  Facilitate enforcement of village development standards as set forth in the adopted regional and local comprehensive plans, adopted components, zoning ordinance, building codes, and official map of the village. 
(Prior Code, § 15.01C) 
Sec. 38-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural land use means the use of land for planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and pasturing or yarding of livestock. 
    Alley means a special public way affording only secondary access to abutting properties. 
    Arterial street means a street used for through traffic movement between areas and across the village. Direct access to abutting property is limited by control of entrances and exits. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one or more streets and public parks, cemeteries, shorelines of waterways or corporate boundary lines. 
    Building line means a line parallel to a lot line and at a distance from the lot line to comply with the village zoning code's setback requirements. 
    Certified survey map means a process of land division by the owner or subdivider resulting in the creation of a maximum of four parcels in any subdivision. It shall comply with all provisions of Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
    Collector street means a street used or intended to be used to carry traffic from local streets to the major system of arterial streets. Collector streets may include principal entrance streets to residential developments. 
    Commercial land use means the use of land for the retail or wholesale sale of goods and services. 
    Community means a village or group of adjacent villages or municipalities having common social, economic, or physical interests. 
    Comprehensive plan means the extensively developed plan (also called the master plan), adopted by the village pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23, including proposals for future land use, transportation, redevelopment, and public facilities. Devices for the implementation of these plans, such as zoning, official map, land division (subdivision regulations), and capital improvement programs shall be considered a part of the comprehensive plan. 
    Control measure means a practice or combination of practices to control erosion and attendant pollution. 
    Control plan means a written description of the number, locations, sizes and other pertinent information of control measures designed to meet the requirements of this chapter submitted by the applicant for review and approval by the village. 
    County planning agency means any agency created by a county board and authorized by statute to plan land use, such as a rural planning committee, a park commission, a zoning committee, or a plan commission. 
    Cul-de-sac street means a local street closed at one end, with a turnaround provided for vehicles. 
    Development means the entire contiguous area owned or controlled by the subdivider contemplated for development, immediate or future. 
    Easement means a legal and recorded use of the land granted to another party who is not the owner of the land. Examples may be: utility easement, access easement, and drainage easement. 
    Erosion means the detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
    Extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction means the unincorporated area within 11/2 miles of the corporate boundary of the village. 
    Final plat means a plat showing all of the salient features of a subdivision, which shall be recorded after village approval. 
    Flood land means those lands, including the floodplains, floodways and channels, subject to inundation by the 100-year flood, or where such data is not available, the maximum flood record. 
    Frontage street means a street auxiliary to and located adjacent to an arterial street for control of access and for service to the abutting development. 
    High-water elevation means the average high-water level of a pond, lake, stream, flowage, or wetland referred to an established datum plane, or where such elevation is not available, the elevation of a line up to which presence of the water is so frequent as to leave a distinct mark by erosion, change in, or destruction of vegetation, or other easily recognized topographic, geologic or vegetative characteristics. 
    Land developing activity means the construction of buildings, roads, parking lots, paved storage areas and similar facilities. 
    Land disturbing construction activity means any manmade change of the land surface, including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling and grading; but not including agricultural land uses, growing and tending of gardens, harvesting of trees, and landscaping modifications. 
    Landowner means any person operating, leasing, renting, or having made other arrangements with the landowner by which the landowner authorizes use of his land. 
    Local street means a street used or intended to be used for local traffic, with direct access to abutting property. 
    Lot means the portion of the subdivision of land or other land division intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of ownership or of building development. 
    Mean sea level datum means a level established by the federal coast and geologic survey. 
    Minor subdivision means the division of land by the owner or subdivider by certified survey map, resulting in the creation of at least two, but not more than four parcels or building sites, any one of which is less than 11/2 acres in size. 
    National map accuracy standards means standards governing the horizontal and vertical accuracy of topographic maps and specifying the means of testing and determining such accuracy, endorsed by all agencies having surveying and mapping functions and responsibilities as reproduced in appendix D of the SEWRPC technical report no. 7. 
    Out lot means a parcel of land other than a lot or block, so designed on the plat, but not of standard lot size, which can either be re-divided into lots or combined with one or more other adjacent out lots or lots in adjacent subdivisions in the future for the purpose of creating buildable lots. 
    Plat means a map of a subdivision of land. 
    Preliminary plat means a map showing all of the salient features of a proposed subdivision of land submitted to the village for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
    Public improvement means any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, installation of conduit open channel, water main, roadway, park, parkway, public access, sidewalk, pedestrian way, planting strip, or other facility for which the village may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance or operation. The term "public improvement" shall also include all other public improvements reasonably to be required by the village and shall not be limited because of express enumeration and whether or not such improvements are shown on the official village map, but shall not include fiber-optic cable conduit unless agreed to through the developers agreement. See also section 38-168. 
    Public way means any public road, street, highway, walkway, drainageway or part thereof. 
    Replat means the process of changing, or the plat which changes the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The division of a large block, lot or out lot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior boundaries of the block, lot or out lot is not a replat. 
    Right-of-way means land owned by a public entity for purposes of maintaining, controlling, and constructing public streets, roads, and accesses; utilities; and drainageways. 
    Run-off means the rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface. 
    Shorelands means those lands lying within the following distances: 1,000 feet from the high-water elevation of navigable lakes, ponds, and flowages, or 300 feet from the high-water mark of navigable streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever is greater. 
    Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land development activity is proposed in the permit application. 
    Subdivider means any person, firm, or corporation, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land resulting in a subdivision, certified survey map, minor subdivision, or replat. 
    Subdivision means the division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owners thereof, or their agents, where the act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of 11/2 acres each or less in area; or where the act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of 11/2 acres each or less in an area by successive division within a period of five years. 
    Surety bond means a bond guaranteeing performance of a contract or obligation through a forfeiture of the bond if the contract or obligation is unfulfilled by the subdivider. 
    Wetlands means those lands which are partially or wholly covered by marshlands, flora, and generally covered with shallow standing water or lands which are wet and spongy due to a high water table. 
(Prior Code, § 15.02C; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08; Ord. No. 07-12) 
Sec. 38-5. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easement, covenant, agreement, rule, regulation, or permit previously adopted or issued to laws. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Prior Code, § 15.01D) 
Sec. 38-6. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by state law. 
(Prior Code, § 15.01E) 
Sec. 38-7. - Non-liability. 
    The village does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas designated as flood lands will be subject to periodic inundation and hereby asserts that there will be no liability on the part of the village board, its agencies or employees, for any flood damages, sanitation problems, or structural damage that may occur as a result of or reliance upon, or conformance with, this chapter. Furthermore, the village asserts that there is no liability on the part of the village board, its agencies or employees for any damages, losses or problems whatsoever that may occur as a result of or reliance upon, or compliance with this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 15.01F) 
Sec. 38-8. - Jurisdiction. 
    Jurisdiction of these regulations shall include all lands within the village as well as the unincorporated area within 11/2 miles of the corporate limits. The provisions of this chapter as it applies to divisions of tracts of land into less than five parcels shall not apply to: 
(1)  Transfer of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order. 
(2)  Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages or easements. 
(3)  Sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum size required by these regulations, the zoning code or other applicable laws or ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 15.02A; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08; Ord. No. 07-12) 
Sec. 38-9. - Compliance. 
(a)  No person shall divide, convey, record or monument any land located within the jurisdictional limits of these regulations which results in a subdivision, minor subdivision, certified survey map, or replat as defined herein; no such subdivision, minor subdivision, certified survey map, or replat shall be laid out or improvements made to land without compliance with all requirements of this chapter and the following: 
(1)  Wis. Stats. ch. 236; 
(2)  Rules of the state department of transportation relating to safety of access and the preservation of the public interest and investment in the highway system if the land owned or controlled by the subdivider abuts on a state trunk highway or connecting street. 
(3)  Duly approved comprehensive plan, or comprehensive plan component including the zoning code, official map and all other applicable ordinances of the village. 
(4)  Applicable local and county ordinances. 
(5)  Rules of the department of natural resources division of environmental protection setting water quality standards preventing and abating pollution and regulating development within flood land and shoreland areas. 
(b)  No person shall be issued a building permit by the village authorizing the building on, or improvements of, any subdivision, minor subdivision, certified survey map, or replat within the jurisdiction of this chapter not of record as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived until the provisions and requirements of this chapter have been fully met. The village may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin violations of this chapter or applicable state law. 
(Prior Code, § 15.02B, F; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08; Ord. No. 07-12) 
Sec. 38-10. - Dedication and reservation of lands. 
    To ensure that adequate open spaces and sites for public uses may be properly allocated and preserved as the village develops; and in order that the cost of providing public parks, recreation, and open space sites and facilities necessary to serve the additional number of people brought into the community by the residential development of land may be most equitably apportioned on the basis of the additional need created by such developments, the following provisions are established: 
(1)  Whenever a tract of land to be subdivided embraces all or any part of an arterial street, drainageway or other public way which has been designated in the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan component including the park and recreation open space plan, or on the official map of the village, the public way shall be made a part of the plat or certified survey map and dedicated or reserved by the subdivider in the locations and dimensions indicated on the plan or map as set forth in article II, division 4 of this chapter. 
(2)  Where the proposed subdivision abuts an existing or proposed state, county, or town road, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate or reserve any additional lands abutting the road in accordance with the width as required by the county established street and highway width map or any other officially approved plan or ordinance in effect within the area. In addition, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate or reserve any lands he owns in an existing roadway abutting a proposed land division. 
(3)  The village shall at its sole discretion, and as a condition for the approval, of any certified survey map, subdivision plat, development plan of a planned unit development, or conditional use, require the dedication or reservation of land for public site purposes, such as school, playground, recreation or open space areas or the payment of a sum of money in lieu thereof. 
(4)  The location of such public site area on any map, plat, or plan and the feasibility of such dedication or reservation shall be determined by the village board. 
(5)  The area of land to be dedicated or reserved as public site shall be determined on the following basis: The market value shall be at least equal to the cumulative park dedication fee as set forth by resolution approved by the village board for each residential unit created. The market value of such land shall be determined by the village assessor on the basis of the fair market value of similar property in the area. 
(6)  Whenever an area included in a proposed map contains a school, park, playground, recreation or open space site shown on the comprehensive plan of the village or county, and any part of which is not being dedicated or reserved as provided herein, such area shall be reserved or dedicated for acquisition for such purpose for a three-year period. Any such land not so acquired within such period shall be released from this reservation by resolution of the village board. 
(7)  On sites reserved for eventual public acquisition, no building development is permitted during the period of reservation. The reservation or dedication period shall not be longer than three years unless arranged otherwise with the developer. Land so reserved shall be shown on the final plat or on the certified survey map. 
(8)  Where a subdivision abuts a public use area, such as a park, lake, stream, hunting grounds or any similar type of public recreational area, the subdivider, at the option of the village, shall provide a pedestrian easement of at least 20 feet wide connecting such public area with a public street at such a location as the village board shall approve. 
(9)  The land to be dedicated or reserved or acquired and the money to be paid in lieu thereof shall be held for such public use by the village or such agency as it shall create, and all monies received shall be held in a separate non-lapsing account for the implementation of the comprehensive plan and the parks and recreation open space plan for the village park system. 
(10)  The required payment of money for the park dedication fee in lieu of land dedication or reservation, as set forth by resolution, shall be made at the time the building permit fee is paid for the construction on each lot. 
(11)  The dedication or reservation of land for public purposes, such as rights-of-way, parks, school sites and easements, becomes effective at the time of approval and recording of final plat or map. The acceptance of the constructed roadway and utility systems for maintenance purposes shall be made by separate resolution adopted by the village board. 
(12)  Where the lot or parcel for which the payment has been once made is further divided, payment shall be required only for the additional residential units created. 
(13)  No payment shall be required for any lot or parcel in any plat or map record prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived unless the same is further divided into additional dwelling sites, in which event the fee shall be imposed for all additional dwelling sites created by such division. 
(Prior Code, § 15.02D; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08; Ord. No. 07-12) 
Sec. 38-11. - Land suitability. 
(a)  No land shall be subdivided for residential use which is held unsuitable for such use by the village for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community. 
(b)  The presence of soils classified as having severe or very severe limitations for highway upgrade or foundations for low buildings by the soil survey of the county report, prepared by the department of agriculture, soil conservation service, shall be considered by the village board in making its determination of land suitability. 
(c)  The village board, in applying for the provisions of this section, shall, in writing, recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for residential use and afford the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such suitability if he so desires. Thereafter, the village board may affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of suitability. 
(Prior Code, § 15.02E; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08; Ord. No. 07-12) 
Sec. 38-12. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of these regulations shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture as set forth by resolution and be subject to the cost of prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. Compliance therewith may also be enforced by injunctional order at the suit of the village or by the owner or owners of real estate within the district affected by the regulations of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person causing a final plat or certified survey map to be recorded without submitting such plat for approval as herein required, or who shall fail to present same for recording within the time prescribed after approval, shall be subject to a forfeiture as set forth by resolution, upon conviction, together with the cost of prosecution. 
(c)  Any subdivider or his agents who offers or contracts to convey or conveys any subdivision, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 236, or lot or parcel which lies in a subdivision, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 236, or lot or parcel which lies in a minor subdivision, or certified survey map, knowing that the final plat or map thereof has not been recorded, may, upon conviction, be subjected to forfeiture, as set forth by resolution, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof shall be confined to the county jail. The penalties of this subsection shall not apply where the preliminary or final plat of the subdivision has been filed for approval with the village board, and an offer to contract to convey is made which states on its face that it is contingent upon approval of the final plat and shall be void if such plat is not approved. 
(d)  Any subdivider or surveyor who fails to place monuments as prescribed by this chapter when subdividing land shall, upon conviction, be subjected to a forfeiture, as set forth by resolution, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(e)  Any person who knowingly removes or disturbs any monument or survey marker within the village without permission of any governing authority, or who fails to report such disturbance or removal, shall, upon conviction, be subjected to a forfeiture as set forth by resolution, together with all costs of prosecution. 
(f)  Any person who fails to replace properly any monument or survey marker by him removed or disturbed when ordered to do so by any officer of the village, shall be subjected to forfeiture upon conviction, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(g)  Any person who shall fraudulently or maliciously mislead the village or its officers in relation to any fact, information or other matters pertinent to the subdivision of land, as contained in this chapter, with a view to obtain any benefit, privilege or other consideration or who shall falsify any statement required to be made upon application for a plat approval or who shall misrepresent any material part of a subdivision plat filed or pending before the plan commission or the village board or any other section or department charged with the administrative functions of land subdividing shall, upon conviction, be subjected to a forfeiture as set forth by resolution, together with all costs of prosecution. 
(Prior Code, § 15.02G; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08; Ord. No. 07-12) 
Sec. 38-13. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or failure to approve a plat may appeal therefrom, as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.13 and 62.23, within 30 days notification of the rejection of the plat. Where failure to approve is based on an unsatisfied objection, the agency making the objection shall be made a party to the action. The court shall direct that the plat be approved if it finds the action of the approving agency is arbitrary, unreasonable, or discriminatory. 
(Prior Code, § 15.02H; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08; Ord. No. 07-12) 
Sec. 38-14. - Fees. 
(a)  Generally . The subdivider shall pay the village all fees required at the times specified. All fee and penalty amounts shall be specified by resolution of the village board. 
(b)  Preliminary plat fee review fee. The subdivider shall pay an application fee and a fee for each lot or parcel within the preliminary plat, as set forth by resolution, to the village treasurer at the time of first application for review of any preliminary plat to assist in deferring the cost of review. The application fee shall be paid to the village treasurer at the time of reapplication for approval of any preliminary plat which has been previously reviewed. 
(c)  Final plat review fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee, as set forth by resolution, for the application and for each lot within the final plat, to the village treasurer at the time of application for approval of the plat to assist in defraying the cost of review. A reapplication fee, as set forth by resolution, shall be paid to the village treasurer at the time of a reapplication of any plat for approval which has been previously reviewed. 
(d)  Certified survey map review fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee, as set forth by resolution, to the village treasurer at the time of application for approval of a certified survey map to assist in defraying the cost of review. 
(e)  Plan review fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee at the time of submission of improvements plans and specifications to partially cover the cost to the village of checking and reviewing such plans and specifications. This fee shall be estimated, using actual costs by staff. The fee may be recomputed upon demand of the subdivider or village engineer, after completion of improvement construction in accordance with the actual cost of such improvements, and the difference, if any, shall be paid by or remitted to the subdivider. Evidence of cost shall be in such detail and form as provided by the village engineer. 
(f)  Inspection fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the village for such inspection as the village engineer deems necessary to assure that the construction of the required improvements is in compliance with the plans, specifications and ordinances of the village or any other governmental authority. Inspection fees shall be paid as they are accrued. 
(g)  Engineering fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the village for all engineering work incurred by the village in connection with the plat and such fees shall be paid as they accrue. Engineering work may include the preparation of construction plans and standard specifications. The village engineer may permit the subdivider to furnish all, some or part of the required construction plans and specifications, in which case no engineering fees shall be levied for the preparation of such plans and specifications, except that fees shall be leviable for the review of plans submitted in accordance with this chapter. 
(h)  Administrative fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the cost of any legal, administrative or fiscal work which may be undertaken by the village in connection with the plat and such fees shall be paid as they accrue. Legal work shall include the drafting of contracts between the village and the subdivider. 
(i)  Erosion control fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee, as set forth by resolution, for the application and for each lot within the final plat, to the village treasurer at the time of application for construction of said plat to assist in defraying the cost of review. 
(Prior Code, § 15.07) 
Secs. 38-15-38-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING PROCEDURE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-32. - Pre-application. 
    It is recommended that prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider consult with the village staff in order to obtain their advice and assistance. This consultation is neither formal nor mandatory, but is intended to inform the subdivider of these regulations, the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan components, duly adopted plan implementation devices of the village, sewer and water service availability and other engineering considerations, and to otherwise assist the subdivider in planning his development to comply with village standards. In doing so, both the subdivider and staff may better understand the objective of the proposed development and its possible effects on the neighborhood and community. The subdivider will gain a better understanding of subsequent required procedures. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03A) 
Sec. 38-33. - Extraterritorial plat approval. 
    When the land to be subdivided lies within 11/2 miles of the corporate limits of the village, the subdivider shall proceed the same as for plats within the village, except: 
(1)  Transmittal responsibility lies with the town clerk in which the plat lies. 
(2)  Approval agencies include the village board, town board, and county planning agencies, and the subdivider must comply with the land division ordinances of these agencies. 
(3)  The subdivider shall comply with the improvement requirements and regulations of the town board of the town within whose limits the plat lies when they are more stringent than set forth by the village. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03B) 
Sec. 38-34. - Minor subdivisions. 
    When it is proposed to divide land into two parcels or building sites, any one of which is less than 11/2 acres in size, or when it is proposed to divide a block or out lot into not more than four parcels or building sites within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the boundaries of the block, lot, or out lot, the subdivider shall prepare the certified survey map required by this chapter and shall file the copies specified in the application form on file with the village clerk-treasurer at least 21 days prior to the plan commission meeting at which a recommendation is requested. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03N) 
Sec. 38-35. - Optional processing procedure. 
    If the subdivider or developer chooses to follow the optional procedure for processing the plat as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 236, the village clerk-treasurer and the village board shall modify the procedure provided in this chapter and the wording of the necessary certificate and approval accordingly. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03O) 
Sec. 38-36. - Replat. 
(a)  When it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, so as to change the boundaries of a recorded subdivision, or a part thereof, the subdivider or persons wishing to replat shall vacate or alter the recorded plat as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 236, then proceed with the platting process as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The village clerk-treasurer shall schedule a public hearing before the village board when a preliminary plat of a replat of lands within the village is filed, and cause notices of the replat and public hearing to be mailed to the owners of all properties within the limits of the exterior boundaries of the proposed replat and to the owners of all properties within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed replat. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03P) 
Secs. 38-37-38-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 38-61. - Information to be included. 
(a)  A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions and shall be based upon a survey by a registered land surveyor. The plat shall be prepared on a Mylar or similar material at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch and shall show correctly on its face the following information: 
(1)  Title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded. 
(2)  Location of proposed subdivision by: government lot, quarter section, township, range, county, and state. 
(3)  Date, scale, and north point. 
(4)  Name and addresses of the owner, subdivider, and land surveyor preparing the plat. 
(5)  The entire area contiguous to the proposed plat owned or controlled by the subdivider shall be included on the preliminary plat even though only a portion of the area is proposed for immediate development. 
(6)  Location of existing and proposed rights-of-way, streets, alleys, or other public ways; existing and proposed easements; existing and proposed utility rights-of-way; proposed sites to be reserved for future public acquisition or reserved for the common use of property owners within the plat; and sites dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways or other public use. 
(7)  Dimensions of all lots with proposed lot and block numbers. 
(8)  Radii of all curves. 
(b)  The preliminary plat submittal shall also include: 
(1)  The boundaries and acreage of the entire proposed development and the boundaries and the acreage of the proposed plat or plats if it is to be developed in phases. 
(2)  Contours within the exterior boundaries of the entire development and extending to the centerline of adjacent public streets to national map accuracy standards based on mean sea level datum at vertical intervals of not more than two feet. At least two permanent benchmarks shall be indicated on the plat, together with their elevations referenced to mean sea level datum and the monumentation of the benchmarks clearly and completely described. 
(3)  Water elevations of adjoining lakes and streams at the date of the survey and approximate high and low water elevations. 
(4)  The type and width of existing street pavements within or adjacent to the proposed development. 
(5)  Location and name of any adjacent subdivision, parks, cemeteries, and the owners of record or abutting unplatted lands. 
(6)  Location, size, and invert elevations of any existing sanitary or storm sewers, culverts and drain pipes, the location of manholes, catch basins, hydrants, the location and size of any existing water mains within the area of the proposed development or adjacent thereto. 
(7)  Location of all existing property boundary lines, structures, drives, streams or watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, and other similar significant features within the tract being subdivided or immediately adjacent thereto. 
(8)  Location and dimension of proposed sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways or other public use. 
(9)  Existing zoning on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
(10)  Proposed lake or stream access with an inset showing the proposed subdivision in relation to the access. 
(11)  Any proposed lake or stream improvement or relocation. 
(12)  All normal and high-water elevations of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages, and wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat or located within 100 feet therefrom, at the date of survey based on mean sea level datum. 
(13)  Flood land and shoreland boundaries and a contour line lying a vertical distance of two feet above the elevation of the 100 year reoccurrence interval flood. 
(14)  Soil types and boundaries, as shown on the operational soil survey maps prepared by the federal department of agriculture, soil conservation service. 
(15)  The written recommendations of the county soil and water district conservationist for the control of surface water and soil erosion, if requested by the village. 
(16)  Grading and drainage plans showing cut and fill calculations, existing and proposed contours, and proposed finishing grades for: lot corners, garage floors or first floor elevations, and drainageways. 
(17)  Storm drainage calculations. 
(18)  Soil erosion and sediment control plans and specifications as defined in article VI of this chapter. 
(19)  Street plans and profiles. These plans and profiles shall show existing ground surface; proposed and established street grades and profiles; and street extensions beyond the limits of the subdivision when required. All elevations shall be based on U.S.G.S. datum, and plans and profiles shall meet the approval of the village engineer. 
(20)  Borings and soundings in specified areas to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and water conditions, including depth to bedrock and depth to ground water table, in event the village engineer requires such. 
(21)  A draft of any proposed protective covenants whereby the subdivider intends to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development. 
(c)  The surveyor preparing the preliminary plat shall certify on the face of the plat that it is a correct representation of all existing land divisions and features and that the surveyor has fully complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03C, D) 
Sec. 38-62. - Review within the village. 
(a)  Before submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat and an application. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter and the subdivider shall file an adequate number of copies of the plat and application with the village clerk-treasurer at least 21 days prior to the meeting of the village plan commission at which action is desired. 
(b)  Copies of the preliminary plat shall be transmitted to all affected boards, commissions, or departments and all affected local utility companies for their review and recommendations concerning matters within their jurisdiction. The recommendations and comments shall be transmitted to the village seven days in advance of the regular monthly meeting of the plan commission to be considered. The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the village plan commission for conformance with this chapter and all other rules, ordinances, regulations, comprehensive plan and comprehensive plan components which affect it. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03E) 
Sec. 38-63. - Approval within the village. 
(a)  The objecting agencies shall, by seven days in advance of the plan commission meeting, notify the subdivider and all other approving and objecting agencies of any objections. If there are no objections, they shall so certify on the face of the copy of the plat and shall return that copy to the village clerk. If an objecting agency fails to act within the prescribed time limits, it shall be deemed to have no objections to the plat. 
(b)  The village plan commission shall, within 60 days of the date of filing a preliminary plat with the village clerk, recommend approval, conditional approval, or rejection of the plat to the village board. 
(c)  The village board, within 90 days of the date of filing with the village clerk, shall approve, approve conditionally, or reject such plat unless the time is extended by agreement with the developer. The subdivider shall be notified in writing as to the date of the action if approved, any conditions of approval, or if rejected, setting forth the reasons for rejection. One copy of each of the plat and letter shall be placed in the village's permanent files. Failure of the village board to act within 90 days or within the time agreed to with the developer shall constitute approval. 
(d)  Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final plat, except that if the final plat is submitted within six months of preliminary plat approval and conforms substantially to the preliminary plat layout as indicated in Wis. Stats. § 236.11, the final plat shall be entitled to approval with respect to such layout. The preliminary plat shall be deemed an expression of approval or conditional approval of the layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the final plat, which will be subject to further consideration by the village board at the time of its submission. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03F) 
Secs. 38-64-38-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 38-85. - Form and content. 
(a)  A final plat prepared on Mylar or a similar material by a registered land surveyor shall be required for all subdivisions. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236. The plat shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by Wis. Stats. ch. 236, all information, in a final, recordable form, that is required to be shown on the preliminary plat. 
(b)  All final plats shall meet all the surveying, monumenting, and certification requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236. Dedication of streets and other public areas shall require the owner's and mortgagee's certificates as required by Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03G) 
Sec. 38-86. - Deed restrictions. 
    The village board may require that deed restrictions be submitted with the final plat for approval prior to the subdivider recording the same with the plat. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03H) 
Sec. 38-87. - Review within the village. 
(a)  The subdivider shall prepare a final plat and a letter of application in accordance with this chapter and adopted village policies and shall file an adequate number of copies of the plat as specified on the application forms on file in the office of the village clerk. The subdivider shall also submit the copies and application at least 21 days prior to the meeting of the village plan commission at which action is desired. 
(b)  The village clerk-treasurer shall, within two days of the filing of the final plat, transmit four copies to the county planning agency; two copies to the state department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection; two copies to the state department of transportation, if the subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway a connecting street; and the original plat on Mylar and adequate copies, as specified on the application form, to the village. 
(c)  The village shall examine the final plats as to its conformance with the approved preliminary plat; any conditions of approval of the preliminary plat; and its ordinance and all ordinances, rules, regulations, policies, comprehensive plans and comprehensive plan components which may affect it. 
(d)  The final plat may, if permitted by the village board, constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record at that time. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03I) 
Sec. 38-88. - Approval within the village. 
(a)  The objecting agencies shall, by seven days in advance of the plan commission meeting, notify the subdivider and all other approving and objecting agencies of any objections. If there are no objections, they shall so certify on the face of the copy of the final plat and shall return that copy to the village clerk. If any objecting agency fails to act within the prescribed time limits, it shall be deemed to have no objections to the plat. 
(b)  The village shall prepare a subdivision improvement agreement, which shall be agreed to and signed by the subdivider and the village upon approval by the village board. The subdivider shall be responsible for the recording of this document by the county register of deeds. The village clerk-treasurer shall not certify the plat for recording by the county register of deeds unless contracts have been signed or sureties ensuring the installation of improvements are provided by the subdivider. 
(c)  The county register of deeds cannot record the plat unless it is offered within 30 days from the date of last approval. 
(d)  If the final plat is not submitted within six months of the last required approval of the preliminary plat, the village board may refuse to approve the final plat. 
(e)  The village may require the subdivider to furnish an abstract of title, title insurance, or certificate of title certified to the date of submission of the plat for approval to ascertain the fact that all parties having an interest in the lands have signed the owner's certificate on the plat. 
(f)  The village plan commission shall, within 30 days of the filing of the original final plat with the village clerk, recommend approval, conditional approval, or rejection of the plat and application, along with its recommendations to the village board. 
(g)  The village board shall, within 60 days of the date of filing the original final plat with the village clerk, approve, conditionally approve, or reject such plat unless time for the approval is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the plat is rejected, the reason shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement shall be forwarded to the subdivider. The village board may not inscribe its approval on the final plat unless the village clerk-treasurer certifies on the face of the plat that the copies were forwarded to the objecting agencies as required herein, the date thereof, and that no objections have been filed within the prescribed time limits, or if filed, have been met. If the village board fails to act within 60 days, the time having not been extended and no unsatisfied objections having been filed, the plat shall be deemed approved. 
(h)  After the village board has approved the final plat and sureties ensuring the installation of required improvements are filed, the village clerk-treasurer shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the plat attesting to such approval to be duly executed and the plat returned to the subdivider for recording with the county register of deeds. The register of deeds cannot record the plat unless it is offered within 30 days of last approval. 
(i)  The subdivider shall file a duplicate Mylar, one print at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet and one print at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet of the approved and recorded plat with the village clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03J) 
Secs. 38-89-38-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SURVEY MAP 

Sec. 38-120. - Required; content. 
(a)  A certified survey map prepared by a registered land surveyor shall be required for all minor subdivisions, and all other divisions of land when required by the village board. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236. The map shall show, correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by Wis. Stats. § 236.34, the following: 
(1)  Location of the proposed certified survey map by government lot, quarter section, township, range, county, and state. 
(2)  Date, scale, and north point. 
(3)  Name of the subdivider and surveyor. 
(4)  Location and names of existing and proposed rights-of-way, streets, alleys, or other public ways; existing and proposed easements; existing and proposed utility rights-of-way; and proposed sites to be reserved and dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways, or other public use. 
(5)  Dedication or reservation of streets and other public areas shall require, in addition, the owner's certificate and the mortgagee's certificates as required by Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
(6)  The area and the dimensions of each lot. 
(7)  All existing buildings, watercourses, drainage ditches and other features pertinent to proper division. 
(8)  Names of adjoining streets, highways, parks, cemeteries, subdivisions, ponds, streams, lakes, flowages, and wetlands. 
(9)  Flood land and shoreland boundaries. 
(b)  The map shall be accompanied by a duplicate, reproducible copy of the recorded certified survey map; one print at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet and one print at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, and a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and specifications. 
(c)  If the village finds that it requires additional information relative to a particular problem presented by a proposed development to review the certified survey map, it shall have the authority to request such information from the subdivider. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03K, L) 
Sec. 38-121. - Approval. 
(a)  The map shall be reviewed by the village plan commission for conformance with this chapter and all other ordinances, rules, regulations, comprehensive plans and comprehensive plan components which affect it, and shall, within 30 days from the filing deadline of the application and map, recommend approval or rejection of the map, and shall transmit the map along with its recommendations to the village board for action. 
(b)  The village board shall approve, approve conditionally or reject such map within 60 days from the date of filing of the map unless time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the map is rejected, the reason shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement forwarded to the subdivider. 
(c)  The surveyor shall certify on the face of the map that he has fully complied with the provisions of this chapter. The village shall also certify their approval on the face of the map. 
(d)  The certified survey map shall only be recorded with the county register of deeds after the certificates of the village board and the surveyor are placed on the face of the map. The map shall be recorded within 30 days of its approval by the village board. 
(e)  The village shall prepare a subdivision improvement agreement, which shall be agreed to and signed by the subdivider and the village prior to approval by the village board. The subdivider shall be responsible for the recording of this document by the county register of deeds. The village clerk-treasurer shall not certify the plat for recording by the county register of deeds unless contracts have been signed or sureties ensuring the installation of improvements are provided by the subdivider. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03M) 
Secs. 38-122-38-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 38-141. - Street arrangement and design. 
(a)  In any new subdivision, the street layout shall conform to the arrangement, width, and location indicated in the official map, comprehensive plan or component neighborhood development plan of the village. In areas for which such plans have not yet been completed, the street layout shall recognize the functional classification of the various types of streets and shall be developed and located in proper relation to existing and proposed streets, to the topography, to such natural features as streams and tree growth, to public convenience and safety, to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets and to the most advantageous development of adjoining areas. The subdivision shall be designed so as to provide each lot with satisfactory access to a public street. 
(b)  Arterial streets (major streets) shall be arranged so as to provide ready access to centers of employment, centers of governmental activity, community shopping areas, community recreation, and points beyond the boundaries of the community. They shall also be properly integrated with and related to the existing and proposed system of major streets and highways and shall be, insofar as practicable, continuous and in alignment with existing or planned streets with which they are to connect. 
(c)  Collector streets shall be arranged so as to provide ready collection of traffic from residential areas and conveyance of this traffic to the major street and highway system and shall be properly related to the mass transportation system, to special traffic generators such as schools, churches, shopping centers, and other concentrations of population and to the major streets into which they feed. 
(d)  Local streets shall be arranged to conform to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit the design of efficient storm and sanitary sewerage systems, and to require the minimum street area necessary to provide safe and convenient access to abutting property. 
(e)  Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract being subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the village, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision or for the advantageous development of adjacent tracts. 
(f)  Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a major street or highway, adequate protection of residential properties, limitation of access and separation of through and local traffic shall be provided by reverse frontage, with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the real property line. 
(g)  Streams or lakeshores shall have 60 feet of public access platted to the low water mark at intervals of not more than one-half mile as required by Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
(h)  Reserve strips shall not be provided on any plat to control access to streets or alleys, except where control of such strip is placed with village approval. 
(i)  Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial districts for off-street loading and service areas by the village, but shall not be approved in residential districts. Dead-end alleys shall not be approved, and alleys shall not connect to a major thoroughfare. 
(j)  Street names shall not duplicate or be similar to existing street names, and names shall be projected wherever possible. 
(Prior Code, § 15.04A; Ord. No. 93-02) 
Sec. 38-142. - Limited access highway and railroad right-of-way treatment. 
    Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a limited access highway, the design shall provide the following treatment: 
(1)  When lots within a proposed subdivision back upon the right-of-way of an existing or proposed limited access highway or railway. The subdivider shall plant trees and shrubs as a buffer as required by the village. The building of structures thereon is prohibited. The homeowner shall be responsible for the maintenance of this space. 
(2)  Double fronted lot design in residential subdivisions should be avoided. 
(3)  Streets parallel to a limited access highway or railroad right-of-way when intersecting a major street, highway or collector street which crosses the highway or railroad, shall be located a minimum distance of 250 feet from the highway or railroad right-of-way. Such distance, where desirable and practicable, shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for the future separation of grades by means of approach gradients. 
(Prior Code, § 15.04B; Ord. No. 93-02) 
Sec. 38-143. - Street design standards. 
(a)  The minimum right-of-way and roadway width of all proposed streets and alleys shall be as specified by the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan component, official map, neighborhood plan, or jurisdictional highway system plan; or, if no width is specified therein, the minimum widths shall be: 
Type of Street Minimum Right-of-Way 
Width Dedicated Pavement Width-

Urban Type Pavement Width-

Rural Type Standard arterial streets 100 feet 48 feet face to face of curbs. Four foot sidewalk at 2 feet inside right-of-way. 40 feet edge to edge of pavement. Collector streets 80 feet 40 feet face to face of curbs. Four foot sidewalk at 2 feet inside right-of-way. 32 feet edge to edge of pavement. Local streets 60 feet 36 feet face to face of curbs. Four foot sidewalk at 2 feet inside right-of-way. 24 feet edge to edge of pavement. Alleys 22 feet 20 feet edge to edge of pavement. Pedestrian ways 10 feet 5 feet edge to edge of pavement.  
(b)  Both urban and rural street sections are for standard arterial streets only. Cross sections for special arterial streets, freeways, expressways and parkways should be based on detailed engineering studies. 
(c)  Cul-de-sac streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall not exceed 500 feet in length without approval of the village, and in no event exceed 1,000 feet. The turnaround portion of the cul-de-sac shall be subject to the approval of the village engineer. In no case shall the turn portions be less than 60 feet radius for the right-of-way. Temporary cul-de-sac streets shall be constructed at the ends of streets within the subdivision that are planned to be extended either within the subdivision or to adjacent parcels or subdivisions outside the subdivisions. These temporary cul-de-sacs are subject to the approval of the village. 
(d)  Unless necessitated by exceptional topography, subject to the approval of the village, the maximum centerline grade of any street or public way shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Arterial streets: Six percent. 
(2)  Collector streets: Eight percent. 
(3)  Local streets, alleys and frontage streets: Ten percent. 
(4)  Pedestrian ways: 12 percent, less steps of acceptable design are provided. 
(5)  The grade of any street shall in no case exceed 12 percent or be less than 0.5 percent. 
(e)  Streets grades shall be established wherever practicable so as to avoid excess grading, the promiscuous removal of ground cover and tree growth, and general leveling of topography. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent in feet to 15 times the algebraic difference in rates of grade of major streets, and one-half this minimum for all other streets. 
(f)  When a continuous street centerline deflects at any point by more than five degrees, a circular curve shall be introduced having a radius of curvature on the centerline of not less than the following: 
(1)  Arterial streets and highways: 500 feet. 
(2)  Collector streets: 300 feet. 
(3)  Local streets: 100 feet. 
(4)  A tangent, at least 100 feet in length between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets, will be considered desirable. 
(g)  Where an existing dedicated or platted half-street is adjacent to the tract being subdivided, the other half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. The platting of half-streets should be avoided where possible. 
(h)  The elevations of roads passing through floodplain areas and the waterway openings of all new bridges and culverts shall be subject to floodplain zoning regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 15.04C; Ord. No. 93-02) 
Sec. 38-144. - Street intersections. 
(a)  Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles as topography and other limiting factors of good design permit. 
(b)  The number of streets converging at one intersection shall be reduced to a minimum, preferably not more than two. 
(c)  The number of intersections along major streets and highways shall be held to a minimum. Wherever practicable, the distance between such intersections shall not be less than 1,200 feet. 
(d)  Local streets shall not necessarily continue across arterial or collector streets; but if the centerlines of such local streets approach the major streets from opposite sides within 300 feet of each other, measured along the centerline of the arterial or collector street, then the location shall be so adjusted that the adjoinment across the arterial or collector street is continuous and a jog is avoided. 
(Prior Code, § 15.04D; Ord. No. 93-02) 
Sec. 38-145. - Blocks. 
    The widths, lengths, and shapes of blocks shall be suited to the planned use of the land, zoning requirements, need for convenient access, control and safety of street traffic, and the limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(1)  Blocks in residential areas shall not, as a general rule, be less than 600 feet, or more than 1,500 feet in length unless otherwise dictated by exceptional topography or of other limiting factors of good design. 
(2)  Pedestrian ways of not less than ten feet in width may be required near the center and across any block over 900 feet in length where deemed essential by the village to provide adequate pedestrian circulation or access to schools, shopping centers, churches, public sites, or transportation facilities. 
(3)  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth except where otherwise required to separate residential development from through traffic. 
(Prior Code, § 15.04E; Ord. No. 93-02) 
Sec. 38-146. - Lots. 
(a)  The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. The lots should be designed to provide an aesthetically pleasing building site and a proper architectural setting for the buildings contemplated. 
(b)  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to lot lines on which the streets the lots face. Lot lines shall follow municipal boundary lines. 
(c)  Double frontage lots and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from through traffic or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(d)  Every lot shall front or abut a public street for a distance of at least 50 feet. 
(e)  Area and dimensions of lots shall conform to the requirements of the zoning code, and in areas not served by the public sewer, shall, in addition, conform to the requirements of the governing state agency. Whenever a tract is subdivided into large parcels, such parcels shall be arranged and dimensioned as to allow resubdivision of any such parcels into normal lots in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Lots shall have a minimum average depth of 100 feet. Excessive depth relation to width shall be avoided and a proportion of two to one shall be considered a desirable ratio under normal conditions. 
(g)  Widths of lots shall conform to the requirements of the zoning code. 
(h)  Corner lots shall have sufficient width so as to permit the adherence to required setbacks from all streets. 
(i)  Lands laying between the meander line and the water's edge and any otherwise unplattable lands which lie between a proposed subdivision and the water's edge shall be included as part of lots, out lots or public dedications in any plat abutting a lake or stream. 
(j)  Width and depth of lots or parcels reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for off-street service and parking required by the zoning ordinance for the contemplated use. 
(Prior Code, § 15.04F; Ord. No. 93-02) 
Sec. 38-147. - Easements. 
(a)  The village shall require utility and drainage easements of widths deemed adequate for the intended purpose on each side of all rear lot lines and on side lot lines or across lots where necessary or advisable for electric power and communication lines, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and other utility lines. 
(b)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, the village shall require an adequate drainageway or easement. The location, width, alignment and improvement of such drainageway or easement shall be subject to the approval of the village engineer; and parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. Where necessary, storm sewer drainage shall be maintained by landscaped open channels of adequate size and grade to hydraulically accommodate potential volumes of flow. These design details are subject to review and approval by the village engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 15.04G; Ord. No. 93-02) 
Sec. 38-148. - Public sites and open spaces. 
    In the design of the subdivision, due consideration shall be given to the reservation of suitable sites of adequate area for future schools, parks, playgrounds, drainageways and other public purposes. If designated on the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan component, official map, or component neighborhood plan, such areas shall be made a part of the plat. If not so designated, consideration shall be given in the location of such sites to the preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of fine trees, marshes, lakes and ponds, watercourses, watersheds and ravines. 
(Prior Code, § 15.04H; Ord. No. 93-02) 
Sec. 38-149. - Street trees. 
    The subdivider or developer shall provide for the planting of two inch caliper street trees (measured four feet from the surface of the ground when planted) in all new subdivisions, planned unit development, and appropriate conditional use requests. The number of trees shall be calculated on a one tree per 60 lineal feet of lot frontage. Both public and private streets are subject to this provision. The planted trees shall be guaranteed for a period of one year from installation. 
(Prior Code, § 15.04I; Ord. No. 93-02) 
Secs. 38-150-38-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 38-167. - Required; contract and bond. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the village that subdividers will be required to provide all public improvements for their respective development. Such public improvements shall be warranted to be free of defects in material and workmanship for a period of one year from acceptance of such improvements. 
(b)  Before final approval of any plat located within the village, the subdivider shall enter into a contract with the village agreeing to install the required improvements specified in the subdivision improvements agreement, which shall be agreed to and signed by the subdivider and village upon approval of the village board, and shall file with the agreement a letter of credit, cashier's check, or deposit in escrow, in an amount equal to or greater than the estimated cost of any required improvements. Such contract and security shall provide that such required improvements shall be completed in acceptable condition by the subdivider within specified time limits, that all obligations to contractors, subcontractors, suppliers and the village pertaining to the development are satisfied, that such public improvements are warranted to be free from defects in material and workmanship for a period of one year from acceptance of such improvements, and that in the event of default of the terms of the agreement by the subdivider, the village shall have the right to take over and complete the required improvements at the expense of the subdivider and his security. Such agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. 
(c)  Before final approval of any plat located within the village, the subdivider shall furnish the village a consent and waiver of the statutory provisions for the installation of sump pump laterals from the storm sewer, sanitary sewer, sewer laterals, water main, fire hydrants, water laterals, curb and gutter sidewalks, street surfacing, street lighting, and all other underground utilities, which shall be in a form approved by the village attorney and shall be recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. Such consent and waiver shall provide that the installation of such improvements shall be made at the discretion of the village board. 
(d)  Governmental units to which these bond and contract provisions apply may file, in lieu of the contract and bond, a letter from officers authorized to act on their behalf agreeing to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Contractors and subcontractors who are engaged in the construction of street and utility improvements on dedicated street rights-of-way shall be subject to approval of the village engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05A; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-168. - Standard specifications. 
    All improvements shall comply with the approved standard specifications of the village, which are on file with the village engineer. These requirements would apply to new subdivisions within the village and to subdivisions within 11/2 miles of the corporate limits of the village. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05B; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-169. - Survey monuments. 
    The subdivider shall install survey monuments placed in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and as may be required by the village engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05C; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-170. - Grading. 
    After the installation of temporary block corner monuments or other survey control points by the subdivider and establishment of street grades by the village, the subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of all streets proposed to be dedicated in accordance with the plans and standard specifications approved by the village engineer. The subdivider shall grade the roadbeds in the street rights-of-way to sub-grade together with side slopes beyond the right-of-way as required. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05D; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-171. - Sanitary sewer facilities. 
(a)  Subdivisions within the village shall connect to the public sewer system of the village and the subdivider shall construct sanitary sewers in such a manner as to provide sewer service to each lot within the subdivision. The installation of sewer laterals to the lot line shall be included. The size, type, and installation of all sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and standard specifications as approved by the village. Sanitary sewer mains shall not be less than eight inches in diameter. 
(b)  The subdivider shall assume the cost of all sanitary sewer facilities within the proposed subdivision, except for the added cost of installing sewers greater than ten inches in diameter which are necessary to serve areas lying outside the proposed development. Such added pipe material cost shall be assumed by the village. 
(c)  Gravel or granular backfill shall be used for all trenches dug within a proposed or existing street right-of-way, including trenches dug under a proposed or existing sidewalk. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05E; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-172. - Water supply facilities. 
(a)  Subdivisions within the village shall connect to the public water system of the village and the subdivider shall construct water mains in such a manner as to provide water service to each lot within the subdivision. The installation of water laterals to the lot line shall be included. The size, type, and installation of all water facilities proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and standard specifications as approved by the village. Water mains shall not be less than eight inches in diameter in single-family residential areas, multifamily and commercial areas; and ten inches in diameter in industrial areas. Water mains may not be less than eight inches in diameter in cul-de-sacs under 500 feet in length as measured from the center of the connecting street to the center of the cul-de-sac. 
(b)  The subdivider shall assume the cost of all water supply facilities within the proposed subdivision, except for the added cost of installing water mains greater than 12 inches in diameter which are necessary to serve areas lying outside the proposed development. Such added pipe and valve material cost will be assumed by the village. 
(c)  Gravel or granular backfill shall be used for all trenches dug within a proposed or existing street right-of-way, including trenches dug under a proposed or existing sidewalk. 
(d)  The subdivider may be required to loop or connect water lines to provide for a desirable level of water and fire protection service to the development. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05F; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-173. - Storm sewer facilities. 
(a)  The subdivider shall construct stormwater drainage facilities, which may include stormwater retention/detention ponds, curbs and gutters, catchbasins and inlets, storm sewers, road ditches, culverts and open channels, as may be required. The size, type grade, and installation of all stormwater facilities proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with design criteria, plans and standard specifications as approved by the village. Storm sewers shall not be less than 15 inches in diameter. Storm sewer leads connecting the catchbasin to the storm sewer shall not be less than 12 inches in diameter. 
(b)  The subdivider shall assume the cost of all stormwater facilities within the proposed subdivision. 
(c)  The subdivider shall be required to provide sump pump drain laterals for each lot, from the storm sewer to the lot line for the purpose of receiving sump pump discharge. Laterals shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter. 
(d)  All sump pumps, including existing pumps, shall be connected to and discharge into storm sewer facilities when facilities are available. 
(e)  Gravel or granular backfill shall be used for all trenches dug within a proposed or existing street right-of-way, including trenches dug under a proposed or existing sidewalk. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05G; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-174. - Curb and gutter. 
    After installation of all underground utilities and improvements required by the village, the subdivider shall construct concrete curb and gutter in accordance with the standard specifications on file with the village engineer. Curb and gutter standards shall provide for the construction of concrete curb and gutter, using a 30-inch curb and gutter specification. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05H; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-175. - Rural street sections. 
    When rural street sections have been approved by the village board, the subdivider shall finish grade of all shoulders and ditches, install all necessary culverts to prevent erosion and sediment in accordance with plans and standard specifications by the village engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05I; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-176. - Surfacing. 
    After the installation of all utility, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water mains and other improvements, the subdivider shall surface all roadways in streets proposed to be dedicated, to the widths prescribed by these regulations, and shall be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications of the village which are on file with the village engineer. Street surfacing standards shall provide for requirements no less stringent than the following: 
(1)  Streets shall have a base of 11/2 inch size crushed limestone or crushed gravel that shall not be less than five inches thick, after being rolled and compacted. This shall be followed by three-quarter inch sized crushed road gravel that shall not be less than four inches thick, after being rolled and compacted. 
(2)  Streets shall have an asphalt binder course of material as determined and specified by the village engineer applied to such streets and shall not be less than three inches thick on any street after being rolled and compacted. This shall be followed by a final concrete asphalt course as determined and specified by the village engineer that shall not be less than two inches thick after being rolled and compacted for a street within a 66 foot right-of-way, and two inches thick for a street within an 80 foot or larger right-of-way. 
(3)  Where a proposed pavement surface is determined by the village to be greater than 36 feet in width, edge to edge of asphalt pavement, the village will assume the additional cost of over-sizing. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05J; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-177. - Compaction. 
(a)  Trench compaction. All fill within trenches shall be compacted by means of mechanical vibration in one-foot lifts. Spoil material, minus topsoil, vegetation and all detrimental objects (including, but not limited to, asphalt, concrete chunks, scrap metal, building materials, and large rocks), as approved by the village engineer, may be used as backfill. All spoil material shall be compacted to a minimum compaction of 96.5 percent standard proctor, with an average of 98 percent standard proctor. Four tests shall be taken every 100 feet until the first 300 feet of the trench backfill has met the compaction standards as set forth in this section. For each 100 feet, two tests shall be taken when the trench has been backfilled halfway, and two tests shall be taken when the trench is completely backfilled. Upon verification that the 300 feet of the trench has passed the minimum compaction requirements, and that satisfactory compaction requirements, and that satisfactory compaction methods are being followed, the contractor has two options for verifying the compaction on the remaining length of the trench: 
(1)  Option 1. Two tests shall be made for every utility trench (sanitary sewer, water line, storm sewer, etc.), for every 200 feet of the trench. One test shall be made when the trench has been backfilled halfway, and one test shall be made when the trench is completely backfilled. Any area that fails a test shall be re-compacted and retested until the compaction requirements are met. 
(2)  Option 2 . Two tests shall be made for every utility trench (sanitary sewer, water line, storm sewer, etc.), for every 200 feet of trench. Both tests shall be made after the trench has been completely backfilled, but prior to the final grading of the area. One test shall be made at the surface and one test shall be made at one foot below sub-grade. This option will require test holes to be dug. Any area that fails any compaction test shall be re-excavated to a minimum of three feet below the failed test location, backfilled, re-compacted, and retested until the compaction requirements are met. 
(b)  Sub-base compaction. Undisturbed soil, exposed during grading, lying just below the proposed base, shall be rolled with a vibrating roller just prior to base application. A minimum of two passes shall be required. The contractor shall not be required to provide density tests on this material if the minimum required passes are performed to the satisfaction of the village engineer. If the sub-base has been substantially disturbed, or if fill is sub-grade, then a minimum compaction of 103 percent existing density or 96.5 percent standard proctor (at a minimum of 101 percent existing) is required. Fill lifts shall be limited to a maximum of one foot. Minimum tests for verification of compaction shall be: one density test per 100 feet. 
(c)  Base compaction. Base course material shall be thoroughly compacted to a minimum density of 96.5 percent standard proctor and to an average of 98 percent standard proctor. The material shall not be placed in lifts greater than six inches if vibratory compaction is used and lifts shall not be greater than four inches if non-vibratory compaction is used. Minimum tests required for verification of compaction shall be two density tests per 100 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05K; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-178. - Driveways. 
    The subdivider shall be responsible for all driveways being graveled in advance of any building construction on any lot within the subdivision after the issuance of a building permit, in keeping with the intent of the erosion control provisions of this chapter. A concrete driveway apron shall be installed between the sidewalk and the street prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05L; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-179. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  The subdivider shall construct a concrete sidewalk on one side of all frontage roads and on both sides of all other streets within the subdivision. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in width. The design and construction of all sidewalks shall be in accordance with plans and standard specifications which are on file with the village engineer. 
(b)  Wider than minimum standard sidewalks may be required by the village in the vicinity of schools, commercial areas and other places of public assemblage; and the village board may require the construction of sidewalks in locations other than required under the preceding provisions of this chapter if such walks are necessary, in their opinion, for safe and adequate pedestrian circulation. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05M; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-180. - Other utilities. 
    The subdivider shall cause gas, electrical power and communication facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make adequate service available to each lot in the subdivision. All electrical and communication service shall be buried underground and shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with other municipal underground facilities. Plans indicating the proposed location of all gas, electrical power and communication lines shall be approved by the village engineer. The cost of installing conduit to be used for the installation of dark fiber shall be refunded to the then current property owner in accordance with the terms of the subdivision improvement agreement, when the dark fiber is lit. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05N; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-181. - Street lamps. 
    The subdivider shall install street lamps along the streets proposed to be dedicated to the village, of a design compatible with the neighborhood and type of development proposed. Such lamps shall be placed on each street intersection and at such interior block spacing to provide the required footcandles of lighting intensity as may be required by the village engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05O; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-182. - Street signs. 
    Street signs, as required by the village, shall be obtained and placed by the village, the cost of which shall be paid for by the subdivider. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05P; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-183. - Clean up. 
    During all work upon any subdivision or building lot created pursuant to a certified survey map, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rocks and other debris resulting from work being performed upon the property. All clean-up operations at the location of the property shall be accomplished at the expense of the owner, subdivider, or permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the village. From time to time, as may be ordered by the village, and in any event immediately after completion of work on the property, the owner, subdivider or permittee shall, at his or its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind either on the site or deposited upon public streets or thoroughfares. Upon failure to do so within the time frame given by the village, the work may be done or contracted by the village and the cost thereof charged to the owner, subdivider or permittee and the same shall be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provisions provided in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05Q; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Sec. 38-184. - Acceptance of improvements. 
(a)  The approval of the final plat by the village board shall not constitute acceptance of the dedication of the right-of-way for any public street, open space, or other public area as shown on the final plat. Upon acceptance of the subdivision, the village shall record such deeds and assume all responsibilities for the dedications. The village shall not be held liable for any accidents on any such street or other area and shall not be held responsible for the repair of damages to the improvements caused by the elements or by other causes until final acceptance by the village of all improvements thereon. It is intended that the improvements be complete in whole and in good condition in all respects at the time of acceptance by the village. 
(b)  The acceptance of the utilities (sewer and water) shall be affected by passage of a resolution of the village board. The acceptance of all other improvements shall also be affected by a passage of a separate resolution by the village board. Both resolutions shall be based upon the village engineer's certification that improvements have been properly installed and completed, and that the village has adequate security for the correction of defects for a period of one year from the date of acceptance of such improvements. Normal operating costs, such as street lighting electricity, pump station electricity, and maintenance, such as snow plowing and street sweeping, shall be assumed by the village from the time of assuming the use of the improvements. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05R; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 97-02; Ord. No. 05-09; Ord. No. 07-08) 
Secs. 38-185-38-206. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 38-207. - Commencement. 
    No construction of improvements shall commence in a proposed subdivision until the final plat or certified survey map has been approved, the plans pertaining to the work which is proposed to be commenced are approved, the plan review fees are paid, and the village engineer has given written authorization to commence work. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06A; Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-208. - Plans. 
    The following plans, together with calculations and accompanying construction specifications, shall be required by the village before authorization of construction or installation of improvements. All street and utility plans shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of one inch to 40 feet and a vertical scale of one inch to four feet on standard 24-inch by 36-inch plan-profile sheets, unless other scales and sizes are approved by the village engineer. Elevations shall be referenced to mean sea level datum and benchmarks indicated on the plans. 
(1)  Street plans and profiles showing existing and proposed grades, elevations and cross sections of required improvements. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer plans and profiles showing location, grades, sizes, cross sections, elevations and materials of required facilities. 
(3)  Storm sewer and open channel plans and profiles showing the location, finished grades, sizes, cross sections, finished elevations and materials of required facilities. 
(4)  Water main plans and profiles showing the location, size, elevation and material of required facilities. 
(5)  Grading and drainage plans showing finished grades and elevations, cut and fill calculations, and proposed first floor elevations for each lot. 
(6)  Erosion and sedimentation control plans showing those structures required to retard the rate of runoff water and those grading and excavating practices that will prevent erosion shall generally follow the guidelines and standards set forth by the state department of natural resources' "Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook," or as directed by the village engineer. 
(7)  Additional special plans or information as may be required by the village engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06B; Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-209. - As-built plans. 
    After completion of all public improvements and prior to final acceptance of the improvements, the subdivider shall make or cause to be made maps showing the actual location of all valves, manholes with elevations, stubs, sewer and water mains, sewer and water laterals, and other such facilities as the village engineer may require. The subdivider shall provide the village as-built working drawings of sewage lift stations, water pump house facilities, together with manufacturer's guarantees on equipment where in force. Such maps, plans, and drawings shall be provided on a reproducible medium and supplied on an AutoCAD compatible file on a 3.5 inch disc. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06C; Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-210. - Inspection. 
    The subdivider, prior to commencing any work within the subdivision, shall make arrangements with the village engineer to provide inspection of the work. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06D; Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Secs. 38-211-38-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EROSION AND POLLUTANT CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-229. - Design criteria, standards and specifications for control measures. 
    All control measures required to comply with this chapter shall meet the design criteria, standards and specifications as set forth in the department of natural resources' Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook, or as directed by the village engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.1; Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-230. - Maintenance of control measures. 
    All sedimentation basins and other control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be maintained by the subdivider or subsequent land owner during the period of land disturbance and land development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate performance and to prevent nuisance conditions. The standards for maintenance of control measures shall be set forth in the department of natural resources' "Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook," or as directed by the village engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.2; Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-231. - Applicability. 
    This division applies to land disturbing and land developing activities on lands within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the village and within its extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction under Wis. Stats. ch. 236, as follows: 
(1)  Those requiring a subdivision plat or certified survey map approval or the construction of buildings on lots of approved subdivisions or certified survey maps; 
(2)  Those involving grading, removal of protective ground cover or vegetation, excavation, land filling or other land disturbing activity affecting a surface area of 4,000 square feet or more; 
(3)  Those involving excavation or filling or a combination of excavation and filling affecting 400 cubic yards or more of dirt, sand or other excavation or fill material; 
(4)  Those involving street, highway, road, or bridge construction, enlargement, relocation or reconstruction; 
(5)  Those involving the laying, repairing, replacing or enlarging of an underground pipe or facility for a distance of 300 feet or more; 
(6)  Those involving grading, removal of protective ground cover or vegetation, excavation, landfilling or land disturbing activity within 200 feet of a lake, stream or wetland. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.3; Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-232. - Site dewatering. 
    Water pumped from the site shall be treated by sedimentation basins or other appropriate control measures specified in the department of natural resources' "Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook." Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion of the site, adjacent land or receiving channels. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.4(a); Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-233. - Waste and material disposal. 
    All waste and unused building materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials, or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel or storm sewer system. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.4(b); Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-234. - Tracking. 
    Each site shall have graveled roads, access drives and parking areas of sufficient width and length to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by street cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.4(c); Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-235. - Drain inlet protection. 
    All storm drain inlets shall be protected with a straw bale, filter fabric, or equivalent barrier meeting acceptance design, criteria, standards and specifications approved by the village engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.4(d); Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-236. - Additional requirements for runoff sites. 
(a)  This section applies only to land development or land disturbing activities that result in runoff leaving the site. 
(b)  Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the site shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if practical. Otherwise the channel shall be protected as described in this section. Sheet flow runoff from adjacent areas greater than 10,000 square feet in area shall also be diverted around disturbed areas unless shown to have resultant runoff velocities of less than 0.5 feet per second across the disturbed area for the ten year 24-hour storm. Diverted runoff shall be conveyed in a manner that will not erode the conveyance and receiving channels. For allowable velocities in different types of channels, soil conservation service guidelines shall be followed. 
(c)  All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical sequence to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one time. 
(d)  Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site shall be controlled by meeting either subsections (d)(1) and (2) or (d)(1) and (3) of this section. 
(1)  All disturbed ground left inactive for 14 or more days shall be stabilized by temporary or permanent seeding; temporary or permanent seeding and mulching; sodding; covering with tarps; or equivalent control measures. If temporary seeding is used, a permanent cover shall also be required as part of the final site stabilization. Seeding or sodding shall be conducted and specified in the department of natural resources' "Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook" or by the village engineer. Variances from the requirements of this subsection may be granted by the village engineer upon application, but only if the failure to comply is due to extended periods of rain or other construction delays beyond the control of the responsible party. 
(2)  For sites with ten or more acres disturbed at one time, or if a channel originates in the disturbed area, one or more sedimentation basins shall be constructed. Each sedimentation basin shall be designed and constructed as specified in the department of natural resources' "Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook." 
(3)  For sites with less than ten acres disturbed at one time, straw bales, or equivalent control measures shall be placed along the side slope and downslope sides of the site. If a channel or area of concentrated runoff passes through the site, filter fences shall be placed along channel edges to reduce sediment reaching the channel. 
(e)  Runoff from sites on slopes of 12 percent or more slope may require additional or different controls than listed in subsection (d) of this section. Requirements for such slopes shall be specified by the village engineer. 
(f)  Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than ten cubic yards of material should not be located with a downslope drainage length of less than 25 feet to a roadway or drainage channel. Straw bales or filter fence barriers shall be placed immediately on the downslope side of the piles. If remaining for more than 30 days, they shall be stabilized by mulching, vegetative cover, tarps, or other means. In-street utility repair or construction soil or dirt storage piles located closer than 25 feet of a roadway or drainage channel must be covered with tarps or suitable alternative control if exposed for more than seven days, and the storm-drain inlets must be protected with straw bales or other appropriate filtering barriers. If any soil or dirt storage pile described in this subsection is in existence for more than six months, the filter fabric or straw bales shall be replaced upon order by the village engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.4(e); Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Secs. 38-237-38-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTROL PLANS, CONTROL STATEMENTS AND PERMITS 

Sec. 38-266. - Required; application submission. 
    No landowner or land user may commence a land disturbance or land development activity subject to this chapter without receiving prior approval of a control plan for the site and a permit from the village. At least one landowner or land user controlling or using the site and desiring to undertake a land disturbing or land developing activity subject to this chapter shall submit an application for a permit, together with a control plan and pay an application fee to the village. The applicant may file supplemental information to comply with directives resulting from the village engineer's initial review. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the village engineer and village building inspector to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of the control plan. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.4(f); Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-267. - Plan content for parcels containing one or more acres. 
    The control plan for land disturbing and land development activities covering one or more acres shall include the following: 
(1)  Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions on a scale of at least one inch equals 100 feet showing the site, boundaries and immediately adjacent areas which accurately identify site locations. 
a.  Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; 
b.  100 year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways; 
c.  Location of the predominant soil types; 
d.  Vegetative cover (type and extent); 
e.  Location and dimensions of stormwater drainage systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site; 
f.  Locations and dimensions of utilities, structures, roads, highways, and paving; 
g.  Site topography at a contour interval not to exceed two feet. 
(2)  Plan of final site conditions . A plan of final site conditions on the same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes. 
(3)  Site construction plan. A site construction plan including: 
a.  Locations and dimensions of all land disturbing and development activities; 
b.  Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles; 
c.  Locations and dimensions of all construction site management control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter; 
d.  Schedule of anticipated starting and completion date of each land disturbing or land developing activity, including the installation of construction site control measures needed to meet the requirements of this chapter; 
e.  Provisions for maintenance of the construction site control measures during construction. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.4(f)1; Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-268. - Plan content for parcels containing less than one acre. 
    The control plan statement for land disturbing and land development activities covering less than one acre shall include an erosion control plan statement with a location map of sufficient scale to describe the site and erosion controls (including the site development schedule) that will be used to meet the requirements of the chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.4(f)2; Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-269. - Review of control plan. 
(a)  Applications, control plans, and control plan statements shall be submitted to the village at least 21 days in advance of the plan commission meeting at which action is expected. 
(b)  Within three days of receipt of the application, a copy thereof, together with a copy of the control plan for activities covering more than one acre, shall be delivered to the village engineer for initial review. 
(c)  Within three days of the village receipt of the application, a copy thereof, together with a copy of the control plan statement for activities covering less than one acre, shall be delivered to the village building inspector for initial review. 
(d)  If the village engineer or village building inspector finds the application or control plan or statement to be lacking necessary information or not in compliance with this chapter, the applicant shall be notified of the inadequacy as soon as practical after review. 
(e)  All initial reviews shall be filed with the village seven days in advance of the plan commission meeting, along with the application and control plans or control plan statements. Within 45 days of the filing deadline for the application, control plan, or control plan statement and fee for the plan commission meeting, the village shall approve the plan, inform the applicant and issue a permit. 
(f)  If the conditions are not met, the village may request additional information or reject the plan. The village shall inform the applicant in writing of the status of the application, reason for rejection, and any such request for additional information. Within 45 days of receipt of additional requested information, the village shall again determine if the plan meets the requirements of this chapter. If the plan is rejected, the village shall inform the applicant of the reasons for the rejection. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.4(f)3; Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-270. - Permits. 
(a)  Duration. Permits shall be valid for a period of 180 days, or the length of the building permit or other construction authorizations, whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The village may extend the period one or more times for up to an additional 180 days. The village may require additional control measures as a condition of the extension if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Surety bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the village, at its option, may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond or an irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the approved control plan and any permit conditions. 
(c)  Conditions. All permits shall require the permittee to: 
(1)  Notify the village at least 48 hours in advance of commencing any land disturbing and land developing activity. 
(2)  Notify the village of completion of any control measures within 14 days after their installation. 
(3)  Obtain permission in writing from the village prior to modifying the control plan. 
(4)  Install all control measures as identified on the control plan. 
(5)  Maintain all road drainage systems, control measures and other facilities identified in the control plan. 
(6)  Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainageways resulting from land developing or disturbing activities. 
(7)  Inspect the construction control measures after each rain of 0.5 inches or more and at least once each week and make needed repairs. 
(8)  Allow the village engineer or building inspector or agent of the village to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting for compliance with the control plan or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the control plan. 
(9)  Keep a copy of the control plan on the site. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.4(f)4(c); Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Secs. 38-271-38-288. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 38-289. - Inspection. 
(a)  The village engineer or building inspector may post a stop-work order if: 
(1)  Any land disturbing or land developing activity regulated under this article is being undertaken without a permit; 
(2)  The control plan is not being implemented in a good faith manner; or 
(3)  The conditions of the permit are not being met. 
(b)  If the permittee does not cease the activity or comply with the control plan or conditions of the permit, the village may revoke the building permit in addition to the control plan permit. 
(c)  If the landowner or land user where no permit has been issued does not cease the activity within ten days, the village may request the village attorney to obtain a cease and desist order. 
(d)  The village or the board of appeals may retract the stop-work order on the revocation. 
(e)  Ten days after posting a stop-work order, the village engineer may issue a notice of the intent to perform work necessary to comply with this article. The village engineer may go on the land and commence the work after 14 days from issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work performed by the village, plus interest at the rate authorized by the village shall be billed to the permittee or the landowner. In the event the permittee or the landowner fails to pay the amount due, the clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.60(16). 
(f)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture, as set forth by resolution, and the costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists, starting from the day a stop-work order is posted, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)  Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by permittee; abatement of nuisances; or other appropriate and available remedy. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.4(g); Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Sec. 38-290. - Appeals. 
    The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the village in administering this article. Upon appeal, the board of appeals: 
(1)  May authorize variances from the provisions of this article which are not contrary to the public interest and where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the article will result in unnecessary hardship; and 
(2)  Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06E.4(h); Ord. No. 93-01; Ord. No. 97-03) 
Chapter 39 - RESERVED 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1-40-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- General property taxes, Wis. Stats. § 70.01 et seq. 

Sec. 40-19. - Preparation of tax roll and tax receipts. 
(a)  Aggregate tax stated on roll. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.65(2), the village clerk-treasurer shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate amount of state, county, school and local taxes in a single column in the roll opposite the parcel or tract of land against which the tax is levied or in the case of personal property, in a single column opposite the name of the person against whom the tax is levied. 
(b)  Rates stamped on receipts. In lieu of entering on each tax receipt the several amounts paid respectively for state, county, school, local and other taxes, the aggregate amount of such taxes shall be combined in a single column on the tax receipt issued by the village treasurer. The treasurer shall cause to be printed or stamped on the tax receipt the separate proportion or rate of taxes levied for state, county, school, local or other purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 2.01) 
State Law reference- Tax roll, Wis. Stats. § 70.65; tax receipts, Wis. Stats. § 74.19. 
Sec. 40-20. - Confidentiality of information obtained by the village for tax purposes. 
(a)  Adoption of state law. Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af) is adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this section. 
(b)  Income and expense information confidential. Income and expense information provided by a property owner to an assessor for the purposes of establishing the valuation for assessment purposes by the income method of valuation shall be confidential and not a public record open to inspection or copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(c)  Exception. An officer may make disclosure of such information under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The assessor has access to such information in the performance of his duties. 
(2)  The board of review may review such information when needed, in its opinion, to decide upon a contested assessment. 
(3)  Another person or body has the right to review such information due to the intimate relationship to the duties of an office or as set by law. 
(4)  The officer is complying with a court order. 
(5)  The person providing the income and expense information has contested the assessment level at either the board of review or by filing a claim for excessive assessment under Wis. Stats. § 74.37, in which case the base records are open and public. 
(Prior Code, § 1.03G.2.a, G.2.b; Ord. No. 03-14; Ord. No. 10-07; Ord. No. 12-08) 
State Law reference- Board of review proceedings, Wis. Stats. § 70.47; claims of excessive assessment, Wis. Stats. § 74.37. 
Secs. 40-21-40-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRANSIENT LODGING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal room tax, Wis. Stats. § 66.0615. 

Sec. 40-44. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hotel or motel means a building or group of buildings in which the public may obtain accommodations for a consideration, including, without limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts, lodginghouses, summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges, campgrounds, cabins and any other building or group of buildings in which the accommodations are available to the public, except accommodations rented for a continuous period of more than one month and accommodations furnished by any hospital, sanatorium, nursing home, roominghouse, or by corporations or associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
    Gross receipts means total room sales receipts from the state sales and use tax return. 
    Person or organization includes corporations, partnerships and other business entities. 
    Transient means any individual residing for a continuous period of less than one month in a motel, hotel, or other furnished accommodations available to the public. 
(Prior Code, § 2.12J; Ord. No. 05-06; Ord. No. 05-15) 
Sec. 40-45. - Penalty. 
    In addition to all other penalties specified in this article, any violation of, or noncompliance with, any of the provisions of this article shall subject the violator to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 or more than $250.00, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day of violation or noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 2.12K; Ord. No. 05-06; Ord. No. 05-15) 
Sec. 40-46. - Imposed; rate. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0615, a tax is imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing, at retail, rooms or lodging to transients by hotel keepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the accommodations. Such tax shall be at the rate of five percent of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodgings. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by Wis. Stats. § 77.52(2)(a)1. 
(Prior Code, § 2.12; Ord. No. 05-06; Ord. No. 05-15) 
State Law reference- Imposition of retail sales tax, Wis. Stats. § 77.52. 
Sec. 40-47. - Registration required. 
    Every person furnishing rooms or lodging under this article shall register each business entity with the village treasurer. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a sole proprietor and, if not a sole proprietor, by the person authorized to act on behalf of such sellers. 
(Prior Code, § 2.12A; Ord. No. 05-06; Ord. No. 05-15) 
Sec. 40-48. - Business license. 
(a)  Required. Every person and organization furnishing rooms or lodging shall file an application with the village treasurer for a license for each place of business. Applications shall be made upon a form provided by the village treasurer. The business owner or his authorized agent shall sign the application. 
(b)  Fees. The current application fee as provided in the village fee schedule shall be paid to the village treasurer at the time of filing the application. There shall be no refund or prorating of the license should the business change ownership or cease operation. 
(c)  Term; renewal. License shall be issued annually, for one year, from July 1 through June 30. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, or his authorized agent, to apply for this license annually. 
(d)  Change in ownership. Change of ownership shall require the new owner to obtain a license in his name and place of business name. 
(e)  Display of license. The license shall at all times be displayed in a conspicuous location at the place of business for which it was issued. 
(f)  Person in default in payments to village may not be licensed. If any person or organization fails to comply with the requirements for hotel/motel quarterly tax reporting and payment, or are in default of any other taxes, charges or fees due to the village, the license shall not be granted. If the license is denied for nonpayment of taxes, charges or fees, the license will not be granted. 
(g)  Revocation. Any person or organization which becomes in default during the year that such license has been issued, for failure to comply with the requirements for hotel/motel quarterly tax reporting and payment, or are in default of any other such fees due to the village, shall be given written notification by the village treasurer, to have ten days' notice to come into compliance with all fees and fines due, or to show just cause why his license should not be revoked. If the license has been revoked, then a new fee and application will be required before a new license is issued. No license shall be reissued after revocation until the village treasurer is satisfied that the license holder will comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 2.12B; Ord. No. 05-06; Ord. No. 05-15) 
Sec. 40-49. - Reporting and collection procedure. 
(a)  Due date. The room tax imposed under this article for each calendar quarter is due and payable and must be received in the office of the village treasurer at the village hall on or before the last business day of the month next succeeding the calendar quarter for which is it is imposed. 
(b)  Quarterly room tax returns. A quarterly room tax report return shall be filed with the village treasurer. The quarterly tax imposed for the months of January, February, and March shall constitute the first quarter, the months of April, May and June the second quarter, the months of July, August and September the third quarter, and the months of October, November December the fourth quarter. Such return shall be on a form provided by the village and shall show the gross receipts of the preceding calendar quarter from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging, illustrating and indicating thereon any exemption from an imposed room tax, billed to the state or its departments or agencies, the amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other information as the village treasurer deems necessary, provided it is directly related to the tax. The quarterly room tax report and payment for such tax shall be filed with the village treasurer 15 days following the end of such quarter. 
(c)  Annual room tax return; extensions. Every person or organization required to file such a quarterly return shall also be required to file an annual calendar year return on a form provided by the village which shall be due and filed as part of the quarterly return for the fourth quarter of each calendar year. The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile and adjust for errors in the quarterly returns, and shall contain certain such additional information as the village treasurer requires, provided it is directly related to the tax. The required person or organization to file a return, or his duly authorized agent, shall sign all annual returns. This annual return shall be filed with the village treasurer 30 days following the close of the calendar year. The village treasurer may extend the time for filing any return if such extension shall not exceed 30 days from the date that it is due. Such an extension may be granted only for good and sufficient cause. 
(d)  Exemptions from room tax. Any hotel/motel establishment must furnish lease or rent receipt copies, verifying that the individuals are indeed lodging there for a continuous period of 30 days or more, and are therefore exempt from the hotel/motel tax imposed by the municipality. 
(e)  Liability for unpaid tax. The room tax imposed shall be a continuing liability upon the business entity or person or organization upon whom it is imposed until paid in full. Business successors shall be liable for any preceding calendar quarter for which a return has not been filed and payment not received. 
(f)  Interest on unpaid taxes. All unpaid taxes under this article shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month/12 percent per annum from the due date of the return until the first day of the month following the month in which the tax was paid. 
(g)  Delinquent tax returns. Tax returns required hereunder and not timely filed shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to a late filing fee in the amount provided in the village fee schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 2.12C, D; Ord. No. 05-06; Ord. No. 05-15) 
Sec. 40-50. - Failure to timely report and pay; penalties. 
(a)  If any person fails to timely file a return, as required by this article, the village treasurer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts upon which the tax is determined. Such estimate shall be made for the period for which such person failed to make a return and shall be based upon any information in the village treasurer's possession or may come into his possession, which may have a bearing upon the determination of gross receipts. 
(b)  The village treasurer shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the village by adding to the sum thus arrived at, and by adding a penalty equal to ten percent to that total amount due. Such a determination may be made for each quarterly period for which no return is filed. 
(c)  The penalty shall be due upon written notice to the business entity or person owing the tax and shall not be in lieu of the tax due hereunder. 
(Prior Code, § 2.12F; Ord. No. 05-06; Ord. No. 05-15) 
Sec. 40-51. - Administration; authority and duties of village treasurer. 
(a)  The village treasurer shall be responsible for the administration and collection of the room tax. 
(b)  The village treasurer may, by field audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the village or the refund due to any person or organization under this article. The determination shall be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited and upon any other information available to the village treasurer. 
(c)  The village treasurer is authorized to examine and inspect the books, records, state sales tax records, memoranda, and property of the person or organization which is directly related to the tax or which has a direct bearing upon the gross receipts upon which the tax is due, in order to verify the tax liability of that person or organization. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall prevent the village treasurer from making a determination of tax at any time. 
(Prior Code, § 2.12E; Ord. No. 05-06; Ord. No. 05-15) 
Sec. 40-52. - Fraudulent tax returns; penalties. 
    If a person files a false or fraudulent return with the intent in either case to defect or evade the tax imposed by this article, a penalty of 50 percent shall be added to the tax amount that is required to be paid, exclusive of interest and other penalties. 
(Prior Code, § 2.12G; Ord. No. 05-06; Ord. No. 05-15) 
Sec. 40-53. - Records to be maintained. 
    Every person or organization shall be held liable for the tax imposed by this article and shall keep or cause to be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers for seven years in such form so as to enable the village treasurer to determine the tax due hereunder. 
(Prior Code, § 2.12H; Ord. No. 05-06; Ord. No. 05-15) 
Sec. 40-54. - Confidentiality. 
    All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to such returns on file with the village treasurer are deemed to be confidential, except the village treasurer may divulge his contents to the person who filed the return and such public officials when deemed necessary and after notification of the licensee. No person having an administrative duty under this article shall make known in any manner the business affairs, the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, any tax return or copy thereof, or any particular disclosed in any return, or permit, to be seen or examined by any person, except as provided herein, or that which is obtained by an investigation of records of any person or organization on whom a tax is imposed by this article. 
(Prior Code, § 2.12I; Ord. No. 05-06; Ord. No. 05-15) 
Chapter 41 - RESERVED 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - State traffic statutes adopted. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. chs. 110, 194 and 340 through 350 describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  In addition, and except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions in the following statutory sections are adopted, provided that the penalty for violation thereof shall be a forfeiture only, and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein: 
(1)  Wis. Stats. § 941.01, Negligent operation of vehicle off highway. 
(2)  Wis. Stats. § 941.03, Highway obstruction. 
(3)  Wis. Stats. § 943.11, Entry into locked vehicle. 
(4)  Wis. Stats. § 943.23, Operating motor vehicles without owners consent. 
(5)  Wis. Stats. § 947.045, Drinking in motor vehicle on highway. 
(c)  Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by the reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic on the highways, street and alleys of the state. 
(Prior Code, § 4.01A; Ord. No. 01-13; Ord. No. 02-01) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to adopt traffic regulations in strict conformity with state law, Wis. Stats. § 349.06. 
Sec. 42-2. - State traffic-related administrative regulations adopted. 
    There are also hereby adopted by reference the following state administrative code provisions, provided that the penalty for violation of the provisions adopted in this section shall be limited to a forfeiture: 
(1)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 150, Leasing of vehicles by private carriers. 
(2)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 175, Rental companies. 
(3)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 177, Motor carriers. 
(4)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 254, Single trip permits for oversize or overweight vehicles or loads. 
(5)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 255, Multiple trip permits for oversize or overweight vehicles or loads. 
(6)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 305, Standards for vehicle equipment. 
(7)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 308, Brakes, safety chains and other types of equipment on trailers and semi-trailers. 
(8)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 325, Motor carrier safety regulations generally. 
(9)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 327, Motor carrier safety (hours a truck driver can work). 
(Prior Code, § 4.01B; Ord. No. 01-13; Ord. No. 02-01) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt traffic regulations in strict conformity with state law, Wis. Stats. § 349.06. 
Sec. 42-3. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Generally. This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 345.20 to 345.52 and 66.0114. 
(b)  Penalties. The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a forfeiture together with the cost of prosecution imposed as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 345.20 to 345.52. Forfeitures for violation of any provision of Wis. Stats. chs. 340 to 348 and 350, and for Wis. Stats. § 941.01, shall conform to forfeitures for violation of the comparable state offense, including any variations or increases for second offenses as published in the state revised deposit schedule as adopted by the state judicial conference and any guidance issued by the Mid-Moraine Municipal Court. 
(c)  Uniform citation for moving violations. The uniform traffic citation promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11 shall be used for all moving traffic violations under this chapter. 
(d)  Parking citation for non-moving violations. Citations for all non-moving traffic violations under this chapter shall conform to Wis. Stats. § 345.28 and shall permit direct payment of the applicable minimum forfeiture to the village clerk-treasurer within five days of the issuance of the citation in lieu of court experience. The issuing officer shall specify thereon the amount of the applicable forfeiture as provided in this section. 
(e)  Seizure of license plates. In addition to any citation issued for violation of Wis. Stats. § 341.63(1) a police officer may seize suspended registration plates from vehicles found operating within the village. Such plates shall be stored in accordance with department policy. If, after 30 calendar days, the plates are not claimed with proof that the cause for the suspension has been cured, the plates shall be destroyed. Written notice shall be provided to the operator, which includes the reason for the seizure, information on how to reclaim the plates (if permitted by state law) and a warning that the plates will be destroyed if unclaimed. No fees will be charged for the storage of such plates. 
(Prior Code, §§ 4.10, 4.11; Ord. No. 02-02) 
State Law reference- General provisions in traffic forfeiture actions, Wis. Stats. § 345.20; double prosecution prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 345.52; negligent operation of vehicle, Wis. Stats. § 941.01; uniform traffic citations, Wis. Stats. § 345.11; non-moving violations, Wis. Stats. § 345.28; deposits, Wis. Stats. § 345.26; information to persons charged, Wis. Stats. § 345.27; when registration to be suspended, Wis. Stats. § 341.63. 
Secs. 42-4-42-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGNS, SIGNALS AND STREET USE DESIGNATIONS 

Sec. 42-25. - Compliance with traffic signs and signals required. 
    When official signs or automatic traffic signals are erected at any location they shall be complied with. 
(Prior Code, § 4.02(intro.)) 
State Law reference- Traffic signs, signals, and markings, Wis. Stats. § 346.37 et seq. 
Sec. 42-26. - Stop and yield intersections designated. 
(a)  The following village streets are designated arterial and collector streets. All traffic entering such streets is to stop or yield for the posted signs. Arterial and collector streets are: 
(1)  Center Street (Tower Drive to Parkway Drive). 
(2)  Chateau Drive (Wilshire to Willow Ridge Drive). 
(3)  County Highway P (North to South Limits). 
(4)  Eagle Drive (Main to Hickory), except for the four-way stop intersection at Hickory. 
(5)  Glen Brooke Drive (Main to Glen Hill Drive). 
(6)  Glen Hill Drive (Parkway Drive to Glen Brook Drive). 
(7)  Hickory Lane (Sherman Road to Jackson Drive). 
(8)  Highland Road (Jackson Drive to East Limits). 
(9)  Hunters Road (Jackson Drive to Chateau Drive). 
(10)  Industrial Drive (Main to Metro Court). 
(11)  Jackson Drive (North to South Limits), except at the intersection of Main Street (STH 60) which is controlled by automatic traffic signals. 
(12)  Main Street (STH 60) (East to West Limits), except at its intersection with CTH P and its intersection with Jackson Drive which are controlled by automatic traffic signals. 
(13)  Parkview Drive (Hazelwood Lane to Ridge Road). 
(14)  Ridgeway Drive (Main Street to Highland Road). 
(15)  Sherman Road (East to West Limits). 
(16)  Western Avenue (Main Street to Parkway Drive). 
(17)  Wilshire Drive (Georgetown Drive to Jackson Drive). 
(18)  Riverview Drive (Jackson Drive to The Northern Intersection With Songbird Circle). 
(19)  Francis Drive from Raymond Drive to Creekside Drive. 
(b)  In addition, all traffic entering the following streets is to stop or yield for the posted signs: 
(1)  Ash Drive at Pine Drive. 
(2)  Cedar Park Court at Cedar Parkway. 
(3)  Colonial Lane at Westfield Drive. 
(4)  Georgetown Drive at Wilshire Drive/Park Court. 
(5)  Hemlock Street at Spruce Street. 
(6)  Juniper Street at Pine Drive. 
(7)  Oakland Drive at Cedar Run Drive. 
(8)  Parkview Drive at Ridge Road. 
(9)  Parkway Drive at Glencoe Lane. 
(10)  Scot Court at South Street. 
(11)  Valley Drive at North View Drive. 
(Prior Code, § 4.02A, B) 
State Law reference- Traffic signs, signals, and markings, Wis. Stats. § 346.37 et seq. 
Sec. 42-27. - One-way streets. 
    One-way streets may be designated by the police chief upon the posting of an official sign following approval by the village board. 
(Prior Code, § 4.09) 
Sec. 42-28. - School bus warning light use when no traffic signal exists. 
    The operation of school buses within the village may use the flashing red warning lights of the bus in a residential or business district where pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at a location where there are no traffic signals and where such person or persons must cross the street or highway before being loaded or after being unloaded. 
(Prior Code, § 4.08A; Ord. No. 01-07; Ord. No. 01-14) 
Secs. 42-29-42-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED AND VEHICLE OPERATION 

Sec. 42-60. - Speed limits. 
    Speed limits for traffic purposes within the village are as follows: 
Maximum Speed Location 15 mph In all school zones when children are present. On all village park area roads. On the alley/driveway running east and west along the south side of Jackson Park from Jackson Drive on the east to the end of public right-of-way on the west. 25 mph On all streets within the village other than school zones and streets otherwise specifically designated in this chapter. 35 mph On Main Street (STH 60) from east village limits to just west of Ridgeway Drive. On Cedar Parkway from Main Street (STH 60) to the southern village limits. 40 mph On Main Street (STH 60) from west village limits to Industrial/Glen Brooke Drive. 45 mph On Cedar Creek Road from eastern to western village limits. On CTH P from southern to northern village limits. 65 mph On US South 45 from the southern to northern village limits.  
(Prior Code, § 4.03) 
State Law reference- Speed restrictions generally, Wis. Stats. § 346.57 et seq.; special speed restrictions for certain vehicles, Wis. Stats. § 346.58; minimum speed regulation, Wis. Stats. § 346.59; local authority to modify speed restrictions, Wis. Stats. § 349.11. 
Sec. 42-61. - Driving conduct. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all premises held out to the public for use of their motor vehicles, whether such premises are publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for use thereof. This section is intended only to regulate driving conduct on premises specified in this section and does not constitute a traffic regulation for which violation points could result. 
(b)  Manner of vehicle operation restricted. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on premises subject to this section at a speed in excess of 15 mph, outside driving lanes indicated by painted lines, across parking stalls indicated by painted lines except when entering and exiting a parking stall, in a manner known as "spinning doughnuts" wherein a vehicle is driven rapidly in a tight radius, at a rapid or sudden rate of acceleration, in the wrong direction in a driving lane where such direction is indicated by painted arrow or by the entry angle of adjoining parking stalls, or in such a manner as to endanger lives and property by not stopping at stop signs. 
(c)  Exemption . This section shall not apply on any street or highway as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01 or to motor vehicles operated on premises covered by state and local traffic regulations. 
(d)  Signs. All sign installation necessary to enforce any part of this section shall conform to the state administrative code rules of the highway division and the state department of transportation. 
(Prior Code, § 4.08B; Ord. No. 01-07; Ord. No. 01-14) 
Secs. 42-62-42-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING, LOADING ZONES AND FIRE LANES 

Sec. 42-81. - Heavy vehicles and trailers. 
(a)  No truck, trailer, truck power unit, tractor, bus or recreation vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 12,000 pounds gross weight, or over 16 feet in length (including accessories, racks, or other physical extensions), or having a height of more than eight feet from the roadway, shall be parked or stored on any public street or parking lot, except when loading, unloading, or rendering a service. Vehicles and equipment actively engaged in construction, remodeling, or maintenance of adjacent private property may park on the street in accordance with posted parking restrictions between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to park trailers, campers, motor homes, boats, or other similar vehicles within a public right-of-way for more than 72 hours. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs. 
(Prior Code, § 4.04E, F) 
Sec. 42-82. - All night parking and parking for more than 24 hours. 
(a)  Parking in excess of 24 hours prohibited. Parking on any street, alley, or in a municipally owned or operated parking lot for a period longer than 24 consecutive hours is prohibited. 
(b)  All night parking. No person shall park any vehicle on any village street between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from December 1 to April 1. 
(Prior Code, § 4.04G, H) 
Sec. 42-83. - Fire lanes. 
    No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle on public or private property posted as a fire lane. Such fire lanes will be established upon recommendation of the fire chief in the interest of public safety and needs of fire department operations. The following areas are designated fire lanes: 
(1)  East and west sides of the driveways on the east and west sides, and the north side of the driveway on the north side of the Tillie Lake Strip Mall located at N168 W22700 to N168 W22730 Prairie View Drive. 
(2)  West side of the driveway located between N168 W22223 and N168 W22225 Main Street south from Main Street to the rear of N168 W22223. 
(3)  East side of the driveway running north and south to the rear of the buildings located at W208 N16779 to W208 N16793 South Center Street and located east of N168 W20827 Main Street. The driveway cannot be blocked to emergency vehicles. 
(4)  No parking or stopping or standing on the north side of the front entrance driveway of the Community Center. 
Sec. 42-84. - Blocking mail delivery. 
    No vehicles shall be parked so as to prevent the delivery of mail to postal boxes. Upon receiving a complaint from a resident or postal carrier that mail could not be delivered because a parked motor vehicle blocked the carrier's access to the box, a police officer shall investigate, and if the vehicle is so parked as to prevent mail delivery, may issue a parking citation. 
(Prior Code, § 4.04M) 
Sec. 42-85. - Parking regulated during snow emergencies. 
(a)  Prohibited . No person shall park, or allow to remain parked, any vehicle on any public street when a snow emergency exists. 
(b)  Snow emergency declaration . The public works director or designee shall notify radio and television stations and newspapers of general circulation when feasible. Each announcement shall describe the declaration, including the time it became or will become effective and duration. The public works director or designee shall make a record of each time and date any declaration is announced to the public. 
(c)  Termination of snow emergency. A snow emergency will automatically terminate at the time given in the emergency declaration without further notice required, unless extended by a new declaration. A snow emergency may be terminated early if the public works director or designee determines that the conditions which required the snow emergency no longer exist. Notice of the early termination shall be provided to the same outlets that were notified of the original declaration. 
(d)  Removal of vehicles . Whenever a snow emergency exists and a vehicle is parked, stopped or standing in such a manner as to prevent or impede snow clearance or removal in any manner in or upon any public street or alley, the public works director or the chief of police or their designees shall be authorized to move or remove such vehicles to an off-street location or to any other portion of a public street or alley within the limits of the village where such vehicle will no longer prevent or impede snow clearance or removal. All removal, towing, damage and storage costs arising from the enforcement of this section shall be paid by the person or corporation owning, controlling, using and/or responsible for the vehicle. The village shall not be liable for damage to vehicles removed, towed or stored as a result of the enforcement of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.05) 
Sec. 42-86. - Limited parking in certain areas; loading zones. 
    When signs or parking meters are erected on any street giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for other than the period specified by the sign or meter. Parking is restricted as indicated in the following areas of the village: 
(1)  No parking. 
a.  No parking at any time in the following areas: 
Street/Location Area Main Street (South 60) North and south side from the eastern village limits to the western village limits. Jackson Drive East side, south of Main Street (South 60) 165 feet south. East side, north of Wilshire Drive to 38 feet north. East side, south of Wilshire Drive to 15 feet south. West side, south of Main Street (South 60) 700 feet south. West side, north of Main Street (South 60) to six feet north of the alley. Industrial Drive West side, south of Tower Drive, 110 feet south. East side, between Main Street (South 60) to the entrance to Green Valley III. Tower Drive North side, east of Industrial Drive, 50 feet east. South side, from Industrial Drive to Center Street. Eagle Drive East and west sides from Main Street (South 60) to Hickory Lane. Cedar Run Drive South and west side from just west of to the intersection of Lea Fon Circle as posted. Glen Brooke Drive East and west side from Main Street (South 60) to South Street. East and west sides from Sherman Road to approximately 100 feet south of Glen Hill Drive. Reynolds Street North side from Western Avenue to Center Street. South Street South side from Western Avenue to Center Street. Western Avenue West side form Main Street to South Street. Cedar Parkway West side north of Sysco Drive approximately 275 feet north. North Ridgeway Drive West side, south of Willow Ridge Drive, south to approximately 50 feet north of the south lot line W198 N17011 North Ridgeway Drive. North Center Street East side from Main Street approximately 188 feet north. Hickory Lane North side of Hickory Lane from the east entrance of the Jackson Area Community Center parking lot west to Jackson Drive. Stonewall Drive East side of Stonewall Drive from Georgetown Drive to 380 feet north along Stonewall Drive.  
b.  No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle on: 
1.  Municipal public property. 
(i)  Village hall. 
A.  On the east or west side of the driveway into the village hall off of Main Street (STH 60). 
B.  In front of the garage doors on the west side of the building and areas posted "Police Vehicles Only." 
(ii)  Fire department. In front of the garage doors on the south side of the building posted "No Parking." 
(iii)  Community center. In front of the community center entrance driveway. 
(2)  One hour parking. One hour parking between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except holidays and Sundays, in the following areas: 
Street/Location Area Jackson Drive East and west sides from Main Street (South 60) to south village limits except as otherwise specified in this chapter.  
(3)  School zone parking, loading and unloading. No parking in any school zones on school days with the following exceptions and restrictions: 
Street/Location Area Jackson Drive Parking permitted between Main Street and Georgetown Drive-east and west side, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Parking permitted between Main Street and Georgetown Drive-east side diagonal parking spaces, 15 minutes only, except from 8:00 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 3:45 p.m. Georgetown Drive No discharge or pickup of passengers within the road-way during school hours. No parking or stopping at any time on the south side from Jackson Drive to approximately 100 feet east.  
(4)  Loading zone parking for up to 15 minutes. Parking and standing for loading and unloading for more than 15 minutes in the following areas and subject to the indicated restrictions: 
Street/Location Area South Center Street West side in the area located south of Main Street (South 60) to the drive at the south end of the building located at W208 N16785 (approximate 40 feet).  
(Prior Code, § 4.04A-D; Ord. No. 95-12; Ord. No. 96-16; Ord. No. 99-21; Ord. No. 00-01; Ord. No. 01-11; Ord. No. 00-12; Ord. No. 00-15; Ord. No. 00-16; Ord. No. 02-08; Ord. No. 02-13; Ord. No. 04-18; Ord. No. 04-14; Ord. No. 04-21; Ord. No. 06-01; Ord. No. 12-02; Ord. No. 14-02, § I) 
Sec. 42-87. - Parking on private property. 
(a)  Unauthorized parking generally. No person shall park a vehicle on the property of another without permission. A vehicle shall be considered illegally parked if the vehicle has been left unattended without the permission of the owner, lessee, or authorized agent and the property is posted as required by state statutes and the police department. 
(b)  Unauthorized parking in driveways. No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle in any private driveway without the permission of the owner or lessee of the property which such driveway is located, whether or not such driveway is posted to limit or restrict parking. 
(c)  Parking on the grass. No vehicles are to be parked on the grass surface adjacent to any public parking lot unless authorized by the police department. No vehicle shall be permitted to be parked on the grass and shall be restricted to a continuous hard surface in the front yard setback. 
(d)  Parking vehicles in setbacks. Vehicles (including recreational vehicles, campers, trailers, boats, motorcycles and snowmobiles) are not permitted to be parked or be placed in the front yard setback, in residential, commercial or industrial areas, except on the owner's driveway or parking lot on a continuous poured concrete or asphalt or paved surface. Parking in all other areas requires a conditional use or a planned unit development amendment. 
(e)  Securing parked vehicle required. No person shall permit a motor vehicle to stand or remain unattended on any public street, alley or other place open to the public, except an attended parking area, unless either the starting lever, throttle, steering apparatus, gear shift lever or ignition is locked and the key for such lock is removed from the vehicle. This section does not apply to motor vehicles operated by common carriers of passengers under Wis. Stats. ch. 194. 
(Prior Code, § 4.04J; Ord. No. 15-04, § I(4.04(m)); Ord. No. 17-04 , § 1) 
Secs. 42-88-42-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES AND DEVICES 

Sec. 42-118. - Bicycles, skateboards and play vehicles. 
(a)  Safe operation required. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle, play vehicle, or skateboard in a reckless manner. 
(b)  Use of bicycles and play vehicles prohibited in certain areas. No person shall operate or ride upon a play vehicle, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(43m), or a skateboard in any of the following locations: 
(1)  In or upon any public or private property, parking lot, pedestrian way or other premises where the owner or person in charge of such property has posted signs that operation of such is prohibited. 
(2)  In or upon any alley, highway, roadway or street, except while crossing such area at a crosswalk as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(10). 
(c)  Use of play vehicles permitted on sidewalks. The use of play vehicles on village sidewalks is permitted. 
(d)  More than one person on bicycle prohibited. No more than one person shall ride a bicycle at one time unless such bicycle is designed to carry more than one passenger. 
(e)  Bicycle equipment. No person may operate a bicycle upon a highway, bicycle lane or bicycle way during hours of darkness unless such bicycle is equipped with or the operator is wearing a lamp emitting a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front of the bicycle. Such bicycle shall also be equipped with a red reflector that has a diameter of at least two inches of surface area on the rear so mounted and maintained as to be visible from all distances from 50 to 500 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beam of headlights on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to, but not in lieu of, the red reflector. 
(f)  Responsibility of parent, guardian or ward of minor for violations. No parent or guardian of any minor or ward shall permit such minor or ward to operate a play vehicle, bicycle, or skateboard in violation of this section. 
(g)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeit, together with a penalty assessment and the cost of prosecution. 
(Prior Code, § 4.05A; Ord. No. 04-06; Ord. No. 07-10; Ord. No. 11-05) 
Sec. 42-119. - Snowmobiles and other off-highway vehicles. 
(a)  Operation in village restricted. It is unlawful to operate any snowmobile or any other motor-driven craft or vehicle principally manufactured for off-highway use on the village streets, alleys, parks, parking lots, or on any public lands or private lots held open to the public, except operation of snowmobiles will be permitted on trails approved by the village board. 
(b)  Permitting operation by improper persons prohibited. No owner or person having charge or control of a snowmobile shall authorize or permit any person to operate such snowmobile who is not permitted under state law to operate such snowmobile, or who is under the influence of an intoxicant or any dangerous or narcotic drug. 
(Prior Code, § 4.05B; Ord. No. 04-06; Ord. No. 07-10; Ord. No. 11-05) 
Sec. 42-120. - Neighborhood electric vehicles. 
(a)  A neighborhood electric vehicle (NEV) is any self-propelled electrically-powered motor vehicle, excluding golf carts, that has a maximum speed of 20 to 25 miles per hour, and that has successfully completed the Neighborhood Electric Vehicle America Test Program conducted by the Federal Department of Energy, and that conforms to the definition and requirements for low-speed vehicles as adopted in the federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles under 49 CFR 571.3(b) and 571.500. 
(b)  Neighborhood electric vehicles authorized pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.26 shall be allowed to operate on the public roads within the village, provided that operation is limited to streets with a speed limit of 35 mph or less and the vehicle displays a valid NEV registration plate issued by the state department of transportation and a federal certification label. 
(Prior Code, § 4.06; Ord. No. 08-03) 
State Law reference- Authority to allow or prohibit the operation of low-speed vehicles, Wis. Stats. § 349.26. 
Secs. 42-121-42-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoning motor vehicles prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 346.94(13); vehicle abandonment prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 342.40. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-139. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or mobile home as defined by the state law provisions adopted in section 42-1, regardless of whether the vehicle is registered under state law. 
(Prior Code, § 4.07B; Ord. No. 05-05) 
Sec. 42-140. - Junk vehicles prohibited and declared nuisance. 
(a)  On public property. No person owning or having custody of any partially dismantled inoperable, wrecked, junked, unregistered or discarded motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to remain on any public highway or public parking lot longer than 24 hours. Any such vehicle is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be removed and disposed of as provided in this article. 
(b)  On private property. No vehicle, which is disassembled, dismantled, inoperable, wrecked, or unregistered, and any parts thereof, may be stored or allowed to remain on any private property unless permitted by a conditional use permit or completely enclosed in a building. Any such vehicle is declared to be a public nuisance and may be removed and disposed of as provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 4.07K; Ord. No. 05-05) 
Secs. 42-141-42-163. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 42-164. - Abandonment prohibited; exceptions; presumption of abandonment. 
(a)  No person shall abandon any vehicle unattended within the village for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to be abandoned. This section shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner authorized by the village or a vehicle parked in a metered or paid lot or parking space where the required fee has been paid and meter activated. 
(b)  Any vehicle left unattended for more than 48 hours on any public highway or grounds, or on private property where parking is prohibited, limited or restricted, without the permission of the owner or lessee, is deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance; provided that the vehicle shall not be deemed abandoned under this section if left unattended on private property out of public view, by permission of the owner or lessee, or when designated as not abandoned by the police chief. 
(Prior Code, § 4.07A, C, D; Ord. No. 05-05) 
Sec. 42-165. - Removal and impoundment. 
    Any vehicle found abandoned in violation of this article shall be impounded by the police department until lawfully claimed or disposed of as provided in this section. If the police chief, or his duly authorized representative, determines that towing costs and storage charges for the ten day impoundment period would exceed the value of the vehicle, the vehicle may be junked or sold prior to the impoundment period, upon determination by the police chief that the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or any other reason. 
(Prior Code, § 4.07E; Ord. No. 05-05) 
Sec. 42-166. - Notice to owner. 
    The police department shall, as soon as practical, notify the owner and lienholder of record, by certified mail, of the impoundment and of his right to reclaim the vehicle. The notice shall set forth the information contained in Wis. Stats. § 342.40(3) and shall state that the failure of the owner or lienholder to exercise their rights to reclaim the vehicle shall be deemed a waiver of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to sale of the vehicle. 
(Prior Code, § 4.07F; Ord. No. 05-05) 
Sec. 42-167. - Sale; claims of interest barred; exceptions. 
    Each retained vehicle not reclaimed by its owner or lienholder may be disposed of by sale, by sealed bid, or by auction sale as provided in Wis. Stats. § 342.40(3). The sale of a motor vehicle under provisions of this section shall forever bar all prior claims thereto and interest therein except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 4.07G. H; Ord. No. 05-05) 
Sec. 42-168. - Purchaser to remove vehicle. 
    The purchaser shall have ten days to remove the vehicle from the storage area, but shall pay a reasonable storage fee established by the village board for each day the vehicle remains in storage after the second business day subsequent to the sale date. Ten days after the sale, the purchaser shall forfeit all interest in the vehicle and the vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be sold again. 
(Prior Code, § 4.07I; Ord. No. 05-05) 
Sec. 42-169. - Notice to department. 
    Within five days after the sale or disposition of a vehicle under this section, the police chief shall advise the state department of transportation of such sale or disposition on a form supplied by the department. 
(Prior Code, § 4.07J; Ord. No. 05-05) 
Chapter 43 - RESERVED 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Village board to act as utility commission. 
    The village board shall act as the utility commission and shall have all of the powers and duties of such commission prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 66.0805. 
(Prior Code, § 16.01) 
Secs. 44-2-44-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-16. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    Any officer or authorized employee of the village water utility shall have the right of access during reasonable hours to the premises supplied with service, for the purpose of inspection or for the enforcement of the utility's rules and regulations and for compliance with an approved subdivision improvement agreement. 
(Prior Code, § 16.05) 
Sec. 44-17. - No claims for damages against village. 
(a)  No person shall enter a claim for damage against the village, as a water utility, or any officer thereof, for damage to any pipe, fixture, or appurtenance by reason of interrupted water supply, or variation of pressure, or for damage of any nature whatsoever caused by the turning off, or turning on, either wholly or partially, of the water supply for the extension, alteration, or repair of any water supply for the extension or discontinuance of the premises' water supply for the violation of any rules or regulations of the village water utility. 
(b)  No claims will be allowed against the village, on account of the interruption of the water supply caused by the breaking of pipes or machinery, or by stoppage for repairs, on account of fire or other emergency, and no claims shall be allowed for any damage caused by the breakage of any pipe or machinery. 
(Prior Code, § 16.06) 
Secs. 44-18-44-31. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 44-32. - Compulsory connection. 
(a)  Any existing residential, commercial, industrial, or other property that has private water service at the time a public water main is installed abutting or through such property shall cease use of the private water service and be connected to the public water utility within one year from the date public water service becomes available. 
(b)  The assessment therefor shall be established by the utility commission and the assessment and charges imposed under this chapter shall be paid when the plumbing permit is issued. Properties that have a public water main abutting or through the property, but are not connected to the public water service, shall connect to the public water service within one year from the date of the enactment of this section. 
(c)  The village board may, in its sole discretion, grant a waiver of the compulsory connection requirements upon such conditions and limitations and for such durations as it determines are just and equitable to avoid hardship to abutting property owners. 
(Prior Code, § 16.24; Ord. No. 94-07) 
Sec. 44-33. - Establishing service. 
(a)  Application . Application for water service shall be made in writing on a form furnished by the village water utility. The application will contain the address of the property to be served, name of applicant, the use to be made of service and such other information as the utility may require. 
(b)  Conditions of providing service. Service will be provided only if the: 
(1)  Premises has a frontage on a regular platted street or public strip in which a village water utility main has been laid; 
(2)  Applicant has installed or agrees to install a service lateral from the curb line to the point of use according to the utility's specifications; and 
(3)  Premises has approved piping beyond metering point. 
(c)  Approval may be withheld. The village water utility may withhold approval of application. The village water utility is empowered to withhold approval of any application if full information of the purpose of such supply is not clearly indicated by the applicant property owner. 
(d)  Customers bound by state rules and regulations. All persons now receiving a water supply from the utility or who may hereafter make application therefor shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by all rules and regulations as filed with the state public service commission. 
(e)  Public service commission rules adopted. Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 185 is adopted by reference and made a part of these rules as if set forth in full. Any provisions adopted in this chapter, which are more stringent, shall apply when not in conflict with Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 185. A violation of any such rules shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 16.02) 
Sec. 44-34. - Only authorized village personnel may turn on water. 
    The water shall not be turned on for a consumer except by a duly authorized employee of the utility. 
(Prior Code, § 16.08) 
Sec. 44-35. - Division of water service prohibited. 
    No division of the water service shall be made for the extension and independent use of the supply to an adjoining lot or parcel of land. 
(Prior Code, § 16.02D) 
Sec. 44-36. - Vacation of premises; removal of connection apparatus. 
    When the premises are to be vacated, the utility shall be notified, so that it may remove the meter and shut off the supply at the curb stop. The owner of the premises shall be liable for prosecution for any damage to the property of the water department by reason of failure to notify the utility of a vacancy. 
(Prior Code, § 16.23) 
Secs. 44-37-44-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 44-51. - Digging of trenches. 
(a)  Refill of trenches in streets. Trenches in streets shall be refilled with slurry as approved by the village water utility. 
(b)  Responsibility of contractor to repair mains and service pipes. If excavating machines are used in digging sewers, all water mains shall be maintained at the expense of the contractor. Contractors must ascertain for themselves the existence and location of all service pipes. If they are removed, cut or damaged in the construction of a sewer, the contractor must at his own expense cause them to be replaced or repaired at once. The contractor must not shut off the water service pipes from any consumer for a period exceeding six hours. 
(c)  Nuisance remarking costs. Any person performing excavation work for the streets, highways, or rights-of-way under the village's jurisdiction, shall be liable for any and all unnecessary and unreasonable costs and expenses that the village incurs in complying with Wis. Stats. § 182.0175 in response to the person's multiple requests to relocate and remark municipal utility facilities at the same excavation site, thus causing nuisance remarking costs. Payment of such costs and expenses are due within 30 days of the date of invoice, issued by the village, to the person responsible for the nuisance remarking costs. 
(Prior Code, §§ 16.18, 16.19; Ord. No. 04-17) 
State Law reference- Damage to transmission facilities, Wis. Stats. § 182.0175. 
Sec. 44-52. - Purity of supply not to be impaired by cross connections. 
    Every person owning or occupying premises receiving village water shall maintain such water supply free from any connection, either of a direct or of an indirect nature, with a water supply from a foreign source, or of any manner of connection with any fixture or appliance, whereby water from a foreign supply or the waste from any fixture, appliance, waste or soil pipe may flow, be siphoned or pumped into the piping of the village water system. The Jackson Water Utility has the right to request entry of the property for the purpose of cross connection inspection per DNR requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 16.20) 
Sec. 44-53. - Operation of valves and hydrants. 
    No person, without authority of the village water utility, shall operate any valve connected with the street or supply mains, or open fire hydrant connected with the distribution system. Owners or operators of motor vehicles will be held for the cost of repair of any hydrant damaged by being hit by a motor vehicle and the water department will not be responsible for any damage to the motor vehicle by reason of such accident. 
(Prior Code, § 16.21) 
Sec. 44-54. - Relief valves. 
    On all "closed system" (i.e., systems having a check valve, pressure regulator, or reducing valve, water filter, or softener), an effective pressure relief valve shall be installed in accordance with the state plumbing code. 
(Prior Code, § 16.22) 
Sec. 44-55. - Water main extensions in platted subdivisions. 
(a)  Plans for the installation of water mains in regularly platted subdivisions shall be filed with the village and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  Name of subdivision. 
(2)  Legal description. 
(3)  Map showing streets, lots and sizes of proposed mains and hydrants, and street laterals. 
(4)  Date of approval of subdivision plan by the appropriate state agency. 
(5)  Date of approval of proposed mains by department of natural resources. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the proposed plan, the village will review the extension of water mains and hydrant placement in the subdivision for approval. 
(c)  If the developer, or a contractor employed by the developer, is to install the water mains (with approval of the utility) the developer shall be responsible for the total cost of the construction. 
(d)  Special assessments shall be done in accordance to state law. 
(Prior Code, § 16.03) 
Sec. 44-56. - Repairs to service; responsibilities of property owner. 
(a)  The service pipe from the main to the curb stop will be maintained by the utility. 
(b)  The property owner will be responsible for damage to the curb stop and the service pipe to the point of use. Initial construction of the entire service pipe, including the curb stop, is the responsibility of the property owner. 
(c)  If a customer property owner fails to repair a service pipe within a reasonable time following notification of needed repairs, the water will be shut off until repairs are completed. 
(Prior Code, § 16.16; Ord. No. 93-09) 
Sec. 44-57. - Thawing frozen services. 
    Frozen services shall be thawed and the expense to the utility and property owner shall be determined after examination of contributory fault or negligence by the customer or the utility, such as reduction of grade, improperly installed customer service pipe, etc. 
(Prior Code, § 16.17) 
Secs. 44-58-44-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - METERS 

Sec. 44-80. - Unauthorized disconnection and interference prohibited. 
    Meters placed by the utility are not to be disconnected or interfered with by the customer. 
(Prior Code, § 16.09A; Ord. No. 95-17; Ord. No. 97-01; Ord. No. 09-12; Ord. No. 04-15) 
Sec. 44-81. - Installation regulations. 
(a)  Accessibility. Meters shall be so located that they will be easily accessible for reading and inspection, installation and exchange. 
(b)  Shutoff valves and box; stop box; cost; maintenance. All metered services shall have a separate water lateral and external shut off unless otherwise approved by the village. The service shall include a curb valve and curb stop box at the property line. The customer shall, at its own expense, provide the proper connection and shutoff valves for the meter. No meter shall be installed for customer service without its own, separate, and individual outside shutoff or stop box. The consumer shall protect the stop box in his terrace and shall keep the same free from dirt and other obstructions. The utility shall not be liable for failure to locate stop box and shut off water in case of a leak on the consumer's premises. 
(c)  Meter horn. The meter horn shall be installed in a readily accessible location, approximately three feet above the floor, or as designated by the village water utility. All residential units shall provide a one inch by 71/2 inch meter horn connection with inlet and outlet shutoff valves. 
(d)  Ball valves. The ball valves shall be sized depending on the size of the service, and be installed in a readily accessible location, which is approved by the village water utility prior to installation of the water meter and connection to the water supply. 
(e)  Multiple meter connections. An existing water lateral may be used to connect two metered services for condominiums, mobile homes, and other similar multiple residential metered services. A wye shall be connected to individual curb stops and curb stop boxes which shall be installed behind (away from the main) the wye connection at the property line. Conversion from a single metered service to a multiple metered service shall require an individual stop box or other approved outside shut off for each metered service to be provided by the customer prior to installation of the meter. 
(f)  Bypass required for certain commercial and industrial connections. All commercial/industrial connections with a one inch or larger meter shall install a bypass which shall have a valve that will enable the village water utility to lock in the closed position. 
(Prior Code, §§ 16.09A, B, 16.14; Ord. No. 95-17; Ord. No. 97-01; Ord. No. 09-12; Ord. No. 04-15) 
Sec. 44-82. - Repair. 
(a)  Meters will be repaired by the water department and the cost of such repairs caused by ordinary wear and tear will be borne by the utility. 
(b)  Repair of any damage to a meter resulting from the carelessness of the owner of the premises, his agent or tenant, or from the negligence of any one of them to properly secure and protect same, including any damage that may result from freezing, the presence of hot water or steam in the meter, shall be paid for by the consumer or the owner of the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 16.10) 
Secs. 44-83-44-107. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RATES AND BILLING 

Sec. 44-108. - Rates established. 
    Utility rates shall be set by resolution as provided in the village fee schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 16.04; Ord. No. 95-17; Ord. No. 04-04) 
Sec. 44-109. - Billing. 
(a)  Due date. Bills for water service are rendered quarterly and become due and payable on the fifth of the month following the period for which billing is done. 
(b)  Late charges. A late payment charge of one percent will be added to bills not paid within 20 days of issuance. This late payment charge is applicable to all customers. The utility customer may be given a written notice that the bill is overdue no sooner than 20 days after the bill is issued, and unless payment or satisfactory arrangement for payment is made within the next ten days, service may be disconnected pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 185. 
(c)  Responsibility of landlord and tenant. The utility shall attempt to collect from tenants who are required to pay their own water bills. The landlord has the final responsibility of payment for these water bills. 
(d)  Dishonored check fee. Any check, being given for payment, that is returned by the bank for insufficient funds, shall incur an additional charge in the amount provided in the village fee schedule to that customer's account for which the payment was made. 
(e)  Combined metering. When a consumer's premises has several buildings, each supplied with service and metered separately, the full service charge will be billed for each meter separately and the readings will not be cumulated. If these buildings are all used in the same business and are connected by the consumer, they can be metered in one place. If the utility, for its own convenience, installs more than one meter, the readings will be cumulated for billing. 
(Prior Code, § 16.04(1), (2); Ord. No. 95-17; Ord. No. 04-04) 
Sec. 44-110. - Estimated billing if meter reading is unavailable. 
(a)  If the utility is unable to read a meter, the minimum charge shall be assessed and the difference adjusted when the meter is again read; that is, the bill for the succeeding quarter will be computed with the gallons or cubic feet in each block of the rate schedule doubled and credit will be given on that bill for the amount of the minimum bill paid the preceding month. 
(b)  Only in unusual cases and when approval is obtained from the customer shall more than two consecutive estimated bills be rendered. 
(Prior Code, § 16.11) 
Sec. 44-111. - Public water users. 
(a)  Water service supplied to municipal buildings, schools and similar facilities shall be metered and the regular metered service rates applied. Water used on an intermittent basis for flushing service, street sprinkling, flooding skating rinks, drinking fountains, etc., shall be metered where meters can be set to measure the service. 
(b)  If it is impossible to measure the service, the village water utility shall estimate the volume of water used based on the pressure, size of opening and period of time water is allowed to be drawn. The metered or estimated quantity, and rate, which shall be billed, shall be set forth by resolution. 
(Prior Code, § 16.04B; Ord. No. 95-17; Ord. No. 04-04) 
Sec. 44-112. - Fire protection services. 
(a)  Public fire protection service. For public fire protection service to the village, the annual charge shall be set forth by the public service commission. 
(b)  Private unmetered fire protection service. Quarterly demand charges for private fire protection service to unmetered connections to the main for automatic sprinkler systems, stand pipes (if connected permanently or continuously to the mains) and private hydrants shall be as provided by the state public service commission. For combined service, where a connection is made to the main for private fire protection service, such service line may be tapped with a smaller size branch line for general metered service. 
(Prior Code, § 16.04C, D; Ord. No. 95-17; Ord. No. 04-04) 
Sec. 44-113. - Building and construction water service. 
    Metered service rates shall apply to water services for building and construction purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 16.04E; Ord. No. 95-17; Ord. No. 04-04) 
Sec. 44-114. - Temporary metered water supply. 
(a)  An applicant for temporary water supply on a metered basis shall make and maintain a monetary deposit as per current Jackson Water Utility approved rates. The charge for setting the valve and furnishing and setting the meter shall be as provided in the village fee schedule. 
(b)  If no other supply is available, permission may be granted by the superintendent to use a hydrant after such hydrant is equipped with a sprinkling valve. Charges for setting or moving the valve and a deposit for the hydrant wheel and reducer in the amount provided in the village fee schedule shall accompany the application for temporary service. 
(c)  In no case shall any valve be placed or moved except by a member of the water department. If the water is to be used through iron pipe connections, all such pipe installations shall have a swing joint to facilitate quick disconnection from the fire hydrant. The applicant is responsible for protection of the water connection through backflow and cross connection requirements. 
(d)  All monies deposited as security for payment of charges arising from the use of temporary water supply on a metered basis, or for the return of a sprinkling valve wheel or reducer if the water is used on an un-metered basis, will be refunded to the depositor on the termination of the use of water, the payment of all charges levied against the depositor, and the return of the wheel and reducer. 
(Prior Code, § 16.12) 
Sec. 44-115. - Temporary service interruptions for repairs. 
    The utility reserves the right to shut off the water in the mains temporarily, to make repairs, alterations or add additions to the plant or system. When the circumstances will permit, the utility will give notification of the discontinuance of the supply. No rebate or damages will be allowed to consumers for such temporary suspension of supply. 
(Prior Code, § 16.15) 
Sec. 44-116. - Charges for water wasted due to leaks. 
    When a meter registers losses due to pipe leaks, the superintendent shall determine the extent of the consumer's knowledge of the leak and efforts to correct the leak. If the superintendent determines that the loss occurred without the consumer's knowledge or that the consumer knew of the loss but tried to correct the condition, he may determine the amount of the loss as nearly as possible by comparison with the use of the water during a like period, and the excess may be billed at the lowest step in the rates. If, however, the consumer knew of the leak and failed to give proper attention to it, the utility bills for the total consumption shown by the meter at regular rates. 
(Prior Code, § 16.13) 
Sec. 44-117. - Discontinuing use; disconnections at consumer request. 
(a)  Disconnections made to a water service shall include removal of the meter. The water service line shall be permanently disconnected or disabled and approved by the village water utility prior to alterations being made. A plumbing permit shall be required and work performed by a licensed master plumber unless exempted by state law. 
(b)  Consumers desiring to discontinue the use of water must contact the utility department on or before the quarterly billing date, or face being charged for the minimum quarterly charge for the next succeeding month. The request shall be made in writing. 
(Prior Code, §§ 16.04A, 16.09A; Ord. No. 95-17; Ord. No. 97-01; Ord. No. 09-12; Ord. No. 04-15) 
Sec. 44-118. - Re-connection charges. 
    Reconnection charges shall be in the amount provided in the village fee schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 16.07F) 
Secs. 44-119-44-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-150. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare of the citizens of the village, and is designed to comply with state law and federal regulations for the acceptance of construction grants to improve the quality of effluent discharges from waste treatment works. It is further intended to provide for administration and enforcement of this article and to provide penalties for its violations. 
(b)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, ordinances, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Prior Code, § 17.01) 
Sec. 44-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accrued reserves remains a method of keeping accounts of the segregated resources over several years to determine the funds available to offset capital expenditures to maintain an on-going, on-line waste treatment facility. 
    Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Administrator means the regional administrator of region 5 of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Annual notification. All sewer service customers shall be notified annually concerning the breakdown of their sewer service charges to specifically identify the portion of the total sewer service charges that are attributed to operation, maintenance, and replacement costs. 
    Audit means an audit as a separate report from other funds and shall cover the following: 
(1)  Financial operations are properly conducted; 
(2)  Financial reports are presented fairly; 
(3)  Applicable laws and regulations have been complied with; 
(4)  Resources are managed and used in an economical and efficient manner. 
    Authorized expenditures means those expenditures authorized by the utility and made payable from the accounts kept for the expenditures of the user charge. Expenditures from the reserve funds shall be limited to those for which the fund was created. 
    Billable biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means a user's loading in pounds of BOD calculated using the billable flow and concentration of BOD in the waste as determined by the engineer. Minimum waste strength of BOD shall be the domestic waste concentration of 238 milligrams per liter for the purpose of billing for user charges. 
    Billable flow means a user's recorded quarterly water usage as metered by the appropriate water utility, plus metered water from wells and other sources, and less any sewer-exempt metered data, times the approved percentage factor for wastewater entering the sewer system out of the metered water. 
    Billable total suspended solids (TSS) means a user's loading in pounds of TSS calculated using the billable flow and concentration of TSS in the waste as determined by the engineer. Minimum waste strength of TSS shall be the domestic waste concentration of 233 milligrams per liter for the purpose of billing user charges. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees centigrade. 
    Building drain, sanitary, means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives sanitary or industrial sewage only and is located inside the walls of a building and conveys the sewage to the building sewer, which begins three feet outside the building wall. 
    Building drain, storm, means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives stormwater or other clear water discharge, but receives no wastewater from sewage or other drainage pipes, and is located outside the walls of a building and conveys the sewage to the building sewer, which begins three feet outside the building wall. 
    Building sewer, sanitary, means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal and conveys only sanitary or industrial sewage. This is also known as a house connection. 
    Building sewer, storm, means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal and conveys stormwater or other clear water drainage, but no sanitary or industrial sewage. This is also known as a house connection. 
    Classes of users means the division of wastewater treatment customers by waste characteristics and process discharge similarities or function, such as residential, commercial, institutional, industrial or governmental. 
    Collection sewer means a sewer whose primary purpose is to collect wastewaters from individual point source discharges. 
    Combined sewage means a combination of both wastewater and stormwater or surface water. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stormwater or surface water. 
    Commercial user means, for the purpose of the user charge system, a user engaged in the purchase or sale of goods or in a transaction or business or who otherwise renders a service. 
    Commission means the governing body of the village utility. 
    Compatible pollutant means BOD, suspended solids (SS), pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit, if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact, does remove them to a substantial degree. 
    Debt service means the annual payments required on bonds or other promissory notes for principal and interest for loans or bonds for capital expenditures for the sewerage system. 
    Deposited means placing funds in control of the utility and, if the deposit is in the form of a bank check, deposit shall not be deemed collected within this definition until the applicable rules of the bank's collection procedures are fulfilled. 
    Director means the chief administrator of the utility. 
    Dissolved solids means that concentration of matter in the sewage consisting of colloidal particulate matter one micron in diameter or less, and both organic and inorganic molecules and ions present in solution. 
    Domestic level user or residential user means, for the purpose of the user charge system, a user whose premises or building is used primarily as a domicile for one or more persons and whose wastes originate from the normal living activities of its inhabitants. 
    Easement means an acquired legal right less than fee simple for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Engineer means the chief engineer of the utility registered in this state as a professional engineer. 
    Fecal coliform means any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of man and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution. 
    Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility approved by the district. 
    Force main means a pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure. 
    Functional betterment means a process improvement in the increased size facilities or a process improvement in existing facilities that is directly anticipated to preclude physical betterment or is an indirect improvement to the process as a result of renewal on a cost effective basis. 
    Functional obsolescence means the process deficiency of a functional element of a plant beyond the capacity of a preventative maintenance program to such extent that a new process device or piece of equipment would be more cost effective. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any non-treatable waste product, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids. 
    Industrial user means, for the purpose of the user charge system, a manufacturing or processing facility, which is engaged in a production or profit-making venture. For the purpose of this article, an industrial user shall mean any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works, identified in the standard industrial classification manual, 1972, as amended and supplemented, prepared by the statistical policy division, office of management and budget, including, but not limited to, the following divisions: 
(1)  Division A-agriculture, forestry, and fishing. 
(2)  Division B-mining. 
(3)  Division D-manufacturing. 
(4)  Division E-transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary services. 
(5)  Division I-services. 
    Infiltration means the water unintentionally entering the public sewer system, including sanitary building drains and sewers, from the ground through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow. 
    Infiltration/inflow means the total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source. 
    Inflow means the water discharge into a sanitary sewer system, including building drains and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders; cellar, yard and area drains; foundation drains; unpolluted cooling water discharges; drains from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers; cross connections from storm sewers or combined sewers; catchbasins; stormwaters; surface runoff; street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguishable from, infiltration. 
    Interceptor sewer means a sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system permit means a permit issued under the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant to section 402 of public law 92-500, as amended. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    Normal domestic strength sewage , as defined for the purposes of the article, means wastewater or sewage having an average daily-suspended solids (SS) concentration of not more than 233 milligrams per liter and an average daily BOD of not more than 238 milligrams per liter. 
    Operation and maintenance costs includes all costs, direct and indirect, not including debt service but inclusive of expenditures attributable to administration, replacement of equipment, and treatment and collection of wastewater, necessary to ensure adequate wastewater collection and treatment on a continuing basis which conforms to applicable regulations and assures optimal long-term facility management. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group discharging any wastewater to the wastewater treatment facility. 
    Personal property means, for the purpose of the user charge system, all equipment owned by the utility and used in the transport and treatment of sewage. Such equipment must be mechanical, electronic or electrical or have movable parts. 
    pH means the term used to express the intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Physical betterment means the expansion of a physical facility to increase capacity of the treatment works. 
    Physical obsolescence means the material deficiency of a functional element of a treatment plant to a point that repair, as normal or preventative maintenance, is not cost benefit effective. 
    Pretreatment means the treatment of industrial sewage from privately owned industrial sources by the generator of that source prior to introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly owned treatment works. 
    Private sewer means a sewer which is not owned by the utility. 
    Public sewer means a sewer which is owned and controlled by the utility and is separate from and does not include sewers owned by other governmental units. 
    Pumping station means a station positioned in the public sewer system at which wastewater is pumped to a higher level. 
    Real property means, for the purpose of the user charge, all fixed physical facilities owned by the utility and used in the transport and treatment of sewage which do not have movable parts, such as buildings, tanks, sewers, structures and the like. 
    Renewal costs means the expenditures from reserve funds or other funds to overcome physical or functional consumption of plant capacity or function or obsolescence of same, in order that the equivalent in function of the plant is present at the end of the anticipated useful life. 
    Replacement costs means the expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance costs," as defined in this section, includes replacement costs. 
    Replacement reserve means an account for the segregation of resources to meet capital consumption or personal or real property. Monies collected for replacement, as a component of the user charge, shall be placed in this account. 
    Resolution of differences. Resolution of differences or disputes over sewer service and sewer service charges that arise between users and the staff of the village and cannot be resolved at that level may be appealed to the village board and shall be resolved by the decision of the village board. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries only wastewaters from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means the combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions including polluted cooling water and unintentionally admitted infiltration/inflow. 
    Combined sewage means wastes, including sanitary sewage, industrial sewage, stormwater, infiltration, and inflow, carried to the wastewater treatment facilities by a combined sewer. 
    Industrial sewage means a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from an industrial establishment and resulting from any trade or process carried on in that establishment and shall include the wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water. 
    Sanitary sewage means the combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from the toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities. 
    Sewer service charge means the total of all charges, including debt service charges, operation, maintenance, and replacement charges, sampling and analysis charges, replacement reserve account charges, sewage strength surcharges, and all other charges as reflected in the total billing. 
    Shredded garbage means garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions, normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.25 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Significant industry means any industry that will contribute greater than 50,000 gallons per day. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater in concentration of any given constituent or in any quantity of flow which shall adversely affect the collection system, or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
    Standard methods means the laboratory procedures set forth in the following sources: the latest edition of standard method for the examination of water and wastewater, as amended, prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation; methods for chemical analysis of water and wastes, prepared and published by the analytical quality control laboratory, Federal Environmental Protection Agency; "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants"; or any other procedures recognized by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency and the state department of natural resources. 
    Storm sewer means a sewer that carries only stormwaters, surface run-off, street wash, and drainage and to which sanitary or industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted. 
    Suspended solids (SS) or total suspended solids (TSS) means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, waste, wastewater, or other liquids and is removable by laboratory filtration as prescribed in the "standard methods" enumerated in this section. 
    Total solids means the sum of suspended and dissolved solids. 
    Toxic amount means concentration of any pollutant or combination of pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause severe adverse effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations, and physiological manifestations, as defined in standards issued pursuant to section 307(a) of public law 92-500, as amended. 
    Unpolluted water means water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that is of sufficient quality that it would not be in violation of federal or state water quality standards if such water were discharged into navigable waters of the state. Unpolluted water would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    Useful life means the anticipated term in years of physical or functional productivity of elements or the whole of the wastewater treatment system which can be reevaluated as a result of preventative maintenance, renewal which offsets physical or functional obsolescence, renewal of capital elements due to consumption, and physical or functional betterment, direct or indirect. 
    User charge system means the system of charges levied on users for the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement requirements on new and old wastewater collection and treatment facilities. 
    Utility means the village sewer utility. 
    Volatile organic matter means the material in the sewage solids transformed to gases or vapors when heated to 500 degrees centigrade for 15 minutes. 
    Wastewater treatment works means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, transport, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and to dispose of the effluent accumulated residual solids. 
    Water works means all facilities for water supply, treatment, storage reservoirs, water lines, and services and booster stations for obtaining, treating, and distributing potable water. 
    Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02) 
Sec. 44-152. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Inspection rights. Any duly authorized employee or agent of the utility bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted at any time to enter upon all properties within the corporate limits of the utility or outside a utility that has contracted for wastewater treatment service, for the purpose of inspecting, observing, measuring, sampling, and testing, as may be required in pursuance of the implementation and enforcement of the terms and provisions of this article. 
(b)  Liability during inspections. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to this section, the duly authorized employees of the utility shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the commercial or industrial user, and the user shall be held harmless for injury or death to the utility's employees, and the utility shall indemnify the user against loss or damage to its property by utility employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the user and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the user to maintain safe conditions. 
(Prior Code, § 17.13) 
Sec. 44-153. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violations of regulatory provisions. 
(1)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a forfeiture in an amount as set forth in the municipal forfeiture schedule or as provided in section 1-15. 
(2)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall also be: 
a.  Liable to the utility for all costs, expenses, loss, or damage, if any, incurred by the utility as the result of such violation. 
b.  Subject to immediate disconnection of the sewer serving the property upon or in connection with which the violation incurred. 
c.  Subject to a lien upon the property in the amount of any costs described in this article. 
(b)  Nonpayment of bills. 
(1)  Lien. Whenever wastewater treatment bills or capital surcharge bills become delinquent as set forth in the revenues section of this article, the same shall become and constitute a lien upon the real estate to which sewer service is applied pursuant to state law. Statements rendered for such charge shall be deemed notice to all parties, whether or not the person charged with the statement is the owner of the property served. The claim for lien shall be made in the form of a sworn statement setting forth: 
a.  A description of the real estate, sufficient for the identification thereof, upon or for which the sewerage service was supplied; 
b.  The amount or amounts of money due for such sewerage service; 
c.  The date or dates when such amount or amounts became delinquent. 
If all amounts shown due remain unpaid after recording as provided by state statutes, the utility may foreclose the lien in the same manner and with the same effect as in the foreclosure of mortgages on real estate. 
(2)  Civil action. In the alternative of levying a lien, the utility may, at its discretion, file suit in a civil action to collect such amounts as are delinquent and due against the occupant or user of the real estate and shall collect, as well, all attorney's fees incurred by the utility in filing the civil action. Such attorney's fees shall be fixed by order of the court. 
(3)  Interest. In addition to all penalties and costs attributable and chargeable to recording notices of the lien or filing a civil action, the owner or user of the real estate being served by the treatment works shall be liable for interest upon all unpaid balances at the rate of five percent per annum. 
(4)  Filing fees. In all cases where the sewer user charge payment has become delinquent and utility elects to file a statement thereof in the office of the register of deeds, as herein above set forth, there shall be added to the amount due the utility such charges and expenses as are necessary and required to verify the legal description of the property to which the lien is to attach, plus a sum established by the utility as sufficient to cover the cost of preparation of such notices and forms required. In each instance, the director or a duly appointed employee of the utility shall be authorized and directed to include such additional costs in the amount claimed due the utility in the notice of the lien. 
(5)  Revocation of permits and disconnecting of service. The utility reserves the right to revoke discharge permits and to disconnect service to any user whenever wastewater treatment, industrial cost recovery, or capital surcharge bills become delinquent. 
(6)  Deposit of future payments. All amounts charged under this article continue to be due hereunder, whether or not the sewer is disconnected, and no sewer shall be reconnected until the utility is paid in full for all amounts due it, and in addition, there shall be paid to the utility a deposit equal to an estimated amount of such charge for the next succeeding year. Such a deposit shall be held by utility in escrow, and will be returned upon satisfactory payment of all bills for a period of two years. 
(Prior Code, § 17.14; Ord. No. 94-04) 
Secs. 44-154-44-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION AND TREATMENT 

Sec. 44-175. - Sewage collection and treatment regulations. 
(a)  Conditions for discharge into treatment system. 
(1)  Public wastewater collection facilities are required to be used for the deposit of human waste and some commercial wastes in accordance with federal and state statutes and state administrative regulations, local requirements, and approved by the state department of natural resources. 
(2)  No building or facility shall be connected to any sewer unless the entire property on which the building or facility is situated is located within the corporate limits of the village sewer utility, except as set forth in section 44-232. 
(3)  No person shall place, deposit, or discharge, or cause to be placed, deposited, or discharged, upon public or privately owned property any wastewaters within the corporate limits of the utility unless done so within adequately sized holding facilities approved by all applicable federal, state, and local agencies. 
(4)  No person shall deposit or discharge, or cause to be deposited or discharged, to any wastewater collection facilities, any solid, liquid, or gaseous waste unless through a connection approved under the terms of this article. 
(5)  No person shall discharge any sewage, waste, or material, industrial waste, or any polluted water into a stream or in the air or onto the land, except where the person has made and provided for treatment of such wastes, which will render the content of such wastes discharge in accordance with applicable utility, state, federal laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
(6)  In case of natural outlet discharges, at the time construction of the waste treatment works commences, each owner or operator shall furnish the utility an approved national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit setting forth the effluent limits to be achieved by such pretreatment facilities and a schedule for achieving compliance with such limits by the required date. The NPDES permit shall be kept on file with the director and updated by such information as periodically required by the utility, local, state, or federal agencies. 
(7)  Any person owning property within the corporate limits of the utility and the property is improved with one or more residences, houses, buildings, or structures for or intended for human use, occupancy, employment, or any other similar purpose whatever, and the property abuts on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is located a sewer within 100 feet from the nearest property line shall, within 90 days after such sewer is in service, at his expense, install suitable toilet and waste disposal facilities in the residences, houses, buildings, or structures, and connect the facilities with the sewer in accordance with the terms and provisions of the article; provided, however, that in the event compliance with this section causes economic hardship to the person, he may apply to the utility for exemption. An application for exemption shall state in detail the circumstances which are claimed to cause the economic hardship. Exemptions shall only be granted to residential users and shall not apply to commercial and industrial users. Any connection to the sewer under this article shall be made only if the utility determines that there is capacity, including BOD, TSS, TPH, and TNIT capacity, available in all downstream sewer lift stations and sewer lines and in the treatment plant. 
(8)  Persons described in this section shall not avoid connection to the sewer by reason of the actual distance between the building or structure and the connecting point of the sewer line. 
a.  The village board may order commercial and industrial property to install a monitoring manhole on their property. 
b.  All new commercial and industrial structures shall install a monitoring manhole on their property. The manhole shall be built in accordance with the village's design manual. 
(b)  Limitations on discharge. No discharger shall cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any of the following described substances into the wastewater collection system or wastewater treatment facility of the village: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids, or gases, which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the operation of the wastewater treatment works. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances, which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment works. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the wastewater treatment works. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity either singly or by interaction to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to exceed the limitation set forth in state or federal categorical pretreatment standards. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified in the toxic pollutant list set forth in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 215. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance or repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the village's effluent or treatment residues, sludges, or scrums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. 
(7)  Any substance, which will cause the village to violate its WPDES or other disposal system permits. 
(8)  Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)  Any wastewater having temperature that will inhibit biological activity in the village wastewater treatment works resulting in interference; but in no case, wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the publicly owned treatment works that exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(10)  Any slug load. 
(11)  Any unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, non-contact cooling water. 
(12)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as exceed limits established by the village in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(13)  Any wastewater that causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(14)  Any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off or surface drainage emanating from any clear water source, including any sump pump. Such waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or other waterway with permission of the village. 
(c)  Pretreatment. 
(1)  Interceptors or retainers shall be installed by the user at its own expense when, in the opinion of the engineer, such are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, oils, or sand in excessive amounts, of any inflammable wastes, and of other harmful ingredients to the wastewater treatment facility and NPDES permit. Such interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the engineer, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning by the user and for inspection by the engineer. 
(2)  Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the user, at his own expense, and shall be kept in continuous and efficient operation at all times. 
(3)  a.  In the event the utility approves the admission of any materials into its sewers as set forth in this section of the code, the utility shall direct the user causing admission of any such materials to, at his own expense, construct, install, and operate such preliminary treatment plants and facilities as may be required in order to: 
1.  Reduce the BOD to 238 parts per million, and the suspended solids to 233 parts per million by weight. Reduce the total phosphorus to ten parts per million and total nitrogen to 30 parts per million. 
2.  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in this section. 
3.  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
b.  When required, in the opinion of the village, to modify or eliminate waste that is harmful to the wastewater treatment works, the discharger shall provide at its expense such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be required to render this suitable for discharge into the public sewers. 
(4)  No preliminary treatment plant and facility shall be constructed or operated unless all plans, specifications, technical operating data, and other information pertinent to its proposed operation and maintenance shall conform to all utility, Federal Environmental Protection Agency, state department of natural resources, and any other local, state, or federal agency regulations, and unless written approval of the plans, specifications, technical operating data, and sludge disposal has been obtained from Federal Environmental Protection Agency, and any other local, state, or federal agency having regulatory authority with respect thereto. 
(5)  All such preliminary treatment facilities as required by this article shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating condition by the user or person operating and maintaining the facility served thereby, and at the user's expense. 
(6)  No provision contained in this article shall be construed to prevent or prohibit a separate or special contract or agreement between the utility or any industrial user whereby industrial waste and material of unusual strength, character, or composition may be accepted by the utility for treatment, subject to additional payment therefor by the industrial user; provided, however, that such contract or agreement shall have the prior approval of the village sewer utility commission. 
(7)  The utility reserves the right to reject admission to the system of any waste harmful to the treatment or collection facilities, or to the receiving station. 
(8)  Dilution is not an acceptable method of reducing waste concentration to the limits in this article. 
(d)  Maintenance and repair to the collection system. 
(1)  The service lateral from the main to the point of use shall be maintained free of obstruction by the property owner. 
(2)  Structural repairs to the service lateral from the main to the property line shall be the responsibility of the utility. Structural repairs to the service lateral from the property line to the point of use shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Initial construction of the entire service lateral shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(e)  Mercury minimization program. 
(1)  Dental offices. This subsection applies to any dental office that places or removes amalgam. If work in a dental office is limited to work that does not involve placing or removing amalgam, such as orthodontics, oral and maxillo-facial surgery, endodontics, or prosthodontics, then this subsection does not apply. Dental offices that meet the requirements of this subsection after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived will be subject to a schedule under subsections (e)(1)b through f of this section, as established by the village. 
a.  All dental offices shall implement best management practices for amalgam as established by the Wisconsin Dental Association. 
b.  Within the shortest reasonable time, but not later than December 31, 2009, every vacuum system where amalgam is placed or removed shall include an amalgam separator that meets the criteria of the international standards organization (ISO 11143). Dental offices shall install, operate and maintain the amalgam separator according to instructions provided by the manufacturer. The amalgam separator shall have a design and capacity appropriate for the size and type of vacuum system. 
c.  On or before June 30, 2009, each dental office shall submit a schedule for the installation of the amalgam separator required by subsection (e)(1)b of this section. 
d.  On or before October 31, 2009, each dental office shall submit a report to the village sewer utility that certifies the implementation of the management practices required by subsection (e)(1)a of this section and identifies the contractors used to remove amalgam waste within the last 12 months. 
e.  On or before October 31, 2009, each dental office shall submit a report providing the following information: 
1.  If installation of the amalgam separator is complete, then the report shall identify the installation date, the manufacturer, and the model name. 
2.  If installation of the amalgam separator is incomplete, then the report shall briefly explain the delay, provide an installation schedule, and identify the manufacturer and the model name of the amalgam separator that will be installed. 
f.  If a dental office has provided a report according to subsection (e)(1)e.2 of this section, then the dental office shall notify the village sewer utility of the completion of the installation within five days after completion. 
g.  The village sewer utility shall provide forms for reporting the information required by subsections (e)(1)c through f of this section. 
h.  From the contractors used to remove amalgam waste, dental offices shall obtain records for each shipment showing the volume or mass of amalgam waste shipped; the name and address of the destination; and the name and address of the contractor. Dental offices shall maintain these records for a minimum of five years. Dental offices shall make these records available to village sewer utility personnel for inspection and copying upon request. 
i.  Annually on or before January 31 each dental office shall submit a report to the village sewer utility that lists the volume or mass of amalgam waste shipped, the name and address of the destination, and the name and address of the contractors used to remove amalgam waste within the previous calendar year. The report shall also set forth all maintenance performed on the amalgam separator within the previous calendar year, including inspections, cleaning, repairs and other maintenance. The village sewer utility shall provide forms for reporting the information required by this subsection. 
j.  Dental offices shall permit village sewer utility personnel to inspect the vacuum system, amalgam separator, and amalgam waste storage areas if requested. Inspections shall occur during normal operating schedule of the dental office according to appointments made in advance, as long as this advance notice does not impede enforcement of this subsection (1). 
k.  If a dental office is implementing the management practices required by subsection (e)(1)a of this section and is operating and maintaining the amalgam separator required by subsection (e)(1)b of this section, then with regard to mercury it will not be subject to the regulatory procedures and requirements as set forth elsewhere in this article. 
(2)  Other facilities. This subsection applies to all other facilities having the potential to discharge mercury or mercury-containing material to the village sanitary sewer system. 
a.  Facilities include: 
1.  Medical facilities, including all hospitals, clinic, and veterinary facilities that have laboratories. 
2.  School facilities, including all public and private schools with science laboratories, including middle schools, high schools, technical schools, colleges, and universities, but not elementary schools. 
3.  Industrial facilities, including all industrial plants that historically or consistently discharge mercury into the wastewater treatment plant and industrial plants with the potential for mercury in their wastewater. 
b.  The village sewer utility shall identify and notify the facilities to be regulated under this subsection (e)(2) within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. All facilities identified after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be notified individually by the village sewer utility that they are subject to regulation under this subsection (e)(2). 
c.  All facilities regulated under this subsection (2) shall implement best management practices as established by the state department of natural resources (DNR) and the village sewer utility. On or before July 31, 2009, each facility regulated under this subsection (e)(2) shall submit a report to the village sewer utility that identifies the management practices already implemented, and lists the anticipated dates for implementing the other management practices listed on the report. New facilities identified under subsection (e)(2)b of this section shall submit this report within three months of notification. 
d.  By December 31, 2009, all facilities regulated under this subsection (e)(2) shall submit a report to the village sewer utility that certifies the implementation of the management practices described subsection (e)(2)c of this section. New facilities identified under subsection (e)(2)b of this section shall implement best management practices and submit a certification report within six months of submittal of the report required under subsection (e)(2)c of this section. 
e.  The village sewer utility shall provide forms for reporting the information required by subsection (e)(2)c and d of this section. 
f.  If the facility regulated under this subsection (e)(2) is implementing the management practices required by subsection (e)(2)c and d of this section, then with regard to mercury it will not be subject to the regulatory procedures and requirements as set forth elsewhere in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 17.07; Ord. No. 93-10; Ord. No. 00-13; Ord. No. 05-07; Ord. No. 09-02) 
Secs. 44-176-44-203. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 44-204. - Required; reporting criteria. 
(a)  The village wastewater utility reserves the right to require a discharge permit from commercial or industrial users of the sewer, and, if the utility does exercise the option, commercial or industrial users shall not discharge to a sewer without having first applied for and obtained a permit from the utility. Upon official notification from the utility, each commercial or industrial user presently discharging material to the sewer shall apply for and obtain such a discharge permit within 90 days from the date of such notification. 
(1)  Commercial and industrial classification codes set forth in the standard industrial classification manual, 1972 edition, as amended and supplemented, are adopted by the village sewer utility as the basis for the issuance of discharge permit for building connections to a sewer. 
(2)  The application for a discharge permit shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by the utility and shall be fully completed under oath by the property owner, user, or a duly authorized and knowledgeable officer, agent, or representative thereof, and acknowledged. If requested, the person making application shall also submit such scientific or testing data, or other information as may be required by the utility. The engineer shall also have, at its discretion, the right to personally inspect the premises, equipment and material, and laboratory testing facilities of the applicant. 
(3)  No fee shall be charged for a discharge application or permit. 
(4)  No discharge permit shall be issued by the utility to any person whose discharge of material to sewers, whether shown upon the application or determined after inspection and testing conducted by the utility engineer, is not in conformance with federal, state or utility statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, unless a waiver or variance of such standards and requirements is granted by the utility in the manner hereinafter set forth. The engineer shall state in writing the reason or reasons for denial or requirement for waiver-variance and the written communication shall be mailed or personally delivered to the applicant within five days after denial. 
(5)  In the event the type or volume of material from property for which a discharge permit was previously granted shall materially and substantially change, the person granted such permit previously shall make a new application to the utility in the same manner and form as originally made. 
(6)  If the application for a new permit or for one because of change in the type or volume of material discharge is denied by the engineer, or if the discharge indicated from the permit application or inspection is not in accordance with the requirements of this section, and a waiver of variance is required, the user may have the utility review the denial or may request a waiver, provided the user shall give written notice of its request within 30 after receiving the denial. The utility shall review the permit application, the written denial, and such other evidence and matters as the applicant and engineer shall present at its next regular meeting following receipt of request for its review, and the decision of the utility rendered publicly at the meeting shall be final. 
(7)  In the event that any discharge of material to a sewer shall materially and substantially differ in type and volume than shown in the application and permit, the person and user shall immediately, upon order of the utility, cease and desist from such discharge and shall also be subject to disconnection, fine, and other penalties provided by this article. 
(8)  A grant of waiver or variance by the utility may set forth such conditions, exceptions, time limitations, durations, and expirations as the utility deems necessary and proper. 
(b)  Reporting criteria for nonresidential users. 
(1)  The village sewer utility reserves the right to require any nonresidential user to submit quarterly to the utility, on forms provided by the utility, a certified statement of the characteristics of its industrial wastes discharge in the sewers and treatment works of the utility or to any sewers connected to its treatment works. This statement shall be filed with the utility no later than the tenth day of the month following the quarter for which the report is required. 
(2)  The waste characteristics to be measured and certified by the user shall be: 
a.  BOD in milligrams per liter. 
b.  Suspended solids in milligrams per liter. 
c.  Total phosphorus in milligrams per liter. 
d.  Total nitrogen in milligrams per liter. 
e.  Such other constituents of wastewater as directed by the engineer. 
(3)  Should there be a difference in understanding between the utility and user as to the characteristics in division 7 of this article, the utility reserves the right to use the utility's results from analyses for purposes of billing. Should submission not be made during the ten-day period, the utility shall use its results from analyses for purposes of billing. 
(4)  Whenever required by the utility, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying nonresidential wastewater and material shall install a large manhole or sampling chamber in the building sewer in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the engineer and installed and maintained at all times at the user's expense. There shall be ample room in each sampling chamber to accurately sample and composite samples for analysis. The chamber shall be safely, easily, and independently (of other premises and buildings of the user) accessible to authorized representatives of the utility at all times. Where construction of a sampling chamber is not economically or otherwise feasible, alternate arrangements for sampling may be arranged at the discretion of the engineer. 
(5)  Each sampling chamber shall contain a parshall flume, weir, or similar device with a recording and totalizing register for measuring liquid quantity; or other metered water supply to the industrial plant may be used as measure of liquid quantity where it is substantiated by the engineer that the metered water supply and waste quantities are approximately the same or where a measurable adjustment agreed to by the engineer is made in the metered water supply to determine the liquid waste quantity. 
(6)  Samples shall be taken every hour or half hour, as determined by the engineer, and properly refrigerated and composited in proportions to the flow for a representative 24-hour sample. Such sampling shall be done as prescribed by the engineer to ensure representative quantities for the entire reporting period. Minimum requirements for determination of representative quantities or characteristics shall include re-evaluation during each 12-month period. The determination of representative quantities and characteristics shall include not less than seven consecutive calendar days of 24-hour composite samplings taken during periods of normal operation, together with acceptable flow measurements. 
(7)  The sampling frequency, sampling chamber, metering device, sampling methods, and analysis of samples shall be subject, at any time, to inspection and verification by the engineer. 
(8)  All measurements, test, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be determined in accordance with the standard methods specified in this section or with any other method approved by the village. 
(9)  The village may elect, at its option, to have the metering and sample collection done by sewer utility personnel or authorized agents and have composite samples delivered to the utility laboratory or a private registered laboratory for analysis. This procedure can also be terminated at any time by the village upon reasonable notice. 
(Prior Code, § 17.11) 
Secs. 44-205-44-231. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SERVICE IN OUTLYING AREAS 

Sec. 44-232. - Service to outlying territory. 
(a)  The utility shall have the right, upon payments, terms, and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon, to contract in writing for the right to use any sewer serving property located wholly or partially outside the village's corporate limits. 
(b)  In the event a contract is made pursuant to section 44-204(a), a user of any sewer serving property wholly or partially outside the utility's corporate limits shall be subject to all of the terms and provisions of this article, and in addition to all payments and charges be required to pay all equivalent costs, taxes, charges, and expenses as would be imposed upon and paid by a user situated within the corporate limits of the village. 
(c)  If any property of a person desirous of becoming a user is situated outside the corporate limits of the utility and not contiguous thereto so that it may not properly be annexed to and become part of the village corporate limits, the utility may permit such a connection, provided that a contract providing essentially the following be entered into between the village and the user: 
(1)  The user may connect buildings situated only on the fully described tract set forth in the agreement and in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the utility and local, state, and federal governments. 
(2)  The wastes and material discharged shall meet all present and future standings for content and volume, and the user shall further agree to pay all future connections, user, and treatment service charges, which are applicable to all property and users uniformly. 
(3)  The utility shall not, without its prior written consent and acceptance, have dedicated to it, or own, any sewer system installed within the property, and the producer, its successors and assigns, shall maintain the same as its own cost; provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit the dedication of part or all of the system to another unit of government. 
(4)  In the event that such property therein described, or any subdivided or separate tract thereof, shall be annexed or attached to the village by proper ordinance or resolution, then the agreement executed pursuant to section 44-204, as to such property or the subdivided or separate tract thereof which is so annexed or attached, shall then terminate and be of no further force and effect. 
(5)  Upon conveyance by the owner of all or any subdivided portion or tract of the property, the successor in title shall succeed to all rights and liabilities hereunder, and the owner shall have no further liability to the utility thereunder in respect to such tract except as shall have accrued as of the date the instrument of conveyance is recorded in the office of the county register of deeds, which recording shall constitute notice to any successor or assign of the owner of its term and provisions, and to which any subsequent conveyance or assignment of the owner shall be subject. 
(6)  If any part or provision of the agreement shall be found or held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, then the entire agreement shall terminate and all sewers of the owner or its successors or assigns shall be promptly disconnected from any such system which ultimately connects to the utilities transport facility. 
(7)  The applicant for treatment service under an agreement pursuant to section 44-204 shall agree to assume user charges, industrial waste charges and capital surcharge, if applicable, and to obtain from the utility the proper building permit by which the connection is allowed and the discharge permit, if applicable, which indicates what discharge will be made to the treatment system. 
(Prior Code, § 17.10) 
Secs. 44-233-44-257. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RATES AND BILLING 

Sec. 44-258. - Utility commission to control. 
(a)  Basis for sewer services charges. 
(1)  Sewer users served by water utility water meters. Upon each lot, dwelling unit, or parcel of land, building, or premises having a connection with the wastewater system and being served with water solely by the water utility, a wastewater treatment service charge shall be levied based, in part, on the quantity of water used as measured by the water utility water meter used upon the premises or direct wastewater metering at the discretion of the village. 
(2)  Sewer service charges. A sewer charge shall be imposed upon each dwelling unit, lot, parcel of land, building or premises serviced by the sewerage system, or otherwise discharging sewage, including industrial wastes, into the sewerage system. The sewer service charge for any dwelling unit, lot, parcel of land, building or premises outside the corporate limits which is connected to the sanitary sewer system shall be based upon the quantity of water used, quantity of wastewater used, quantity of wastewater discharged, and quality of wastewater generated as measured by the water meter or sewage meter in use. 
(3)  All water users shall be metered. 
(b)  General sewer service, metered. 
(1)  General sewer service is available for sewage contributors discharging domestic strength (or less) sewage into the sanitary system. The total quarterly charge shall be the sum of the debt service charge and the user charge. 
(2)  Quarterly debt service charges are based on meter size: 
a.  ?-inch water meter. 
b.  3/4-inch water meter. 
c.  One-inch water meter. 
d.  11/4-inch water meter. 
e.  11/2-inch water meter. 
f.  Two-inch water meter. 
g.  Four-inch water meter. 
Volume charge: the rate for each 1,000 gallons of sewage discharged into the sanitary system for flow, normal strength sewage for BOD, and normal strength sewage for total suspended solids will be set forth by resolution of the village board. 
(3)  User charge for normal domestic strength sewage. The user charge for normal domestic strength sewage will be set forth by resolution for each 1,000 gallons of sewage discharged in the sanitary sewerage system based upon metered water consumption. If a residential or small commercial customer would like to add an additional meter to receive a sanitary sewer credit for water that doesn't go into the sanitary sewer, the sewer utility will charge a meter fee of 50 percent of the regular sanitary sewer meter fee for that meter. This meter fee will cover the cost for the additional manual reading and the custom bill that will need to be generated due to the additional meter. Normal domestic strength sewage, as defined for the purpose of this article, shall mean wastewater or sewage having an average daily suspended solids (SS) concentration of not more than 233 milligrams per liter and an average daily BOD of not more than 238 milligrams per liter and as defined for other sewage components as listed elsewhere in this article. 
(4)  Sewage system users whose waste characteristics are of such a nature that analysis for strengths are required, shall pay for the analysis series on a per sample basis plus any village expenses incurred due to the billing and handling. The frequency of sampling shall be at the discretion of the wastewater utility. 
(c)  High-strength waste sewer service charges, metered. 
(1)  High-strength waste sewer service is available to commercial and industrial waste that is stronger in strength than normal domestic strength sewage that goes into the sanitary system, subject to the total quarterly debt service charge, the user charge for average domestic strength surcharges, fines and applicable sampling and analysis charges. 
(2)  Quarterly debt service charge shall be set forth by resolution. 
(3)  User charges shall be the same as set forth by resolution. High-strength waste surcharges shall be set forth by resolution. 
(4)  Metered service. If a portion of the water furnished to a sewer customer is not discharged to the sewer system, the amount of such water may be deducted in computing the charge for sewer service. A separate meter may be required to be installed to measure such water. The customer must, at his own expense, make necessary changes in the water piping and provide couplings so that a meter can be set. 
(d)  General sewer service, un-metered. 
(1)  General sewer service is available to residential and small commercial sewer service customers who are not metered water service customers. The total charge shall be the sum of the quarterly debt service charge and a user charge based upon an estimate by the village of the amount of sewage discharged to the sewerage system as set forth by resolution. 
(2)  Quarterly debt service charge shall be set forth by resolution for this class of user. 
(3)  User charge. The user charge shall be based upon the village's estimate of the amount of sewage discharged to the sewerage discharged to the sewerage system charged as set forth by resolution for each 1,000 gallons of sewage discharged. 
(4)  At the discretion of the utility, it may designate users in this category as average domestic in un-metered users with an estimated discharge of 27,375 ($86.51/quarter, 300 gallons per day). The resulting user charge for these designated users will be set forth by resolution. 
(e)  High-strength sewer service charge, un-metered. 
(1)  Un-metered industries may be permitted by the village board subject to the terms and conditions as recommended by the wastewater utility. 
(2)  Quarterly debt service charge shall be set forth by resolution. 
(f)  Average domestic un-metered users designated; user charge. At the discretion of the utility, it may designate users in this category as average domestic un-metered users with an estimated discharge of 20,500 gallons per quarter. The resulting user charge for these designated users will be set forth by resolution. 
(Prior Code, § 17.03; Ord. No. 01-08) 
Sec. 44-259. - Payment of charges. 
(a)  Method of billing. The sewer service charge and volume charge shall be payable to the village. 
(b)  Penalties. A penalty of one percent per month shall be added to all bills not paid by the date fixed for final payment in accordance with any administrative procedures of payment determined by the village board. 
(c)  Delinquent bills. 
(1)  Any bill not paid four weeks after date of billing shall be declared delinquent and a past due notice issued to the billed party. The past due notice shall contain an additional handling charge to offset all costs incurred for generating and issuing the past due notice. Additional past due notices containing their respective handling charges shall be issued, if necessary, eight weeks and 12 weeks after date of billing. 
(2)  Should a bill be delinquent 120 days after the date of billing, the bill shall be referred to the attorney for the utility or a collection agency for collection under terms and conditions of section 44-153. 
(3)  Non-receipt of any bill described in this section shall not release the user of liability for any of these charges. In any case where the user is responsible for the non-receipt of the bill, the conditions herein described for late payment and penalties shall apply. In those instances where the utility is responsible for the non-receipt of the bill, the utility may, at its discretion, grant the user an extension of the discount period and late payment conditions described herein. 
(4)  All uncollected service charges shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Lien for charges. Sewerage service charges shall be a lien upon the property served pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0821(4)(d) and shall be collected in the manner therein provided. 
(Prior Code, § 17.04) 
State Law reference- Sewerage and storm water systems, Wis. Stats. § 66.0821. 
Sec. 44-260. - Revenues. 
(a)  Establishment of revenue system. A user charge shall be assessed to all users by the village sewer utility commission in accordance with the provisions of the article. 
(b)  User charge system. 
(1)  Budget and appropriation. The village shall annually prepare an estimate of anticipated costs for each category of user charge, as outlined hereafter, for the forthcoming fiscal year. These estimates shall be made in the form of a rate resolution for the purpose of re-establishing or amending the rates set forth in this article, and shall be adopted by the village sewer utility commission for enactment. 
(2)  Operation and maintenance charges. 
a.  Operation and maintenance costs shall be separated in accordance with their applicability to flow, BOD, TSS, toxics, and nontoxic sampling/analysis. 
b.  Operation and maintenance costs for flow, BOD, and TSS are totaled for each. The unit charges for each are obtained for dividing the total costs by the previous year's total billable flow in 1,000 gallons, billable pounds of BOD, and billable pounds of TSS. To determine the toxics unit charge, the total cost attributable to all the toxics shall be divided by the total number of toxics assigned to be monitored by the utility for all industries monitoring for toxics. The monitoring unit charge is obtained by dividing the total nontoxic sampling/analysis costs for all classes of industrial users by the number of industrial users in each user class times the number of sampling/analyses per year for that user class. 
(3)  Replacement charges. 
a.  The replacement charge shall be sufficient to replace any equipment in the sewers or sewage works owned by the utility as required, in order to assure the continued peak performance of the equipment and to maintain the capacity for which the sewers and sewage works were designed and constructed. The service life for real and personal property shall be established by the engineer in cooperation with the auditors, in accordance with experience of the utility, federal guidelines, and accepted accounting procedures. Each piece of equipment shall be evaluated annually to determine if its useful life has been extended as a result of preventative maintenance programs or repairs. 
b.  Yearly replacement costs for each piece of equipment shall be separated in accordance with their applicability to flow and strengths. This breakdown shall be reviewed annually by the engineer and approved by the utility commission. 
c.  The yearly replacement costs attributable to flow and strengths shall be divided, for example, by the previous year's total billable flow in 1,000 gallons, billable pounds of BOD, and billable pounds of TSS, respectively, and totaled to obtain unit replacement charges. 
(4)  Toxic charges. For each user discharging toxics, the unit charges for toxics described in this article shall be multiplied by the number of toxics assigned to be monitored by the wastewater utility. 
(5)  Industrial and commercial users. The utility shall periodically sample and analyze wastes from selected users in each industrial and commercial user classification to determine the strengths of the wastes and these results shall be used as representative of wastes from all users in that classification for billing purposes unless the user's waste is classified by the engineer as having special problems. At the request of the user, samples shall be made and analyzed on the same frequency as samples for the user's classification, and that analysis shall be used as typical of that particular user's waste for billing purposes. Industries with wastes classified by the engineer as having special problems shall, if directed by the village, install, at the industry's own cost and in a structure located on the building service line, whatever sampling devices are required by the engineer to obtain exact information about the waste. 
(6)  Additional charges. Additional charges as described shall, if required, be listed on the wastewater treatment bill. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05) 
Sec. 44-261. - Debt service. 
(a)  Debt service costs shall be recovered from the debt service charges as stipulated in this article and from connection fees. 
(b)  A connection fee shall be paid for each new sewer connection to the village. This fee shall be levied for each residential equivalent unit. A residential equivalent unit is defined as any single-family dwelling unit, be that unit a single-family residence, an apartment unit, or a condominium unit (for example, a four-unit apartment would have four residential equivalent units.) A nonresidential user shall calculate the number of residential units by dividing the expected daily flow by 300 gallons per day. The billable flows of all nonresidential users shall be reviewed periodically. If it is found that the connection fee that was levied was insufficient, an additional fee shall be levied. In no case shall a nonresidential user be assessed less than one residential unit. The fee per equivalent residential unit shall be set forth by resolution. 
(Prior Code, § 17.06) 
Sec. 44-262. - Wastewater treatment bill. 
(a)  Bill period. A bill shall be produced and submitted to each user once every quarter on a billing cycle established by the utility. 
(b)  Payment of bill and late payment penalty. A three percent penalty on the portion of the wastewater treatment bill shall be added for receipt of payment after 20 days of the date of billing. 
(c)  Delinquent bills. 
(1)  Any bill not paid four weeks after the date of billing shall be declared delinquent and a past due notice issued to the billed party. The past due notice shall contain an additional handling charge to offset all costs incurred for generating and issuing the past due notice. Additional past due notices containing their respective handling charges shall be issued, if necessary, eight weeks and 12 weeks after date of billing. 
(2)  Should a bill still be delinquent 120 days after the date of billing, the bill shall be referred to the attorney for the utility or a collection agency for collection under terms and conditions of this article. 
(3)  Non-receipt of any bill described in this section shall not release the user of liability for any of those charges. In any case where the user is responsible for the non-receipt of the bill, the conditions herein described for late payment and penalties shall apply. In those instances where the utility is responsible for the non-receipt of the bill, the utility may, at its discretion, grant the user an extension of the discount period and late payment conditions described herein. 
(4)  All uncollected service charges shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Prior Code, § 17.08) 
Secs. 44-263-44-287. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PRIVATE SEWAGE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 44-288. - Required when public sewer is not available. 
    When a public sewer is not available, as set forth in section 44-262, the building or structure shall be connected to a private sewer, and a disposal or treatment system shall be constructed in compliance with the terms and provisions of all applicable village, county, state, and federal laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 17.09A) 
Sec. 44-289. - Disconnection required when public sewer becomes available. 
    Within 90 days after a property served by a private sewer or disposal system as described in this division becomes subject to the provisions of section 44-175(a), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer according to the provisions of this article, and all private sewers, disposal systems, septic tanks, cesspools, and other appurtenances of such private sewer and disposal system shall be disconnected and abandoned in accordance with all state, county, and local laws, and all openings, tanks, or other containers or human wastes, garbage, and other wastes shall be permanently filled with granular material. 
(Prior Code, § 17.09B) 
Sec. 44-290. - Utility not responsible for private sewer. 
    The utility shall not be responsible in any way for the operation, maintenance or liability of a private sewer or disposal system or facility, except by prior agreement. 
(Prior Code, § 17.09C) 
Sec. 44-291. - Conflicts of law. 
    No provisions of the article shall be construed to provide lesser requirements for private sewers and disposal systems as are presently or may hereafter be imposed and required by any other local governmental body or the state or federal government. 
(Prior Code, § 17.09D) 
Secs. 44-292-44-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - LIQUID WASTE HAULERS 

Sec. 44-316. - Discharge of hauled liquid waste. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any hauled liquid waste to any sewer connected to the village wastewater treatment plant except as provided below: 
(1)  The utility may accept hauled liquid waste at its discretion. Under no circumstances shall hauled waste be accepted without prior authorization by the utility. 
(2)  Any waste hauled to the plant shall be assessed user charges for billable flow, billable suspended solids, and billable BOD, the volume of which will be determined by the utility. 
(3)  The utility reserves the right to reject any hauled liquid waste. 
(4)  Hauled waste shall not be accepted unless accompanied by a manifest stating the nature and origin of the waste. The manifest shall be signed by the producer and the hauler of the waste. 
(5)  Septic tank and holding tank disposal. 
a.  No person in the business of gathering and disposing of holding tank sewage shall transfer such materials into any portion of the treatment works unless a permit for disposal has been first obtained from the public works director (DPW). Written application for this permit shall be made to the DPW and shall state the name and address of the applicant; the number of disposal units; and the make, model, and license of each unit. Permits shall be nontransferable except in the case of replacement of the calendar year for each licensed unit and a satisfactory credit report on the applicant. The time and place of disposal will be designated by the commission. The commission may impose such conditions as it deems necessary on any permit granted. 
b.  Charges for disposal shall be established in accordance with the village sanitary district user charge system. Bills shall be mailed on a monthly basis and if payments are not received within 30 days thereof, disposal privileges shall be suspended. 
c.  Any person or party disposing of holding tank wastes agrees to carry public liability insurance (general and automobile) in an amount not less than $300,000.00 and workmen's compensation insurance meeting statutory limitations in order to protect any and all persons or property from injury or damage caused in any way or manner by an act, or failure to act, by any of its employees. The persons shall furnish a certificate certifying such insurance to be in full force and effect. 
d.  The approving authority reserves the right to review all permit applications on a case-by-case basis. 
e.  All materials discharged to the treatment works under the permit shall be of domestic origin only. At no time will village sanitary district accept holding tank or septic wastes from commercial or industrial facilities without the specific authorization of the DPW and the approving authority. The discharger shall also certify that he will comply with the provisions of any and all applicable provisions of the village sanitary district and will not deposit or drain any gasoline, oil, acid, alkali, grease, rags, waste, volatile or inflammable liquids, or other deleterious substances into any manhole nor allow any earth, sand, or other solid material to pass into any part of the treatment works. 
f.  The persons or party disposing waste agrees to indemnify the district and save harmless from any and all liability and claims for damages arising out of or resulting from work and labor performed. 
g.  All waste haulers must fill out a report form providing the date, time, name and address of the producer, the volume, waste characteristics and the name and billing address of the hauler. 
h.  Jackson Sanitary District reserves the right to sample any or all hauling loads discharged to the treatment facility. The hauler shall pay all sampling costs for waste loads not meeting the criteria supplied by the hauler or not meeting the conditions set forth in the article. 
i.  All discharges shall be at the location specified by the approving authority. 
(b)  Violation of any of these provisions shall render the discharger subject to immediate revocation of his disposal privileges and may make him liable to the penalty provisions of this article. The village sanitary district also retains the right to suspend or revoke any disposal privileges immediately upon notice if, in the opinion of the approving authority, the acceptance of such wastewater would cause the treatment works to violate the provisions of its WPDES permit due to the volume or character of the wastes. In such cases, the approving authority shall give priority to wastewater generated within the village sanitary district and within the village. 
(Prior Code, § 17.12A-E) 
Sec. 44-317. - Damage of tampering with sewage facilities. 
    Willful, neglect or malicious damage. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment, which is a part of the sewage facilities. Any persons violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under a charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Prior Code, § 17.12F) 
Sec. 44-318. - Liability to discharger for losses. 
    Any person who intentionally, negligently or accidentally violates any provision of this article shall become liable to the village sanitary district or any downstream user may suffer as a result thereof. This section shall be applicable whether or not a written notice of the violation was given and without consideration for any penalties which may be imposed for a violation of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 17.12G) 
Chapter 45 - RESERVED 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Control of weeds and grasses. 
(a)  Property to be mowed/maintained by owner. No person owning property within the village shall permit any weeds or grasses to grow to a height of over eight inches or pollinate upon the owned premises without a conditional use permit. It shall be the duty of every property owner to mow or cause to be mowed upon the owned premises, all grasses or weeds exceeding one foot in height, unless exempted by a conditional use permit. 
(b)  Mowing by village. It shall be the duty of the village to enforce this section and if any person shall fail to comply herewith, the village shall, after five days written notice to the owner, cause the premises to be mowed and report the cost thereof in writing to the village clerk. Such charge shall be billed to the property owner or spread on the tax roll as a special tax to be collected in the same manner as other taxes. The fees for mowing by the village shall be set by policy or resolution. 
(Prior Code, § 9.06) 
State Law reference- Nuisance weeds, Wis. Stats. § 23.235; duty to control noxious weeds, Wis. Stats. § 66.0407. 
Secs. 46-2-46-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - URBAN FORESTRY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-21. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  This article establishes policies, regulations, and standards necessary to ensure that the village will continue to realize the benefits provided by its urban forest. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village to regulate, finance, and control the planting, removal, maintenance, and protection of trees and shrubs upon or in all public areas of the village order to: 
(1)  Establish and maintain the maximum amount of tree cover on public and private lands in the village; 
(2)  Maintain village trees in a healthy and nonhazardous condition through good arbor cultural practices; 
(3)  Establish and maintain appropriate diversity in tree species and age classes to provide a stable and sustainable urban forest; 
(4)  Promote the conservation of village resources; 
(5)  Centralize tree management under the jurisdiction of village personnel with necessary expertise; 
(6)  Promote efficient and cost-effective management of the urban forest; 
(7)  Foster community support for the local urban forestry program, and encourage good tree management on privately owned properties. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all trees and shrubs presently or hereafter planted in or upon any public area; and also to all trees and shrubs presently or hereafter planted in or upon any private premises which will endanger the life, health or safety of persons or property. 
(Prior Code, § 13.01) 
Sec. 46-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Clear-vision triangle means a triangle formed by the existing or proposed curb lines of two or more intersecting streets, roads, or alleys and a third line connecting specified points on those curb lines in order to provide vehicular traffic an unobstructed view at intersections. 
    Park includes all public parks owned by the village having individual names. 
    Private premises refers to all lands not owned, controlled or leased by the village. 
    Public areas includes all public rights-of-way, boulevards, parks and other lands owned, controlled, or leased by the village. 
    Public nuisance means any tree or shrub or part thereof which by reason of its condition interferes with the use of any public area; or which is infected with a plant disease; or which is infested with injurious insects or pests which therein threaten public or private property, or which endangers the public health, safety and welfare. 
    Public right-of way includes the established and legally recognized dedication for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian travel. 
    Public trees and shrubs means any tree or shrub planted in or upon any public area. 
    Public utility means any person, owning or operating any pole, line, pipe or conduit located in any public area or over any public easement or right-of-way for the transmission of electricity, gas, telephone, or television service. 
    Shrub means a woody plant usually with multiple stems, branched at or near the base, reaching a height of less than 15 feet. 
    Topping means the severe cutting back of internodal branch parts two inches or greater in diameter, thereby removing the normal canopy and disfiguring the tree. 
    Tree means a woody plant, usually with a single stem, un-branched at the base, reaching a height of 15 feet or more. 
    Tree board means the board of public works. 
    Tree program manager means the appointed representative, designated for the purposes of direction, regulation, control and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 13.02) 
Sec. 46-23. - Administrators; duties and authority. 
(a)  Tree board. The care of all trees and shrubs planted or hereafter planted in the streets, highways, parks, and public areas of the village are under the authority of the tree board and shall be subject to rules and regulations as the tree board may adopt, and such tree board shall have the right to adopt and amend the rules and regulations as may be required, subject to village board approval. The tree board shall consider the annual report and recommendations submitted by the tree program manager and take actions which may include, but are not limited to, revision or amendment of this article, the adoption of other resolutions or ordinances, or budget recommendations. 
(b)  Tree program manager. Under the jurisdiction and control of the tree board, the tree program manager shall: 
(1)  Have the authority to plant, remove, maintain, and protect the trees and shrubs, or cause such work to be done as may be necessary to preserve the beauty of public areas and to protect life and property. 
(2)  Enforce this chapter and serve notice to any person in violation thereof or institute legal proceedings as may be required (and the village attorney is authorized to institute appropriate proceedings to that end). 
(3)  Collect and maintain all records and data necessary to objectively evaluate whether progress is being made toward the stated goals of this article. 
(4)  Prepare or cause to be prepared and presented to the tree board an annual summary and analysis of the evaluation, and recommendations for action. 
(5)  When a permit is obtained by a carrier to move over-height or over-width structures or objects, assist in advising the carrier regarding trees and shrubs on intended routes. 
(c)  Village arborist. The village may employ or contract with a village arborist, who is under the supervision of the tree program manager and tree board, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 27.09. The village arborist, as supervised and directed by the tree program manager, shall have the following general powers and duties: 
(1)  Cause the provisions of this article to be enforced. 
(2)  Prepare and submit annual budgets to the tree program manager, and tree board, and the village board. 
(3)  Assist in the scheduling and supervision of village forestry related operations and personnel. 
(4)  Perform systematic and routine surveillance of the right-of-way and park tree populations. 
(5)  Institute and develop communicable disease prevention and abatement programs. 
(6)  Institute and direct right-of-way tree planting programs. 
(7)  Develop public education awareness programs. 
(8)  Administer and oversee all forestry related service contracts that the village may enter into. 
(9)  Establish, control and regulate standards of tree care, including planting, pruning, removal and spraying of all trees and shrubs in and upon public area. 
(10)  Perform such other powers and duties as are authorized by state law, particularly Wis. Stats. § 27.09, this chapter, and by direction of the tree program manager and tree board. 
(Prior Code, §§ 13.03, 13.12, 13.13) 
State Law reference- City forester duties and tree planting, Wis. Stats. § 27.09. 
Sec. 46-24. - Penalty and other remedies. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine; the determination of the amount of the fine shall be determined by the municipal court. All such violations which are of a continuing nature shall constitute a separate offense for each day of such continuance. Any violation of this chapter shall also constitute a public nuisance and may be enjoined and abated as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 13.11) 
Secs. 46-25-46-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE AND SHRUB PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 46-52. - Permits required. 
(a)  Except on order of the tree program manager, no person shall plant, remove, spray, brace, trim, prune, cut above or below ground, disturb, alter or do surgery on a tree or shrub in the public right-of-way or any public area or cause such act to be done by others without first obtaining a written permit for such work from the tree program manager as herein provided. 
(b)  If the tree program manager determines that the proposed work or planting described in an application for a permit is necessary and in accord with the purposes of this section, taking into account the safety, health and welfare of the public, location of the utilities, public bike paths, driveways, streetlights, general character of the area in which the tree or shrub is located or proposed to be located, type of soil, characteristics and physiological need of the genus, species and variety of tree or shrub, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(c)  Permits shall be issued by the tree program manager on a standard form and include a description of the work to be done and shall specify the genus, species, variety, size, nursery grade, and location of trees and shrubs to be planted, if any. Any work done under such permit shall be performed in strict compliance with the terms thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 13.08.1) 
Sec. 46-53. - Permits to public utilities restricted. 
(a)  Whenever a permit is issued under this division to a public utility to remove, trim, prune, cut, disturb, alter or do surgery on any public tree or shrub, the tree program manager shall limit the work to be done to the actual necessities of the utility and may assign an inspector to supervise the work done under the provisions of the permit, and the expense of such inspection or supervision shall be charged to the utility at the tree program manager's current rate of pay (salary and fringes). 
(b)  A public utility may secure an annual working agreement with the public works director and the tree board which gives the tree program manager, or appointed representative, the authorization to supervise and direct work done associated with trees and shrubs. 
(Prior Code, § 13.08.2) 
Sec. 46-54. - Clear vision triangle. 
(a)  No tree, shrub, hedge, or other growth exceeding 30 inches in height above street grade shall hereafter be planted in any clear-vision triangle. Clear vision setback lines are hereby established as follows: 
(1)  Across each sector between intersecting streets or highways where the grades are not separated, a clear vision setback line shall be established by a straight line connecting two points on the intersection base setback lines, which points are located 50 feet from the intersection of such base setback lines. 
(2)  Across each sector between the intersection of a street or highway with the railroad where the grades are not separated, a clear vision setback line shall be established by a straight line connecting points on the base setback line and the railroad right-of-way line, which points are located 100 feet from the intersection of the base setback line and the railroad right-of-way line. Such setback lines shall be parallel to and measured at right angles to the centerline of the street or highway. 
(b)  Any tree or shrub or part thereof found to be in violation of the provisions of this section is declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject to abatement in the manner provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 13.10.1) 
Sec. 46-55. - Planting in or upon public right-of-way and public areas. 
(a)  The size and genus, species and variety of trees and shrubs to be planted in public areas and as part of a village approved forestry program and the manner of planting shall be submitted to the tree program manager for approval before commencement of such work. 
(b)  No trees or shrubs shall be planted closer than 20 feet to a utility or street lighting pole, five feet to a fire hydrant or underground utility line, 35 feet to a street intersection or 15 feet to a driveway or alley. 
(c)  Spacing of trees shall reflect the expected diameter of the tree canopies at maturity. Spacing shall be such so as to prevent one tree from interfering with the growth of another. 
(d)  Only trees recommended or approved by the tree program manager shall be permitted to be planted in village rights-of-way. 
(Prior Code, § 13.10.2) 
Sec. 46-56. - Planting in newly developed subdivision; planting plan approval required. 
(a)  In the development of new residential subdivisions and multifamily development projects, the owner or developer shall provide a planting plan to include the number of trees planted and their proposed location and spacing standards, sizes, genus and species, common name, and whether it is to be planted bare root or not, and shall be based on the provision of a minimum of two street trees per residential dwelling unit. 
(b)  The trees shall be located on all streets located within, or adjacent to, the proposed subdivision as directed by the plan commission. The owner shall warranty that all required street trees shall survive the initial planting season and shall be in a hardy, living condition within one year of initial planting. All street trees shall be a minimum of 21/2 inch caliper when planted. 
(c)  The planting plan shall be reviewed by the plan commission and tree program manager. 
(Prior Code, § 13.10.2) 
Sec. 46-57. - Pruning. 
(a)  Standards; authority of tree program manager. The village recognizes as acceptable standards for the pruning of trees on public property the pruning standards set forth in the National Arborist Association's (NAA) publication "Standards for Shade Tree Pruning." The necessity of pruning shall be determined by the tree program manager or appointed representative. 
(b)  Tree service contractor to be certified and approved by tree program manager. When the village requires tree pruning, any tree service contractor shall have on its staff an arborist certified by the Midwest Chapter of the International Society of Arbor Culture. This arborist must oversee all pruning work and certify that all work meets the village's pruning specifications. If a certified arborist is not on the staff of the tree contractor, the tree program manager must approve the tree service contractor before the work begins. 
(c)  Clearance required over public areas. Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any public right-of-way, public areas or upon any private premises adjacent to any public right-of-way or public areas shall be kept trimmed so that the lowest branches projecting over the public street or alley provide a clearance of not less than 131/2 feet. The tree program manager may waive the provisions of this subsection for newly planted trees if he determines that they do not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any street light or endanger public safety. Clearance from sidewalk to lower branches shall not be less than eight feet. 
(d)  Topping prohibited. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or village department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by storm or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where standard pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this subsection at the determination of the tree program manager. 
(Prior Code, § 13.10.3) 
Sec. 46-58. - Removal. 
    In cutting down trees, the tree shall be removed with the root stump grubbed out or ground out to a depth of at least nine inches below grade measured in a straight line; normal grade of sidewalk to top of curb. Surface roots beyond main stump are to be removed to a depth of five inches below grade measured as a straight line; normal grade of sidewalk to top of curb. All wood debris shall be removed from the street prior to the end of each working day and all holes be filled to normal grade level with topsoil as soon as practical. 
(Prior Code, § 13.10.4) 
Sec. 46-59. - Preservation of topography. 
    To protect the property owner from possible damage due to change in the existing grade of adjoining lands and to aid in preserving and protecting the natural beauty and character of the landscape, no change in the existing topography of any land shall be made which would result in raising or lowering the elevation at any point by more than one-quarter of the number of feet by which such point is removed from the nearest property line, except with the approval of the plan commission and the tree program manager. 
(Prior Code, § 13.10.5) 
Secs. 46-60-46-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DAMAGE TO TREES AND SHRUBS 

Sec. 46-77. - Prohibited acts. 
    No person shall, without the consent of the owner for a private tree or shrub or without a written permit from the tree program manager for a public tree or shrub, do or cause to be done by others any of the following acts: 
(1)  Secure, fasten, nail or run any rope, wire, sign, or other materials around, into, or through a tree or shrub, except in emergencies such as storms or accidents. 
(2)  Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub. 
(3)  Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, salt brine, oil, or other injurious substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about any tree or shrub. 
(4)  Excavate any ditch, tunnel or trench or lay any drive a radius of ten feet from any tree or shrub except by those public utilities under the direction of the public works director, unless otherwise noted in contracts permitting the excavation and construction of public utilities, streets, sidewalks, bicycle and pedestrian trails, and drainageways. 
(5)  Erect, alter, repair, raze or excavate without placing suitable guards as approved by the tree program manager around all public trees or shrubs which may be injured by such operations. 
(6)  Remove any guard, stake or other device or material intended to protect a public tree or shrub or close or obstruct any open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to permit access of air, water or fertilizer. 
(Prior Code, § 13.06) 
Sec. 46-78. - Liability of building movers and building moving permit holders. 
    Any damage done to trees and shrubs in the process of moving a building shall be the liability of the person conducting the move and the person to whom the building moving permit has been issued. 
(Prior Code, § 13.07) 
Secs. 46-79-46-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREE AND SHRUB NUISANCES 

Sec. 46-100. - Declaration of nuisance conditions. 
    Any tree or shrub or part thereof growing on private or public property that is interfering with the use of any public area; infected with an infectious plant disease; or which is infested with injurious insects or pests; or endangers the life, health, or safety of persons or property is declared a public nuisance. 
(Prior Code, § 13.04.1) 
Sec. 46-101. - Abatement. 
(a)  Public areas. If the tree program manager shall determine, with reasonable certainty, upon inspection or examination that any nuisance tree or shrub exists in or upon any public area in the village, he shall immediately cause it to be treated, trimmed, removed, or otherwise abated in such a manner as to destroy or prevent the spread of the nuisance. 
(b)  Private premises. If the tree program manager shall determine, with reasonable certainty, upon inspection or examination that any nuisance shrub or tree exists in or upon any private premises, he shall notify the owner or tenant in charge of the premises in writing of the nuisance condition. Within 30 days after the issuance of the notice, the person shall cause the treatment, trimming, or removal and destruction of the nuisance tree or shrub as directed in the written notice. In case the owner or the tenant having charge of such premises shall refuse or neglect to comply with the terms of the written notice within 30 days after receiving the notice, the tree program manager shall cause the removal, treatment or trimming of the nuisance tree or shrub. The expense thereof shall be a charge upon the real property of which the tree or shrub is located pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 27.09. No damage shall be awarded the owner for the destruction of trees or shrubs destroyed pursuant to this article. 
(Prior Code, § 13.04.2) 
Sec. 46-102. - Authority of tree program manager to enter private premises. 
    The tree program manager shall have the authority to enter upon private real estate, excluding any building thereon, at reasonable time for the purpose of examining or taking the necessary samples of any suspected nuisance tree or shrub located over such premises, and enforcing the provisions of this article. All nuisance trees and shrubs to be removed may be appropriately marked by the tree program manager. 
(Prior Code, § 13.04.3) 
Sec. 46-103. - Interference with enforcement prohibited. 
    No person shall interfere with the tree program manager or his authorized representatives while engaged in the execution or enforcement of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 13.04.4) 
Sec. 46-104. - Appeal from order of tree program manager. 
(a)  Notice of appeal; request for hearing. A person who receives an order from the tree program manager and objects to all or part thereof may, within eight days of receipt thereof, notify the tree board and the tree program manager, in writing, of the nature of the objection and request a hearing thereon. 
(b)  Hearing before tree board. Within 45 days of the receipt of such notice of appeal, a tree board shall schedule a hearing to hear the objection. The tree program manager shall be present at such hearing. The appellant is entitled to representation by counsel. 
(c)  Final determination. Within eight days after such hearing the tree board shall, in writing, notify the appellant and the tree program manager of its decision. The tree board may affirm, cancel, or modify the order, in its direction, to best conform such order to the intent of this article. 
(d)  Appeal of tree board decision. The decision of the tree board may be appealed to the village board or the zoning board of appeals. 
(Prior Code, § 13.05) 
Chapter 47 - RESERVED 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 48-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. If not otherwise defined in this section or other provisions of this Code, words used in this chapter shall have their ordinary and accepted meaning. 
    Accessory use or structure means a use or detached structure subordinate to the principal use of a structure, land, or water and located on the same lot or parcel serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use or the principal structure. 
    Alley means a public street or right-of-way affording only secondary access to abutting properties. 
    Arterial street means a public street or highway used or intended to be used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets shall include freeways and expressways as well as arterial streets, highways, and parkways. 
    Automobile wrecking yard means any premises on which more than one automotive vehicle, not in running or operating condition is stored in the open. 
    Basement means that portion of any structure located directly below the average adjoining lot grade. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals or lodging are regularly furnished by prearrangement for compensation for five or more persons not members of a family, but not exceeding 12 persons and not open to transient customers. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, machinery, or materials. 
    Building area means the total living area bounded by the exterior walls of a building at the floor levels, but not including the basement, utility rooms, garage, porch, breezeway, or unfinished attic. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. Channel flow thus is that water which is flowing within the limits of the defined channel. 
    Conditional use means a use which is not permitted without application, review, and a public hearing. The approval shall be based on a list of requirements (conditions), which shall be complied with to retain the use. 
    Condominium means a class or form of ownership wherein individual dwelling units are owned separately and other associated lands or facilities are owned in common. Condominium units may be individual units under individual ownership within a multiple family structure where the land on which the structure is located is in common undivided ownership, or in the case of a detached condominium, may consist of individual home sites owned by separate individuals with common open space lands owned by a cooperative or property owners' association. 
    Density, gross. Density is the area required for a residence divided into an acre (43,560 square feet). The result is expressed as "dwelling units per acre." Gross areas, used in computing "gross density" are the net area devoted to the residential use plus the proportionate area devoted to all supporting land uses, including streets, public lands, or usable lands, school sites, and commercial sites in a given development. 
    Density, net. Density is the area required for a residence divided into an acre (43,560 square feet). The result is expressed as "dwelling units per acre." Net areas, used in computing "net density" are the actual sites devoted to the residential use and consist of the ground floor area of the building plans, the required yards, and private drives. 
    Department means the state department of natural resources. 
    Development means any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures, or accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings, structures, or accessory structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations; and the storage, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    District means a part or parts of the village for which the regulation of this chapter governing the use and location of land and buildings are uniform (such as residential, commercial, and industrial district classifications). 
    District, overlay. Overlay districts provide for the possibility of superimposing certain additional requirements upon a basic zoning district without disturbing the requirements of the basic district. In the instance of conflicting requirements, the stricter of the conflicting requirements shall apply. 
    Dwelling means a residence or sleeping place in a building designed for such a use, having a separate address, but does not include boardinghouses or lodginghouses, motels, hotels, or tents. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence not to exceed the number of dwelling units provided. 
    Dwelling, single family, means a detached dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a detached building containing two separate dwelling (or living) units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families. 
    Equal degree of encroachment . The effect of any encroachment into the floodway must be computed by assuming an equal degree of hydraulic encroachment on the other side of a river or stream for a significant hydraulic reach. This computation assures that property owners up, down, or across the river or stream will have the same rights of hydraulic encroachment. Encroachments are analyzed on the basis of the effect upon hydraulic conveyance, not upon the distance the encroachment extends into the floodway. 
    Erosion means the detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
    Essential services means services provided by public and private utilities, necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure; these services include natural gas, electricity, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewerage, and communication systems. 
    Expandable mobile home means a mobile home with one or more room sections that fold, collapse, or telescope into the principal unit when being transported and which can be expanded at the site to provide additional living area. 
    Family means one or more persons related by blood or marriage occupying the premises and living together as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse, club, fraternity, or hotel. 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Fence means a self-supporting barrier enclosing or separating fields, yards, uses, etc. 
    Fixed houseboat, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.121(1), means a structure not actually used for navigation, which extends beyond the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway and is retained in place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spud poles attached to the bed of the waterway. 
    Flood means a temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in water overtopping its banks and inundating areas adjacent to the channel. 
    Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood; it is generally associated with standing water rather than rapidly flowing water. 
    Flood hazard boundary maps means a map prepared for the village by FEMA designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A-zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. These maps form the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the national flood insurance program. 
    Flood insurance study means a technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and regional flood elevations as well as floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered or unnumbered A-zones. Flood insurance study maps form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood lands . For the purpose of this article, the flood lands are all lands contained in the regional flood or the 100-year recurrence interval flood. For the purpose of zoning regulation, the flood lands are divided into the cedar creek floodway, floodplain-conservancy and floodplain fringe overlay districts. 
    Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river. 
    Flood protection elevation means an elevation that corresponds to a point two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile associated with the regional flood. This safety factor, also called "freeboard," is intended to compensate for the many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights greater than those computed. Such unknown factors may include ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, and obstructions of bridge openings. 
    Floodplain means that land which has been or may be hereafter covered by floodwater during the regional flood. The floodplain includes the floodway and the flood fringe and general floodplain areas. 
    Floodplain island means a natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to unimproved or improved real estate, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. The term "floodproofing" also means measures designed to prevent and reduce flood damage for those uses which cannot be removed from, or which, of necessity, must be erected in the floodplain, ranging from structural modifications through installation of special equipment or materials to operation and management safeguards, such as the following: reinforcing of basement walls; underpinning of floors; permanent sealing of all exterior openings; use of masonry construction; erection of permanent watertight bulkheads, shutters, and doors; treatment of exposed timbers; elevation of flood vulnerable utilities; use of waterproof cement; adequate fuse protection; sealing of basement walls; installation of sump pumps; placement of automatic swing check valves; installation of seal-tight windows and doors; installation of wire reinforced glass; location and elevation of valuable items; waterproofing, disconnection, elevation, or removal of all electric equipment; avoidance of the use of flood vulnerable areas; temporary removal or waterproofing of merchandise; postponement of orders or rescheduling of freight shipments; operation of emergency pump equipment; closing of backwater sewer valves; placement of plugs and flood drain pipes; placement of moveable watertight bulkheads; and the shoring of weak walls or structures. Floodproofing of structures shall be extended at least to a point two feet above the elevation of the regional flood. Any structure that is located entirely or partially below the flood protection elevation shall be anchored to protect it from larger floods. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
    Floodway encroachment lines represent the limits of obstruction to flood flows. These lines are designated to both sides of, and generally parallel to, the channel of a river or stream. They are established by assuming that the area landward (outside of the encroachment lines) will ultimately be developed in such a way that will not convey flood flows, but the development will not cause an increase to regional flood elevations upstream. It is assumed that any development riverward of these lines will cause an obstruction and will require a detailed analysis to determine its effect on the regional flood elevations upstream. 
    Frontage means the smallest dimension of a lot abutting a public street measured along the street right-of-way line; for lots abutting a lake or stream, the smallest dimension measured along the shoreline. 
    Garage, private, means a structure primarily intended for and used for the enclosed storage or shelter of the private motor vehicles of the families resident upon the premises. Carports are considered garages. 
    Garage, public or commercial, means any garage other than a private garage. 
    Group home means a household unit of more than five unrelated persons living in a single dwelling unit under the supervision of a responsible adult or married couple. Examples of group homes are those housing autistic or mentally handicapped persons; sightless or deaf persons; reformed or reforming alcoholics or drug addicts; or other similarly disadvantaged persons for the purpose of adapting or acquainting such persons with normal social environments. Such households may also be referred to as halfway houses. 
    High flood damage potential means any danger to human life or public health or the potential for any significant economic loss to a structure or its contents. 
    Home occupation means any occupation for gain or support conducted entirely within buildings by resident occupants which is customarily incidental to the principal use of the premises, does not exceed 20 percent of the area of one floor, employs no more than one nonresident employee, uses only household equipment, and no stock in trade is kept or sold except that made on the premises. A home occupation includes uses such as baby-sitting, millinery, dressmaking, canning, laundering, music teaching to not more than two pupils at one time, and crafts, but does not include the display of any goods nor such occupations as barbering, beauty shops, dance schools, real estate brokerage, or photographic studios. 
    Increase in regional flood height means a calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, resulting from a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain, but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
    Junk or salvage yard means an area consisting of buildings, structures, or premises where junk waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including automobile wrecking yards, house wrecking and structural steel materials, and equipment yards, but not including the purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment or used cars in operable condition. 
    Land developing activity means the construction of buildings, roads, parking lots, paved storage areas and similar facilities. 
    Land disturbing construction activity means any manmade change of the land surface, including removing vegetation cover, excavation, filling and grading, but not including agricultural land uses, growing and tending of gardens, harvesting of trees, and landscaping modifications. 
    Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see Development .) 
    Lot, for the purpose of this chapter, means a parcel of land on which a principal building and its accessory building are placed, together with the required open spaces; provided that no such parcel is bisected by a public street, and shall not include any portion of a public right-of-way. No lands dedicated to the public or reserved for roadway purposes shall be included in the computation of lot size for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection, provided that the corner of such intersection shall have an angle of 135 degrees or less, measured on the lot side. 
    Lot, double frontage, means a parcel of land, other than a corner lot, with frontage on more than one street or with frontage on a street and a navigable body of water. Double frontage lots, for the purpose of this chapter, shall be deemed to have two front yards and no rear yard. 
    Lot width means the width of a parcel of land measured at the setback line. 
    Manufactured home consists of two manufactured home sections combined horizontally on the site. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. For the purpose of this chapter, "manufactured home" does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
    Manufactured home lot means a parcel of land for the placement of a single manufactured home and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
    Manufactured home park means a parcel of land which has been developed for the placement of manufactured homes, and is owned by an individual, a firm, trust, partnership, public or private association, or corporation. Individual lots within a manufactured home park are rented to individual manufactured home users. 
    Motel means a series of attached, semi-attached, or detached sleeping units for the accommodation of transient guests. 
    Navigable waters means Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within this state and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the state portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under state law. The state supreme court has declared navigable bodies of water with a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and with levels of flows sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft at the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis. 
    Nonconforming uses or structures means any structure, land, or water lawfully used, occupied, or erected at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendments thereto which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter or amendments thereto. Any such structure conforming in respect to use but not in respect to frontage, width, height, area, yard, parking, loading, or distance requirements shall be considered a nonconforming structure and not a nonconforming use. 
    Normal high-water mark means a line of reference commonly identified as being where the land is conterminous to the normal high-water elevation. For the purposes of this chapter, the normal high-water mark is defined as the line where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. 
    Obstruction to flow means any development which physically blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development by itself or in conjunction with any future similar development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
    Official floodplain zoning map means the map, adopted and made part of this chapter, as described in section 48-101, which has been approved by the department and FEMA. 
    Open space use means those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
    Ordinary high-water mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other recognized characteristic. 
    Parking lot means a structure or premises containing ten or more parking spaces. Such spaces may be for rent or a fee. 
    Parties in interest includes all abutting property owners, all property owners within 500 feet and all property owners of opposing frontage. 
    Person means an individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency. 
    Plan agency means the municipal plan commission, agency, committee or a board of public land commissioners of the village's governing body created under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(1) that acts on matters pertaining to planning and zoning. 
    Primary floor area means the floor area of a building for purposes of determining required parking ratios, which areas shall include only that portion of the total floor area devoted to customer service, sales and office space and shall not include warehouse, utility, hallways and other accessory space which does not generate parking demand. 
    Professional home offices means residents of clergymen, architects, landscape architects, professional engineers, registered land surveyors, lawyers, real estate agents, artists, teachers, authors, musicians, or other recognized professions used to conduct their professions where the office does not exceed 20 percent of the area of only one floor of the residence and only one nonresident person is employed. 
    Reach means a longitudinal segment of a stream generally including those flood lands wherein flood stages are primarily and commonly controlled by the same manmade or natural obstructions to flow. 
    Rear yard means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure. This yard shall be opposite the street yard or one of the street yards on a corner lot. 
    Regional flood. The regional flood is a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have generally occurred in this state and that may be expected to occur on a particular stream because of the physical characteristics. The flood frequency of the regional flood is once in every 100 years; this means that in any given year, there is a one percent chance that the regional flood may occur or be exceeded. During a typical 30-year mortgage period, the regional flood has a 20 percent chance of occurrence. 
    Runoff means the rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface. 
    Sectional home means a dwelling made of two or more modular units factory fabricated and transported to the home site where they are put on a foundation and joined to make a single home. 
    Setback or street yard means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing or proposed street or highway line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure. Corner lots shall have two such yards. 
    Shorelands means lands within the following distances from the ordinary high-water mark of navigable waters; 1,000 feet from a lake, pond, or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. 
    Shoreland, wetland district, means the zoning district, created in this zoning code, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps, which have been adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
    Side yard means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building located between the side of the building and the side lot line and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. Each lot shall normally have two side yards. The required side yard dimension shall be measured from the furthest overhang of the building to the side lot line. 
    Signs means any words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks by which anything is made known and which are used to advertise or promote an individual, firm, association, corporation, profession, business, commodity, or product, and which is visible from any public street or highway. 
    Storage capacity means the volume of space available above an area of floodplain fringe land for the temporary storage of floodwater. 
    Street means a public right-of-way providing primary access to abutting properties. 
    Structure means any erection or construction, such as buildings, towers, masts, poles, booms, signs, decorations, carports, machinery, and equipment. 
    Structural alterations means any changes in the supporting members of a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams or girder. 
    Sustained yield forestry means management of forested lands to provide annual or periodic crops of forest products. 
    Unnecessary hardship means that circumstance where special conditions, which were self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with the restrictions governing dimensional standards (such as area, setbacks, frontage, or height) unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purpose of this chapter. Unnecessary hardship is present only where, in the absence of a variance, no feasible use can be made of the property. 
    Variance means an authorization granted by the board of appeals to construct, alter or use a building or structure in a manner that deviates from dimensional standards of this chapter. A variance may not permit a use of property that is otherwise prohibited by the Code or allow construction not protected to the flood protection elevation. 
    Water surface profile means a graphic representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
    Wetlands means those lands which are partially or wholly covered by marshlands, flora, and generally covered with shallow standing water or lands which are wet and spongy due to a high water table. 
    Wetland alteration means any construction filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except for vegetation. The street and rear yards extend the full width of the lot. 
(Prior Code, § 14.02) 
Sec. 48-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the comfort, health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare of the village. It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate and restrict the use of all structures, lands, and waters; and to address the following areas of concern: 
(1)  Lots and structures. Lot size, location, types and sizes of structures are regulated so as to prevent overcrowding and to provide adequate sunlight, air, sanitation, and drainage. 
(2)  Population density and distribution. Population and density are regulated to avoid sprawl or undue concentration and to facilitate the provision of adequate public services and utilities. 
(3)  Parking, loading, and access. Parking, loading and access are regulated so as to lessen congestion in and promote the safety and efficiency of streets and highways. 
(4)  Safety. Protect the village and its residents from fire, flooding, pollution, contamination and other dangers. 
(5)  Property values. Stabilize and protect property values. It is especially important to see that the aesthetics and stability of property values are maintained wherever single-family properties abut industrial or commercial properties. Extra precautions must be taken to prevent impairment or depreciation of existing single-family properties whenever new industrial or commercial properties are proposed. 
(6)  Aesthetics. Preserve and protect the natural as well as manmade characteristics of the village. The plan commission shall not recommend any application, unless it determines that the following facts and conditions exist and shall so indicate in the minutes of its proceedings that: the site plan is architecturally functional; and that the exterior design is not unsightly or obnoxious and is not disharmonious or so similar to existing neighboring developments that substantial depreciation of neighboring property or development will be caused by applicants proposal. 
(7)  Erosion control. Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation, and other pollution of the surface and subsurface waters. 
(8)  Water. Provide safe and healthful water. 
(9)  Flood damage. Prevent flood damage to persons and property and minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects. 
(10)  Commercial and industrial areas. Provide for and protect suitable commercial and industrial sites. 
(11)  Streets and roads. Protect the carrying capacity of existing and proposed arterial and collector streets and highways. 
(12)  Implementation. Implement those municipal, county, watershed, and regional plans or components of such plans adopted by the village. 
(13)  Enforcement. Provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and to provide for penalties for violation of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 14.01B, C) 
Sec. 48-3. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Prior Code, § 14.01D) 
Sec. 48-4. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the village and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power possessed by the village. 
(Prior Code, § 14.01E) 
Sec. 48-5. - Jurisdiction. 
    The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all lands and water within the village limits. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03A) 
Sec. 48-6. - Compliance. 
    No structure, land, or water shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03D) 
Secs. 48-7-48-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-31. - Zoning officer designation and duties. 
    The village shall appoint a zoning officer for the enforcement provisions of this chapter. The duty of the zoning officer shall be to interpret and administer this chapter and to issue, after onsite inspection, all permits required by this chapter. The zoning officer shall further: 
(1)  Advise applicants as to the provisions of this chapter, assist them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms, and ensure that the regional flood elevation is shown on permit applications where appropriate. 
(2)  Maintain records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved, and other official actions. 
(3)  Record the lowest floor elevations of all structures erected, moved, altered or improved in the flood land districts. 
(4)  Establish that all necessary permits that are required for flood land uses by state and federal law have been secured. 
(5)  Inspect all structures, lands, and waters as often as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(6)  Be permitted access to premises and structures during reasonable hours to make those inspections as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. If, however, he is refused entry after presentation of his identification, he may procure a special inspection warrant in accordance with state law. 
(7)  Investigate and report violations of this chapter to the appropriate municipal agencies and the district attorney or municipal attorney. 
(8)  Request assistance and cooperation from the village police department and village attorney as deemed necessary. 
(9)  Assist the village attorney in the prosecution of ordinance violations. 
(10)  Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until he has inspected and approved such use or erection. 
(11)  Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits, appeals for a map or text interpretation, and map or text amendments within ten days after they are granted or denied, to the appropriate district office of the department. 
(12)  Submit copies of floodplain text and map amendments and biennial reports to the regional FEMA office. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03B) 
Sec. 48-32. - Building permits. 
(a)  Required. Unless another section of this chapter specifically exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a building permit shall be obtained before any development, including any change in the use of an existing building or structure, is initiated. 
(b)  Application. An application for a permit shall be made to the village upon forms furnished and shall include the following information and supporting documentation: 
(1)  General information. Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, property owner and contractor; legal description of the property; and a general description of the proposed use or development indicating new construction or modification to existing structures. 
(2)  Site development plan . A site development plan drawn to scale and submitted as a part of the permit application form containing the following information: 
a.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot noted on a copy of the wetland inventory map, if applicable; 
b.  Location and boundaries of wetlands; 
c.  Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration; 
d.  Location of the ordinary high-water mark of the abutting navigable waterways; 
e.  Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover; 
f.  Location of any structures and distances measured from the lot lines and centerline of all abutting streets or highways; 
g.  Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
h.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads; 
i.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined from the floodplain zoning maps used to delineate floodplain areas; 
j.  The elevation of the lot, lowest floor of proposed buildings and fill using national geodetic and vertical datum (NGVD); and 
k.  Data sufficient to determine the regional flood evaluation at the location of the development and to determine whether the requirements of this chapter are met. 
(3)  Data requirements to analyze development. The applicant shall provide with his application all computations required to show the effects of the project on flood heights, velocities and floodplain storage, for all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments exceeding five acres in areas where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000.00. The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all structural development, landscaping improvements, access and road development, electrical and plumbing, and similar items reasonably applied to the overall development costs, but may not include land costs. The data submitted shall include information regarding regional flood elevation, vehicular access to lands outside the floodplain, and adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage. The department will determine elevations and evaluate the proposal where the applicant is not required to provide computations as above, and inadequate data exists. The village may transmit additional information, where appropriate, to the department with the request for analysis. 
(c)  Expiration . All permits issued under the authority of this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03C) 
Sec. 48-33. - Certificate of compliance. 
(a)  No nonconforming use, conditional use, or planned unit development use shall be maintained, renewed, changed, extended, or occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning officer. Such certificate shall show that the building or premises or part thereof is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and conditions of approval on conditional use and planned unit development actions. Such certificate shall be applied for prior to the time of occupancy of any land or building. 
(b)  Application for a certificate of compliance shall be made in the same manner as for a building permit. Application for a certificate of compliance in the flood land districts shall include a certification by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor that the flood land regulations set forth in this chapter have been fully complied with. 
(c)  The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after notification of completion of the work specified in the permit, provided the building or premises or proposed use conforms to all the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  For floodplain development, the applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor that the fill and lowest floor elevations are in compliance with the permit issued, including any required floodproofing. Floodproofing adequacy may also be certified by a registered professional architect. 
(e)  The zoning officer may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a building, premises or part thereof according to rules and regulations established by the village. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03E) 
Sec. 48-34. - Changes and amendments. 
(a)  Authority . Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice require, the village board may, by ordinance, change the district boundaries or amend, change or supplement the regulations established by this chapter or amendments thereto. 
(b)  Initiation . A change or amendment may be initiated by the village board, plan commission, or by petition of one or more of the owners of property within the area proposed to be changed. 
(c)  Petitions . Petitions for any change to the district boundaries or amendments to the regulations shall be filed with the village using a standard application form. 
(d)  Recommendations . The village plan commission shall review all proposed changes and amendments within the village limits and shall recommend that the petition be granted as requested, modified, or denied. The recommendation shall be made at a meeting subsequent to the meeting at which the petition is first submitted and shall be made in writing to the village board. 
(e)  Public hearings . Notice of any public hearing which the village board is required to hold under the terms of this chapter shall specify the date, time, and place of the hearing and shall state the matter to be considered at the hearing. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least once a week for two consecutive weeks and the hearing shall not be held until at least seven days following the last publication. The village clerk-treasurer shall also give at least ten days prior written notice to the clerk of any municipality within 1,000 feet of any land to be affected by the proposed action and to all parties in interest. 
(f)  Village board action. Following such hearing and after careful consideration of the village plan commission's recommendations, the village board shall vote on the passage of the proposed change or amendment. 
(g)  Protest . In the event of a protest against such district change or amendment to the regulations of this chapter, duly signed and acknowledged by either the owners of 20 percent or more of the areas of the land included in such proposed change, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land. Such changes or amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the full village board. 
(Prior Code, § 14.05) 
Sec. 48-35. - Fees. 
    All persons performing work which by this chapter requires the issuance of a permit or approval, shall pay a fee for such action to the village treasurer to help defray the cost of administration, investigation, advertising, and processing of the application and review. The fees shall be depicted on a resolution, on file with the village administrator/clerk-treasurer. 
(Prior Code, § 14.13B) 
Sec. 48-36. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any building or structure hereinafter erected, moved, placed, or structurally altered or any use established in violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person, firm, association, corporation (including building contractors, or his or their agent) shall be deemed an unlawful structure or use. The village board may direct the village attorney to bring an action to enjoin, remove, or vacate any use, erection, moving, alteration, or placement of any building or use in violation of this chapter. Any person who violates this chapter shall forfeit a sum as set forth by resolution. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 14.13B) 
Secs. 48-37-48-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 48-61. - Organization; meetings; minutes; quorum. 
    The board of appeals shall organize and adopt rules of procedure for its own government in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and shall be open to the public. Minutes of the proceedings and a record of all actions shall be kept by the clerk, showing the vote of each member upon each question. These records shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. If a quorum is present, the board of appeals may take any action authorized by this article by a majority vote of the members present. 
(Prior Code, § 14.12A; Ord. No. 06-06) 
Sec. 48-62. - Powers. 
    The board of appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Errors . To hear and grant appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning officer. 
(2)  Variances . To hear and grant appeals for variances as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owning to special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit and purposes of this chapter shall be observed and the public safety, welfare, and justice secured. Use variances shall not be granted. 
(3)  Interpretation . To hear and decide application for interpretations of the zoning regulations and the boundaries of the zoning districts after the village plan commission has made a review and recommendation. 
(4)  Substitutions . To hear and grant applications for substitution of more restrictive nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming uses, provided no structural alterations are to be made and the village plan commission has made a review and recommendation. Whenever the board permits such a substitution, the use may not thereafter be changed without application. 
(5)  Permits . The board may reverse, affirm wholly or partly, modify the requirements appealed from, and may issue or direct the issue of a permit. 
(6)  Oaths . The chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(Prior Code, § 14.12B; Ord. No. 06-06) 
Sec. 48-63. - Appeals and applications. 
    Appeals from the decision of the zoning officer concerning the literal enforcement of this chapter may be made by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the village. Such appeals shall be filed with the clerk within 30 days after the date or written notice of the decision or order of the zoning officer. Applications may be made by the owner or lessee of the structure, land, or water to be affected at any time and shall be filed with the clerk. Such appeals and applications shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the appellant or applicant and all abutting and opposite property owners of record within 500 feet of the subject property. 
(2)  Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor, or a location sketch drawn to scale, showing all of the information required on the standard village application. 
(3)  Additional information required by the village plan commission, village engineer, board of appeals, or zoning officer. 
(Prior Code, § 14.12C; Ord. No. 06-06) 
Sec. 48-64. - Hearings. 
    The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for the required public hearing and shall give notice in the manner provided in chapter 2 regarding administrative review hearings. At that hearing, the appellant or applicant may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. 
(Prior Code, § 14.12D; Ord. No. 06-06) 
Sec. 48-65. - Findings. 
(a)  Preservation of intent . No variance shall be granted that is inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the regulations for the district in which the development is located. No variance shall have the effect of permitting a use in any district that is not a stated permitted use, accessory use, or conditional use in that particular district. 
(b)  Exceptional circumstances. There must be exceptional, extraordinary, or unusual circumstances or conditions applying to lots or parcels, structures, uses, or intended uses that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same district and the granting of the variance would not be of so general or recurrent nature as to suggest that the zoning ordinance should be changed. 
(c)  Economic hardship and self-imposed hardship not grounds for variance. No variance shall be granted solely on the basis of economic gain or loss. Self-imposed hardships shall not be considered as grounds for the granting of a variance. 
(d)  Preservation of property rights. The variance must be necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other properties in the same district and same vicinity. 
(e)  Absence of detriment. No variance shall be granted that will create substantial detriment to the adjacent property and will materially impair or be contrary to the purpose and spirit of this chapter or the public interest. 
(f)  Additional considerations and requirements in flood districts. No variance shall be granted if: 
(1)  Filling and development contrary to the purpose and intent of the FW Cedar Creek Floodway District would result. 
(2)  A change in the boundaries of the FW Cedar Creek Floodway District, the FC Floodplain-Conservancy District would result. 
(3)  A lower degree of flood protection than a point two feet above the 100-year recurrence interval flood for the particular area would result. 
(4)  Any action contrary to the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. 116 would result. 
(5)  Damage to the rights or property values of other persons in the area would result. 
(g)  Appeals regarding increase in regional flood elevation. For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the board shall: 
(1)  Uphold the denial where the board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and any appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners. 
(2)  Grant the appeal where the board agrees that the data properly demonstrate that the project does not cause an increase equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, provided no other reason for denial exists. 
(Prior Code, § 14.12E; Ord. No. 06-06) 
Sec. 48-66. - Decision; conditions. 
    The board of appeals shall decide all appeals and application within 30 days after the final hearing and shall transmit a signed copy of the board's decision to the appellant or applicant, zoning officer, village plan commission, and village board. Conditions may be placed upon any zoning permit ordered or authorized by this board. 
(Prior Code, § 14.12F; Ord. No. 06-06) 
Sec. 48-67. - Expiration of variances, substitutions and use permits granted by board. 
    Variances, substitutions, or use permits granted by the board shall expire within six months unless substantial work has commenced pursuant to such grant. 
(Prior Code, § 14.12F; Ord. No. 06-06) 
Sec. 48-68. - Notice to DNR. 
    The board of appeals shall transmit a copy of each application for a variance to flood land regulations to the department of natural resources (DNR) for review and comment. Final action on the application shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR has made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions relating to variances to flood land regulations shall be transmitted to the DNR within ten days of the effective date of such decision. 
(Prior Code, § 14.12G; Ord. No. 06-06) 
Sec. 48-69. - Notice to applicant. 
    When a variance is granted in a floodplain area the applicant shall be notified in writing by the board of appeals that increased flood insurance premiums may result. A copy of this notification shall be maintained with the variance appeal record. 
(Prior Code, § 14.12H; Ord. No. 06-06) 
Sec. 48-70. - Review by court of record. 
    Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the board of appeals may present to the court of record a petition duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board of appeals. 
(Prior Code, § 14.12I; Ord. No. 06-06) 
Secs. 48-71-48-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS AND REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-99. - Districts established. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the village is hereby divided into use districts designated as follows: 
(1)  A-1 Agricultural District. 
(2)  R-1 Single-Family Residential District. 
(3)  R-2 Single-Family Residential District. 
(4)  R-3 Single-Family Residential District. 
(5)  R-4 Single-Family Residential District. 
(6)  R-5 Single-Family Residential District. 
(7)  R-6 Two-Family Residential District. 
(8)  R-8 Multiple-Family Residential District. 
(9)  R-9 Mobile Home Park District. 
(10)  B-1 Community Business District. 
(11)  B-2 Downtown Business District. 
(12)  M-1 Limited Manufacturing District. 
(13)  M-2 General Manufacturing District. 
(14)  P-1 Park and Recreation District. 
(15)  I-1 Institutional and Public Service District. 
(16)  PUD Planned Unit Development District. 
(17)  FW Floodway District. 
(18)  FC Floodplain-Conservancy District. 
(19)  FF Flood Fringe District. 
(20)  GFD General Floodplain District. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06A; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-100. - District boundaries; district designation of annexed land and specified uses. 
(a)  Boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the maps entitled "Zoning Map-Village of Jackson, Wisconsin" and "Supplementary Flood Land Zoning Map-Village of Jackson, Wisconsin," and are made a part of this chapter. Such boundaries shall be construed to follow village limits; federal public land survey lines; lot or property lines; centerlines of streets, highways, alleys, easements, and railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended; unless otherwise noted on the zoning map. 
(b)  The boundaries of the floodway district (FW), the floodplain-conservancy district (FC), and the floodplain fringe overlay district (FFO) shall be determined by use of the scale contained on the supplementary flood land zoning map. The flood stages, under floodway conditions, contained on the supplementary flood land zoning map were developed from technical data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study-Jackson, Wisconsin," published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Federal Insurance Administration (FIA), and dated October 16, 2015. The information contained in the flood insurance study is further illustrated in FIA floodway and flood boundary map and flood insurance rate map, both maps dated October 16, 2015. Where a conflict exists between the flood land limits as shown on the map and actual field conditions, the elevations from the 100-year recurrence interval flood profile under floodway conditions shall be the governing factor in locating the regulatory flood land limits. 
(c)  Vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause the land vacated to be automatically placed in the same district as the abutting side to which the vacated land reverts. 
(d)  Annexations to or consolidations with the village subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be placed in the A-1 Agricultural District, unless the annexation ordinance temporarily places the land in another district. Within one year the village plan commission shall evaluate and recommend a permanent classification to the village board. Annexations or consolidations containing flood lands shall be placed in the following districts: 
(e)  All floodways shall be placed in the floodway district (FW). 
(f)  All other flood lands shall be placed in the floodplain-conservancy district (FC). 
(Prior Code, § 14.06B; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-101. - Zoning map. 
    A certified copy of the zoning map, together with the supplementary flood land zoning map, shall be adopted and approved with the text as a part of this chapter and shall bear upon its face the attestation of the village president and village clerk-treasurer and shall be available to the public in the office of the village clerk. Changes thereafter to the general zoning districts shall be entered and attested on the certified copy. Changes in the flood land districts shall not become effective until approved by the state department of natural resources (DNR) and the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA). 
(Prior Code, § 14.06C; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-102. - Lot construction and frontage requirements. 
(a)  No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is unsuitable for such use or structure, by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, or low bearing strength, erosion susceptibility, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare of this community. The village, in applying the provisions of this section, shall, in writing, recite the particular fact upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for certain uses. The applicant shall have the opportunity to present evidence contesting such unsuitability findings if he so desires. Thereafter the village may affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of unsuitability. 
(b)  All lots shall abut on a public street, and each lot shall have a minimum frontage at the setback line as required by the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(c)  Lots abutting upon a cul-de-sac or on the outside of a curve may be less than the required lot width at the street right-of-way, but in no case shall such lots be less than 50 feet in width at the street right-of-way nor less than the required lot width at the setback line. 
(d)  All principal structures shall be located on a lot; and only one principal structure shall be located, erected, or moved onto a lot. 
(e)  No building permit shall be issued for a lot which abuts a public street dedicated to only a portion of its proposed width and located on that side thereof from which the required dedication has not been secured. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04A; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-103. - Existing substandard lots. 
(a)  A lot which does not contain sufficient area to conform to the dimensional requirements of this chapter, but which is at least 50 feet wide and 6,000 square feet in area, may be used as a single-family building site, provided that the use is permitted in the zoning district, provided the lot is of record in the county register of deeds' office prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and provided that the lot is in separate ownership from abutting lands. The improvement of such a lot may only proceed upon the granting of a conditional use by the village. 
(b)  If two or more substandard lots with continuous frontage have the same ownership as of January 1, 1991, the lots involved shall be considered to be an individual parcel for the purpose of this chapter. Substandard lots shall be required to meet the setbacks and other yard requirements of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04B; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-104. - Exceptional circumstances. 
(a)  Pre-existing exceptional circumstances. Whenever the village determines that a parcel of real estate, which parcel was in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, cannot be put to any use under the terms of the zoning ordinance, the village may, after public hearing, allow such parcel to be put to such use as the village determines. 
(b)  Use under exceptional circumstances. The village shall list in writing what use and the terms and conditions of such use a parcel found to be exceptional might be put to. No alteration, expansion or other change may thereafter be made under the zoning ordinance for such parcel. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04C; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-105. - Reduction of lot size and joint use. 
    No lot, yard, parking area, building area, or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as not to meet the provisions of this chapter. No part of any lot, yard, parking area, or other space required for a structure or use shall be used for any other structure or use. The village may grant a conditional use for the joint use of parking where one or more different uses having parking needs at differing times of the day can fulfill their parking needs by agreement through the use of a common facility. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04D; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-106. - Floodway lands eligible for meeting area requirements. 
    If a lot is located partially within the FW Cedar Creek Floodway District and partially within any adjoining use district, that portion of the lot in the FW Cedar Creek Floodway District may be utilized to meet the area requirements of the adjoining use district. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04E; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-107. - Lots, yards and setbacks. 
(a)  Lots abutting restrictive district boundaries. Lots abutting more restrictive district boundaries shall provide side and rear yard setbacks not less than those required in the more restrictive abutting district. 
(b)  Side yard requirement for corner lots. The side yard requirement for corner lots shall be the same as the street yard requirement for other lots facing the same street. 
(c)  Decrease of required street yard in residential or business district. The required street yard may be decreased in any residential or business district to the average of the existing street yards of the abutting structures, but in no case shall the setback be less than 15 feet in any residential district or less than five feet in any business district. 
(d)  Modification of yard and setback requirements. Yard requirements may be modified to accommodate the following: 
(1)  Projections . Uncovered stairs, landings and fire escapes may project into any yard. These projections may not exceed six feet and may not be closer than three feet to any lot line. Stairs and landings shall be slatted to permit snow and rain to fall through them. Architectural projections such as chimneys, eaves, and ornaments may project into any required yard, but may not exceed three feet. 
(2)  Security fences. Security fences shall not be permitted in residential districts. Security fences may be constructed in all other zoning districts on property lines upon the conditional use approval. 
(3)  Landscaping. Landscaping, ornaments, and vegetation are generally exempt from the yard setback requirements of this chapter, except where hedges and plant materials may conflict with reasonable safety provisions. Deciduous shrubs and conifers shall be kept trimmed to the public right-of-way line to promote safe pedestrian and vehicular safety provisions. Deciduous trees shall be pruned to permit a minimum seven foot clearance over walks and as necessary over streets and alleys. 
(4)  Additions . Additions in the street yard to existing structures shall not project beyond the average of the existing street yards on abutting lots or parcels. 
(5)  Essential services. Utilities, electric power, and communication lines are exempt from the yard and distance requirements of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04F; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-108. - Accessory use setback and construction requirements. 
(a)  Generally. Accessory uses and detached accessory structures are permitted in the rear yard. They shall not be closer than ten feet to the principal structure. However, they may be within five feet of the principal structure when the accessory structure is provided with an adequate one-hour firewall. Accessory uses shall not exceed 15 feet in height, unless a conditional use permit is granted by the village board. Accessory uses shall not be closer than three feet to any lot line; and shall not be closer than five feet to an alley right-of-way line. 
(b)  Garages. Garages located in a residential district or where the principal use is residential shall conform to the following: 
(1)  No more than one private garage structure shall be permitted per lot. 
(2)  No private garage shall have a floor area larger than 720 square feet unless a conditional use permit is granted by the village board. 
(3)  Construction shall conform to the village building code. 
(c)  Utility sheds. Utility sheds located in a residential district or where the principal use is residential shall conform to the following: 
(1)  No more than one utility shed structure shall be permitted per lot. 
(2)  No utility shed shall have a floor area larger than 150 square feet unless a conditional use permit is granted by the village board. 
(3)  The utility shed shall be securely anchored to withstand wind uplift of 20 pounds per square foot. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04F; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-109. - Barrier required for residential lot abutting certain commercial use parcels. 
    Whenever a parcel zoned B-1, B-2, M-1, or M-2 abuts a parcel zoned residential, at the time construction of improvements on the commercial or industrial parcel begins, the owner shall construct a barrier on the lot line between the parcels consisting of fencing, shrubbery, plantings, berm or other means. The proposed barrier shall be approved by the village, as part of the conditional use approval. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04F; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-110. - Height restrictions. 
    The height limit on structures shall be determined from the averaged finished grades at the principal corners of the structure, as determined by the zoning officer. All uses requiring a modification of the height limitations specified in this chapter shall be required to apply for a conditional use permit. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04G; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-111. - Use restrictions. 
(a)  Principal uses. Only those principal uses specified for a district, conditional use, or planned unit development, their essential services, and the following uses shall be permitted in that district. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures are permitted in any district but not until their principal structure is present or under construction. Residential accessory uses shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade, or industry except the permitted home occupations and professional home offices as defined in this chapter. Accessory uses include incidental repairs, storage, parking facilities, gardening, servant's, owner's and watchmen's quarters not for rent, private swimming pools, and private emergency shelters. 
(c)  Conditional uses and planned unit development uses. Conditional uses and planned unit development uses and their accessory uses are considered as special uses requiring review, public hearing, and approval by the village board in accordance with this article. 
(d)  Temporary uses. Temporary uses (such as real estate offices or shelters for materials and equipment used in the construction of a permanent structure) may be permitted by the village. Sales of goods or merchandise from a trailer shall not be permitted. 
(e)  Unclassified or unspecified uses. Unclassified or unspecified uses shall not be permitted until a zoning text change permitting the use has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the requirements of section 48-34. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04H.1-H.5; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Secs. 48-112-48-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 48-136. - A-1 Agricultural District. 
(a)  Generally. The A-1 Agricultural District is intended to provide for the continuation of general farming and related uses in those areas of the village that are not yet committed to urban development. It is further the intent of this district to protect lands contained herein from urban development until their orderly transition into urban oriented districts is required. 
(b)  Permitted uses. There are no permitted uses in this zoning district. 
(c)  Conditional uses. All uses are conditional in this zoning district. 
(d)  Lot area and width. Farm structures hereafter erected, moved, or structurally altered shall provide a contiguous area of not less than five acres and no farm parcel shall be less than 300 feet in width at the setback line. Accessory farm buildings, existing residential structures, and farm dwellings remaining after the consolidation of existing farms shall provide a lot area of not less than 40,000 square feet and shall be not less than 120 feet in width at the setback line. 
(e)  Building height and area. No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height. No farm dwelling or other residential structure shall be less than 1,100 square feet in area with a first floor area of 750 square feet. 
(f)  Setbacks and yards. There shall be a minimum building setback of 50 feet from the street right-of-way. There shall be a side yard on each side of the principal structure not less than 25 feet in width and a rear yard of not less than 50 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.1; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-137. - R-1 Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Generally. The R-1 Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide for single family residential development, at densities not to exceed 2.7 dwelling units per net acre, served by municipal sewer and water facilities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses include private garages, private carports, sheds (garden, tool and storage) incidental to the residential use, and home occupations and professional home offices as specified in section 48-1. 
(d)  Conditional uses. No conditional uses may be applied for in this zoning district. 
(e)  Lot area and width. Lots shall be a minimum of 16,000 square feet in area and shall be not less than 100 in width at the setback line. 
(f)  Building height and area. No principal building or parts of a principal building shall exceed 35 feet in height. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height. The total minimum floor area of a dwelling shall be 1,100 square feet with a minimum first floor area of 750 square feet. 
(g)  Setbacks and yards. There shall be a minimum building setback of 30 feet from the right-of-way of all streets. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings not less than 15 feet in width and a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.2; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-138. - R-2 Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Generally. The R-2 Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide for single-family residential development at densities not to exceed 3.1 dwelling units per net acre, served by municipal sewer and water facilities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses include private garages, private carports, sheds (garden, tool and storage) incidental to the residential use, and home occupations and professional home offices as specified in section 48-1. 
(d)  Conditional uses. No conditional uses may be applied for in this zoning district. 
(e)  Lot area and width. Lots shall be a minimum of 14,000 square feet in area and shall not be less than 90 feet in width at the setback line. 
(f)  Building height and area. No principal building or parts of a principal building shall exceed 35 feet in height. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height. The total minimum floor area of a dwelling shall be 1,100 square feet with a minimum first floor area of 750 square feet. 
(g)  Setbacks and yards. There shall be a minimum building setback of 30 feet from the right-of-way of all streets. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings not less than 12 feet in width and a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.3; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-139. - R-3 Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Generally. The R-3 Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide for single-family residential development at densities not to exceed 3.6 dwelling units per net acre, served by municipal and water facilities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses include private garages, private carports, sheds (garden, tool and storage) incidental to the residential use, and home occupations and professional home offices as specified in section 48-1. 
(d)  Conditional uses. No conditional uses may be applied for in this zoning district. 
(e)  Lot area and width. Lots shall be a minimum of 12,000 square feet in area and shall not be less than 80 feet in width at the setback line. 
(f)  Building height and area. No principal building or parts of a principal building shall exceed 35 feet in height. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height. The total minimum floor area of a dwelling shall be 1,000 square feet with a minimum first floor area of 600 square feet. 
(g)  Setbacks and yards. There shall be a minimum building setback of 30 feet from the right-of-way of all streets. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings not less than 12 feet in width and a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.4; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-140. - R-4 Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Generally. The R-4 Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide for single-family residential development at densities not to exceed 4.4 dwelling units per net acre, served by municipal sewer and water facilities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses include private garages, private carports, sheds (garden, tool and storage) incidental to the residential use, and home occupations and professional home offices as specified in section 48-1. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses include group homes, foster homes, and halfway houses, provided that there shall be a minimum lot area of 2,500 square feet per person (upon ultimate development) and a minimum principal building area of 200 square feet per person. 
(e)  Lot area and width. Lots shall be a minimum of 10,000 square feet in area and shall be not less than 75 feet in width at the setback line. 
(f)  Building height and area. No principal building or parts of a principal building shall exceed 35 feet in height. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height. The total floor area of a dwelling shall be 1,000 square feet with a minimum first floor area of 600 square feet. 
(g)  Setbacks and yards. There shall be a minimum building setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way of all local streets and a setback of 30 feet from the right-of-way of all collector and arterial streets. There shall be a side yard not less than ten feet in width on each side of the lot and a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.5; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-141. - R-5 Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Generally. The R-5 Single-Family Residential District is to provide for a single-family residential development at densities not to exceed 5.4 dwelling units per net acre, served by municipal sewer and water facilities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses include private garages, private carports, sheds (garden, tool and storage) incidental to the residential use, and home occupations and professional home offices as specified in section 48-1. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses include group homes, foster homes, and halfway houses, provided that there shall be a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet per person (upon ultimate development) and a minimum principal building area of 200 square feet per person. 
(e)  Lot area and width. Lots created after January 1, 1991, shall have a minimum of 8,000 square feet in area and shall not be less than 70 feet in width at the setback line. Lots created prior to January 1, 1991 shall have a minimum of 8,000 square feet and shall not be less than 50 feet in width at the setback line. Single lots created as an infill lot (the remaining space between the two platted and zoned single-family residential lots; between one platted and zoned single-family residential lot and a right-of-way boundary; or between a platted and zoned single-family residential lot and a lot zoned for other uses other than single-family residences) shall have a minimum area of 8,000 square feet and shall not be less than 50 feet in width at the setback line. 
(f)  Building height and area. No principal building or parts of a principal building shall exceed 35 feet in height. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height. The total minimum floor area of a one bedroom dwelling shall be 800 square feet; the total minimum floor area of a two bedroom dwelling shall be 900 square feet; and the total minimum floor area of a three bedroom dwelling shall be 1,000 square feet. 
(g)  Setbacks and yards. There shall be a minimum building setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way of all local streets and a setback of 30 feet from the right-of-way of all collector and arterial streets. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings not less than eight feet in width and a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.6; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-142. - R-6 Two-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Generally. The R-6 Two-Family Residential District is intended to provide for two family residential development at densities not to exceed 7.2 dwelling units per net acre, served by municipal sewer and water facilities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Two-family and single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses include private garages, private carports, sheds (garden, tool and storage) incidental to the residential use, and home occupations and professional home offices as specified in section 48-1. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses include group homes, foster homes, and halfway houses provided that there shall be a minimum lot area of 1,500 square feet per person (upon ultimate development) and a minimum principal building area of 200 square feet per person. 
(e)  Lot area and width. Lots shall be a minimum of 12,000 square feet in area and shall not be less than 85 feet in width at the setback line. 
(f)  Building height and area. No principal building or parts of a principal building shall exceed 35 feet in height. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height. The total minimum floor area of a one bedroom dwelling shall be 700 square feet; the total minimum floor area of a two bedroom dwelling shall be 1,000 square feet. 
(g)  Setbacks and yards. There shall be a minimum setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way of local streets. There shall be a 30 foot minimum setback from the right-of-way of all collector and arterial streets. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings not less than 15 feet in width and a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.7; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-143. - R-8 Multiple-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Generally. The R-8 Multiple-Family Residential District is intended to provide for multiple-family residential development served by municipal sewer and water facilities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. There are no permitted uses in this zoning district. 
(c)  Conditional uses. All uses and accessory uses are conditional in this zoning district. 
(d)  Lot area and width. Lots have the minimum of the larger of 16,000 square feet in area. The minimum total area required per dwelling unit shall be 3,000 square feet for each one bedroom dwelling and 3,500 square feet for each two bedroom or larger dwelling unit. Lots shall not be less than 85 feet in width. 
(e)  Building height and area. No principal building or parts of a principal building shall exceed 35 feet in height. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height. No principal building shall have a floor area of not less than 2,000 square feet. The total required floor area per building shall be 500 square feet for each one bedroom dwelling unit, 700 square feet for each two bedroom dwelling unit, and 900 square feet for each three bedroom (or larger) dwelling unit. 
(f)  Setback and yards. There shall be a minimum building setback of 30 feet from the right-of-way of all streets. There shall be a minimum side yard on each side of all buildings not less than 20 feet in width and a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.8; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-144. - R-9 Mobile Home Park District. 
(a)  Generally. The R-9 Mobile Home Park District is intended to provide for the location of mobile home parks in a residential setting that is compatible with or buffered from adjacent land uses. Mobile homes are declared herein to be residential structures and are entitled to the same protection from incompatible uses as is afforded residential uses in other residential districts. 
(b)  Permitted uses. None; all uses are conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot area and width. Minimum park size shall be 20 acres. Minimum lot area for a single module mobile home shall be 5,000 square feet. Minimum lot area for a doublewide mobile home shall be 7,200 square feet. The mobile home lot shall be a minimum of 60 feet in width. 
(d)  Setbacks and spacing requirements. The minimum distance between a mobile home unit and all exterior park lot lines shall be 30 feet. The minimum distance between mobile homes shall be 15 feet. The minimum setback for all mobile homes shall be 50 feet from all public streets and 30 feet from service roads. 
(e)  Park land dedication and open space requirements. Each mobile home park shall dedicate and construct recreation areas equal to the aggregate of 100 square feet per residential unit. Parkland or a park fee in lieu of a dedication shall be required. The village shall have the sole discretion as to which option shall be exercised. Such fees shall be set forth by resolution. Minimum open space provided shall be 20 percent of the development area, exclusive of streets. 
(f)  Screening requirements. All mobile home parks shall be enclosed and screened using materials approved as part of the conditional use. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.9; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-145. - B-1 Community Business District. 
(a)  Generally. The B-1 Community Business District is intended to provide for individual or small groups of retail and customer service establishments. This type of district is generally located away from the traditional central business district and provides such amenities as increased open space and off-street parking and loading facilities, making such retail centers more compatible with the character of adjacent residential districts. 
(b)  Permitted uses. None; all uses are conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of one acre and shall not be less than 150 feet in width. 
(d)  Building height. No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(e)  Setbacks and yards. There shall be a minimum setback of 50 feet from the street right-of-way. There shall be a side yard on either side of the principal structure of not less than 15 feet in width and a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.10; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-146. - B-2 Downtown Business District. 
(a)  Generally. The B-2 Downtown Business District is intended to provide for the orderly continuation of the traditional central business district. The business activities are more of a general nature and are characterized by on-street parking. While continuing those existing businesses at their present level of service, new businesses located in the B-2 Downtown Business District should be required to provide for off-street parking and loading. 
(b)  Permitted uses. None; all uses are conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum of 7,000 square feet in area and shall be not less than 60 feet in width at the setback line. 
(d)  Building height. No building or parts of building shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(e)  Setbacks and yards. There shall be a minimum building setback of ten feet from the street right-of-way. No minimum side yard is required; however, where a side yard is provided, it shall not be less than ten feet. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.11; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-147. - M-1 Limited Manufacturing District. 
(a)  Generally. The M-1 Limited Manufacturing District is intended to provide for manufacturing, industrial, and related uses of a limited nature and size in situations where such uses are not located in basic industrial groupings and where the relative proximity to other uses requires more restrictive regulation. 
(b)  Permitted uses. None; all uses are conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet and shall not be less than 60 feet in width at the setback line. 
(d)  Building height. No building or part of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(e)  Setbacks and yards. There shall be a minimum building setback of 30 feet from the right-of-way of all streets. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings not less than 12 feet in width and a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.12; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-148. - M-2 General Manufacturing District. 
(a)  Generally. The M-2 General Manufacturing District is intended to provide for manufacturing and industrial development of a more general and less restrictive nature than in the M-1 district in those areas where the relationship to surrounding land use would create fewer problems of compatibility and would not necessitate as stringent regulatory controls. Such districts should not normally abut directly upon residential districts less than ten acres. 
(b)  Permitted uses. None; all uses are conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet and shall not be less than 60 feet in width at the setback line. 
(d)  Building height. No building or part of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(e)  Setbacks and yards. There shall be a minimum building setback of 30 feet from the right-of-way of all streets. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings not less than 12 feet in width and a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.13; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-149. - P-1 Park and Recreation District. 
(a)  Generally. The P-1 Park and Recreation District is intended to provide for areas where the recreational needs, both public and private, of the populace can be met without undo disturbance of natural resources and adjacent uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses. None; all uses are conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot area and width. Lots in the P-1 Park and Recreation District shall provide sufficient area for the principal structure and accessory structures, off-street parking and loading areas, as required by section 48-174. 
(d)  Building height. No building or part of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(e)  Setbacks and yards. All setbacks shall be part of the conditional use process. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.14; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-150. - I-1 Institutional and Public Service District. 
(a)  Generally. The I-1 Institutional and Public Service District is intended to eliminate the ambiguity of maintaining, in unrelated use districts, areas which are under public or public-related ownership and where the use for public purpose is anticipated to be permanent. 
(b)  Permitted uses. None; all uses are conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot area and width. Lots shall be a minimum of 8,000 square feet in area and shall not be less than 70 feet in width at the setback line. 
(d)  Setbacks and yards. There shall be a minimum building setback of 30 feet from the right-of-way of all streets. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings not less than 12 feet in width and a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.15; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-151. - PUD Planned Unit Development District. 
(a)  When applicable. The owner or developer of a parcel of land of two or more acres may follow the provisions of this section in applying for development approval. 
(b)  Purpose. The planned unit development (PUD) procedure offers flexibility in design and layout for residential, commercial, and industrial developments and makes it possible for mixed uses to be integrated into a development. It may provide for open space and land for public purposes. It may permit the use of a more creative development approach, such as zero lot line development. This process offers flexibility, but demands strict compliance. Amendments to the development agreement shall be made by the village board. 
(c)  Compliance. The planned unit development proposal shall be in compliance with the adopted plans and policies of the village for development. The owner or developer shall provide assurance that the approved planned unit development (PUD) project, including the conditions of approval and schedule, will be complied with. The developer or owner shall sign and record a development agreement, a development plan showing all improvements to be constructed, and any deed restrictions or covenants required for approval. The owner or the owner's agent of commercial and industrial developments shall obtain approval of the village for all leases of the PUD project prior to entering into a lease for the entire premises or portions thereof. This requirement is applicable to existing and future PUD commercial and industrial developments. Leasehold uses shall be in compliance with the village's adopted plans and policies for development. The owner shall incorporate the requirements of this subsection in any development agreement required for the project. 
(d)  Density . The former zoning classification of the area under consideration shall serve as the primary requisite in determining the density of dwelling units within the proposed PUD unless it was found that a reduction or increase would be in the best interest of the village. The density of residential development shall be not greater than the number of units permitted per acre on a total acreage basis and shall include wetlands, water bodies, stormwater detention basins, dedicated park land, open space owned in common, etc., so as to maximize open space, wetlands, woodlands, and views, while giving the developer the units needed for the success of the project. 
(e)  Pre-applicable conference . A pre-submittal conference with staff is required to familiarize the applicant with the process and to introduce the staff to the proposal. 
(f)  Submittal requirements. Submittal requirements are as follows: 
(1)  All preliminary subdivision submittal requirements, including erosion control plans. 
(2)  A development plan, showing all proposed improvements, including landscaping, the siting and elevations of all proposed primary structures, and details of any improvement deemed necessary by the staff. 
(3)  A proposal consisting of the restrictions, covenants, phasing, and assurances, which will assure the completion and the expectations of the project. 
(4)  The applicant is encouraged to submit a concept plan prior to a preliminary development plan in order to gain additional insight as to the acceptability of the concept. 
(g)  Development agreement. The development agreement is a recordable document depicting all improvements to be constructed. 
(h)  Deed restrictions and conditions . The village may require conditions and restrictions to be placed upon the property to be developed through properly recorded deed restrictions or restrictive covenants. The village shall be named as a party of interest so that, if necessary, the deed restrictions or restrictive covenants may be enforced through injunctive or other relief under the documents as recorded. Such conditions and restrictions shall provide, among other things, for the continuous maintenance of common areas together with the right of the village to ensure that such areas are maintained by assessing the cost of such maintenance to the developer, owner, or association responsible for the same. 
(i)  Amenities and conditions. Examples of amenities and conditions appropriate for consideration for this type of development are: 
(1)  Recreational areas and parks. 
(2)  Off street parking. 
(3)  Signing. 
(4)  Landscaping. 
(5)  Common areas and their treatment. 
(6)  Maintenance on the common areas. 
(7)  Color and texture of all building materials. 
(8)  Internal pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
(9)  Grading and drainage. 
(10)  Buffering uses in the PUD from surrounding areas and vice versa. 
(11)  Setbacks. 
(j)  Approval . The approval of the planned unit development proposal by the village board shall be based on the following: 
(1)  Compatibility with surrounding development. 
(2)  Compatibility with plans and policies approved by the village. 
(3)  Assurance of compliance, which shall include: 
a.  Development agreement. 
b.  Development site plan. 
c.  Deed restrictions or restrictive covenants as required. 
d.  Performance bonds. 
e.  Proof of financial capability. 
f.  Schedule of construction. 
(k)  Rescission of approval. The village board may rescind the approval of the planned unit development if conditions of approval of the development are not being met. For example: if the time phasing of the development is not being met and an extension has not been mutually agreed to by the village and developer, the village may serve notice that if the project is not brought up to date within a specified time period, the village, at its option, may void all previous approvals. Where such action is taken, all bonds may be forfeited, unless a new agreement is approved upon re-application. 
(l)  Special planning circumstances. Owners or developers of parcels of land less than two acres which, in the determination of the village, have special planning circumstances, may be requested to fulfill the planned unit development procedures of this section. 
(m)  Fees. The schedule of fees shall be set forth in the development agreement. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.16; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 48-152. - Flood districts. 
(a)  FW floodway district. See chapter 16, article II. 
(b)  FC floodplain conservancy district. See chapter 16, article II. 
(c)  FF flood fringe district . See chapter 16, article II. 
(d)  GFP general floodplain district . See chapter 16, article II. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06D.17-D.20; Ord. No. 94-06; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 02-07; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Secs. 48-153-48-172. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRAFFIC, LOADING, PARKING AND ACCESS 

Sec. 48-173. - Obstructions; visibility. 
(a)  Generally. No obstructions, such as structures, parking, or vegetation, shall be permitted in any district between the heights of 21/2 feet and ten feet above the plane through the mean curb grades within the triangular space formed by any two existing or proposed intersecting street or alley right-of-way lines and a line joining points on such lines located a minimum of 15 feet from their intersection. 
(b)  Arterial streets. For arterial streets intersecting with other arterial streets or railways, the corner cutoff distances establishing the triangular vision clearance space shall be increased to 50 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04I.1; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-174. - Loading requirements. 
    On every lot on which a business or industrial use is hereafter established, space with access to a public street or alley shall be provided as indicated below for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public right-of-way. 
(1)  Businesses: One space of at least 12 feet by 60 feet for each 3,000 square feet of floor area or part thereof. 
(2)  Wholesale and industrial: One space of at least 12 feet by 60 feet for each 100,000 square feet of floor area or part thereof. 
(3)  Bus and truck terminals: Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loaded or unloaded at the terminal at any one time. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04I.2; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-175. - Driveways. 
    All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced, or extended after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The distance between driveways and approach openings shall be a minimum of six feet. All approaches or driveways shall be measured from the top of the flare and three feet from all lot lines. 
(2)  Openings for vehicle ingress and egress shall be as follows: 
a.  Single-family lots are allowed one 24 foot opening, measured from the bottom of the flare. 
b.  Two-family lots are allowed up to two 24-foot openings, measured from the bottom of the flare. There must be an island between each approach or driveway. 
c.  All other residential property will be allowed one 24 foot opening per lot, measured from the bottom of the flare, unless otherwise approved by the village board. 
d.  Commercial or industrial property will be allowed one 30 foot opening per lot, measured from the bottom of the flare, unless otherwise approved by the village board. 
(3)  Vehicular entrances and exits to drive-in banks, motels, funeral homes, vehicular sales, service, washing and repair stations, garages, or public parking lots shall be not less than 200 feet from any pedestrian entrances or exit to a school, college, university, church, hospital, park, playground, library, public emergency shelter, or other place of public assembly. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04I.4; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-176. - Highway access. 
    No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of expressways, or any controlled access arterial street without permission of the highway agency that has access control jurisdiction. No direct public or private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of the following: 
(1)  Freeways, interstate highways and their interchanges or turning lanes, nor to intersecting or interchanging streets within 1,500 feet of the most remote end of the taper of the turning lanes. 
(2)  Arterial streets intersecting another arterial street within 100 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
(3)  Access barriers such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping, or other topographic barriers shall be erected to prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the above specified streets or highways. 
(4)  Temporary access to the above rights-of-way may be granted by the village board after review and recommendation by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be temporary, revocable, and subject to any conditions required and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04I.5; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-177. - Parking. 
(a)  Generally. In all districts and in connection with every use, there shall be provided at the time any use or building is erected, enlarged, extended, or increase off-street parking stalls for all vehicles in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each parking space, and driveways shall comply with village standards on file with village engineer. 
(2)  Size of each parking space shall not be less than nine feet wide and 162 square feet in area exclusive of the space required for ingress and egress. 
(3)  Location shall be on the same lot as the principal use or not more than 400 feet from the principal area. No parking stall or driveway except in residential districts shall be closer than 25 feet to a residential district lot line or a street line opposite a residential district. 
(4)  All off-street parking areas or driveways for more than five vehicles shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or Portland cement pavement in accordance with the village standards and specifications so as to provide a durable and dustless surface; shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area; and shall be so arranged and marked so as to provide for orderly and safe loading or unloading, parking, and storage of self-propelled vehicles. 
(5)  Curbs and barriers shall be installed so as to prevent the parked vehicles from extending over any lot lines. 
(b)  Minimum number of spaces required. The following number of parking stalls are required: 
Use Minimum Parking Required Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings,multiple-family dwellings and mobile homes Two spaces for each dwelling unit Motels, hotels One space for each guestroom, plus one space for each three employees Roominghouses and boardinghouses, fraternity and sorority houses, dormitories, rectories One space per bed Retirement homes, orphanages, convents, monasteries One space per 1,000 feet of principal floor area Hospitals, institutions, rest and nursing homes One space for each three beds, plus one space for each three employees, plus one space for each physician Medical and dental clinics Seven spaces for each doctor Churches, theaters, auditoriums, community centers, and night schools, and other places of public assembly One space for each three seats Colleges, secondary and elementary schools One space for each employee, plus one space for each five students of 16 years of age or more Restaurants, bars, places of entertainment, repair shops, retail and service stores One space for each 150 square feet of floor area, plus one space for each two employees Manufacturing and processing plants (including meat and processing laboratories) One space for each 500 feet of principal building area Financial institutions, business, government, and professional offices One space for each 200 square feet of floor area, plus one space for each two employees Funeral homes Twenty spaces for each viewing room Bowling alleys Five spaces for each alley Lodges and clubs One space for each five members Automobile repair garages and service garages One space for each regular employee, plus one space for each 250 square feet of floor area used for repair work Motor vehicle sales (new and used) One space for each 500 square feet of floor area used, plus 300 square feet of outdoor display area for each motor vehicle to be displayed (this requirement does not include service garages-see above) Gasoline filling stations Three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility, plus one space for each attendant.  
(c)  Exceptions. In the case of structures or uses not listed, the provisions for use, which are similar, shall apply. Combinations of any of the above uses shall provide the total of the number of stalls required for each individual use. Where it can be demonstrated that due to differences in peak use times it is necessary, a joint use of parking may be requested as a conditional use. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04I.3; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Secs. 48-178-48-207. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS 

Sec. 48-208. - Existing nonconforming uses. 
    The lawful nonconforming use of a structure, land, or water existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter may be continued although the use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter; however: 
(1)  Only that portion of the land or water in actual use may be so continued and the structure may not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted, moved or structurally altered except when required to do so by law or order or to comply with the provisions of this article or upon recommendation of the plan commission and approval of the village board. 
(2)  Total lifetime structural repairs or alterations shall not exceed 50 percent of the village's equalized value of the structure unless it is permanently changed to conform to the use provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Substitution of new equipment may be permitted by the board of appeals if such equipment will reduce the incompatibility of the nonconforming use with the neighboring uses. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04H.6.a; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-209. - Existing nonconforming structures. 
    A lawful nonconforming structure existing at the time of this adoption or amendment of this chapter may be continued although its size or location does not conform with the lot width, lot area, yard, height, parking and loading, and access provisions of this chapter; however, it shall not be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except when required to do so by law or order or so as to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04H.6.b; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-210. - Nonconforming characteristics of residential structures. 
    Residential structures which encroach upon setback and other yard requirements, but which met setback and yard requirements at the time of construction, may be structurally altered provided that they do not create a greater degree of encroachment. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04H.6.c; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-211. - Abolishment or replacement. 
    If such nonconforming use is discontinued or terminated for a period of 12 months, any future use of the structure, land, or water shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. When a nonconforming use or structure is damaged by fire, explosion, flood, the public enemy, or other calamity, to the extent of more than 50 percent of its current assessed value, it shall not be restored except so as to comply with the use provisions of this chapter. Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04H.6.d; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-212. - Changes and substitutions. 
    Once a nonconforming use or structure has been changed to conform, it shall not revert back to a nonconforming use or structure. Once the board of appeals has permitted the substitution of a more restrictive nonconforming use, the substituted use shall lose its status as a legal nonconforming use and become subject to all the conditions required by the board of appeals. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04H.6.e; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-213. - Areas of floodplains. 
(a)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or a nonconforming structure shall be permitted unless they are made in conformity with the provisions of this chapter for the area of the floodplain it occupies. For the purpose of this section, the words "modification" and "addition" shall include, but not be limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered modifications or additions; such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling and replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components; and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems, or connections to public utilities. 
(b)  No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter and contiguous dry land access is provided in compliance with. 
(c)  As requests are received for modifications or additions to nonconforming uses or nonconforming structures in the floodplain, a record shall be kept which lists the nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, and the cost of the house additions or modifications which have been permitted. 
(d)  If any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is so badly damaged that it cannot be practically restored, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the provisions are met. For the purpose of this subsection, restoration is deemed impractical where the total cost of such restoration would exceed 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the structure. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04H.6.f; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-214. - Floodway areas. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such modification or addition: 
(1)  Has been granted a permit or variance; 
(2)  Meets criteria of this division; 
(3)  Will not increase the amount of obstruction to flood flows as provided in chapter 16, article II; and 
(4)  Any addition to an existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to chapter 16, article II, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation. 
(b)  No new on-site sewage disposal system, or any addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(c)  No new well or modification to an existing well, used to obtain water for ultimate human consumption, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of this chapter and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 111 and 112. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04H.6.g; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-215. - Flood fringe areas. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the flood fringe area unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance and, except where subsection (b) of this section is applicable, the modification or addition is placed on fill or is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with that applicable regulations of that particular use in a flood fringe area in chapter 16, article II. 
(b)  If compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section would result in unnecessary hardship, and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the board of appeals, using the procedures established in section 16-195, may grant a variance from those provisions, for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted provided: 
(1)  No floor is below regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures; 
(2)  Human lives are not endangered; 
(3)  Public facilities, such as water or sewer, are not to be installed; 
(4)  Flood depths will not exceed two feet; 
(5)  Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and 
(6)  The structure will not be used for storage of materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life. 
(c)  An addition to an existing room in a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use may be allowed in a flood fringe area on a one-time basis only if the addition: 
(1)  Has been granted by permit or variance; 
(2)  Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and 
(3)  In combination with other modifications or additions to the building, does not exceed 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the building. 
(d)  All new on-site sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of an on-site sewage disposal system, in a flood fringe area shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinance and in Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(e)  All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well, in a flood fringe area shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 111 and 112. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04H.6.h; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 48-216. - Records. 
    A file of all nonconforming uses shall be maintained by the zoning administrator listing the following: owner's name and address; use of the structure, land, or water; and assessed value at the time of its becoming a nonconforming use. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04H.6.i; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Secs. 48-217-48-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 48-241. - When permitted. 
    The village board may authorize a conditional use as specified in each district in division 3 of this article after the plan commission has made a recommendation and a public hearing has been held, provided that such conditional uses and structures are in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter and are found to be not hazardous, harmful, offensive, or otherwise adverse to the environment or the value of the neighborhood or the community. 
(Prior Code, § 14.07A; Ord. No. 02-07) 
Sec. 48-242. - Review and approval. 
(a)  The plan commission and the village board shall review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage, sewerage and water systems, the proposed operation, and the materials required for the application for such a request. 
(b)  Conditions such as landscaping, architectural design, type of construction, floodproofing, anchoring or structures, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties, lighting, fencing, planting screens, operational control, hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed restriction, highway access restriction, increased yards, or parking requirements are among those conditions of approval which may be required by the village board to fulfill the purpose on intent of this chapter. 
(c)  Compliance with all other provisions of this chapter, such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking, loading, traffic, and highway access, shall be required of all conditional uses. Variances shall only be granted as provided in section 16-195(4). 
(Prior Code, § 14.07B; Ord. No. 02-07) 
Sec. 48-243. - Application. 
    Applications for conditional use permits shall be made on forms furnished by the village and shall include the following: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional engineer, contractor, a letter of content describing the request, all opposite and abutting property owners of record within 200 feet of the site, proof of ownership, and an impact statement. 
(2)  Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; landscape plan; a grading and drainage plan showing storm sewer plans; and the zoning district within which the subject site is located. For flood land conditional uses, such description shall also include information that is necessary for the village board to determine whether the proposed development will hamper flood flows, impair floodplain storage capacity, or cause danger to human or animal life. This additional information may include plans, certified by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor, showing elevations or contours of the ground; fill or storage elevations; first floor elevations of structures; size, locations, and spatial arrangement of all existing and proposed structures on the site; locations and elevation of street water supply, and sanitary facilities; photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream; soil types; and other pertinent information. 
(3)  Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing all of the information required, in addition, the following: mean and historic high-water lines and flood lands on or within 40 feet of the subject premises, and existing and proposed landscaping. 
(4)  Additional information as may be required by the plan commission, village engineer, village administrator, building inspector, or village board. 
(Prior Code, § 14.07C; Ord. No. 02-07) 
Sec. 48-244. - Notice to DNR. 
    The village shall transmit a copy of each application for a conditional use in a flood land district to the state department of natural resources (DNR) for review and comment. Final action on flood land conditional uses shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR has made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions related to conditional uses in flood land districts shall be transmitted to the DNR within ten days of the effective date of such decision. 
(Prior Code, § 14.07D; Ord. No. 02-07) 
Secs. 48-245-48-266. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL USES 

Sec. 48-267. - Permits. 
(a)  Special use permits are applicable to existing conditional use permits and planned unit development. Special use permits may be granted by the administrator or designee. 
(b)  Requests for special use permits must be made in writing and be specific as to the type of special use permit requested. The administrator or designee may request plans, specifications, or other materials be submitted in addition to the written application. 
(c)  Denied requests may be appealed to the plan commission and village board and shall be treated and processed in the same manner as a conditional use permit request. Appropriate processing fees shall be determined by the village board. 
(d)  The granting of a special use permit shall not change the character of the principal use or conflict with the purpose and intent of the original conditional use or planned development approval. In addition, requests for a special use permit shall be reviewed for impact on neighboring uses in addition to the neighborhood. Compatibility is a primary consideration. 
(e)  Requests for special use permits shall include, but not be limited to, the following: flagpoles, sign replacements (of same size or smaller), storage garages to house lawn care equipment or similar items, paint schemes, landscaping modifications, minor changes to building facades, and minor lighting changes, setbacks, and users in multi-tenant structures. 
(Prior Code, § 14.07E; Ord. No. 02-07) 
Secs. 48-268-48-297. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SIGNS 

Sec. 48-298. - Purpose and intent. 
    The intent of this division is to provide for and regulate the location and safe construction of signs in a manner to ensure that signs are compatible with surrounding land uses, and express the identity of individual proprietors and the community as a whole. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10A; Ord. No. 95-02; Ord. No. 02-12; Ord. No. 03-04; Ord. No. 09-01) 
Sec. 48-299. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Awning sign means a non-illuminated identification is affixed flat to the surface of an awning and which does not extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of such awning. 
    Banners means a flexible graphic that may only be displayed by commercial and institutional establishments, delineating a special area or depicting a special announcement. See Temporary signs . 
    Canopy sign means a sign suspended from or forming part of a canopy or marquee and which does not extend horizontally beyond the limits of such canopy or marquee. 
    Changeable copy sign means any sign which is characterized by changeable copy, letters, or symbols, regardless of method of attachment. 
    Flags means devices generally made of flexible materials, such as cloth, paper, or plastic, and displayed on strings. Flags may or may not include copy. This definition does not include the flag of any country or state. 
    Ground sign means a sign attached to the ground independent of any buildings. 
    Marquee. See Canopy sign . 
    Projecting sign means a sign projecting more than 12 inches from the face of the building. 
    Roof sign means a sign erected on or over the roof of the building. 
    Temporary sign means a graphic granted by a special use permit, to be displayed not longer than 16 consecutive days. 
    Wall sign means a sign which is attached to a wall of a building and projects not more than 12 inches from such wall and shall not extend above the ceiling line of the top floor of the building. 
    Window sign means a sign painted on or affixed to a window. Materials affixed to a window shall be affixed to the inside surface of the window to eliminate scattering of copy by wind action. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10A; Ord. No. 95-02; Ord. No. 02-12; Ord. No. 03-04; Ord. No. 09-01) 
Sec. 48-300. - Signs permitted in all districts without a permit. 
    The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts without a permit, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Real estate ground or wall signs not to exceed eight square feet in area which advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which the signs are temporarily located. Such signs may not be placed in the right-of-way. 
(2)  Ground signs identifying the name and address of the resident not to exceed two square feet in area when located on the premises. Such signs may be placed at the right-of-way line. 
(3)  Home occupation and professional home office wall signs not to exceed two square feet in area and mounted flush against the dwelling. 
(4)  Bulletin boards on ground signs or wall signs for public, charitable, or religious institutions not to exceed 50 square feet in area located on the premises. Such signs shall meet the setback requirement of the district in which they are located. 
(5)  Memorial signs, tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal and affixed flat against a structure. 
(6)  Official ground signs such as traffic control, parking restrictions, information, and notices. Such signs may be placed at the curb line or pavement edge. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10B; Ord. No. 95-02; Ord. No. 02-12; Ord. No. 03-04; Ord. No. 09-01) 
Sec. 48-301. - Signs permitted in business and industrial districts with a permit. 
    Signs are permitted in all business and manufacturing districts subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Temporary signs when seeking a special use permit shall, in each case, describe the material of the sign to be permitted; the size of the sign to be permitted; the time period the sign is to remain in place; and how the sign will be displayed, including the location. Signs which meet the definition of a non-permanent sign, but are anticipated to be recurring, shall be approved as a conditional use or a planned unit development site plan amendment. 
(2)  Wall signs placed against the exterior walls of buildings shall not extend more than 12 inches outside of a building's wall surface, shall not exceed in area 30 percent of the signable area of the building, or 300 square feet, whichever is smaller, for any one premises. Wall signs shall not extend beyond the ceiling level of the top floor of the building upon which they are located. 
(3)  Projected signs, awning signs, canopy signs, and marquees fastened to, suspended from, or supported by structures shall not exceed 100 feet in area for any one premises; shall not extend more than six feet into any required yard; shall not extend more than three feet into any public right-of-way; shall not be less than ten feet from all side lot lines; shall not exceed a height of 20 feet above the mean centerline street grade; and shall not be less than ten feet above the sidewalk nor 15 feet above a driveway or an alley. 
(4)  Ground signs shall not exceed 20 feet in height above the mean centerline street grade, shall not exceed 80 square feet on one side nor 160 square feet on all sides for any one premises. No ground sign shall be placed closer than 80 feet to another ground sign or projecting, awning, canopy, or marquee sign unless permitted by conditional use. The conditional use application shall include scaled drawings or renderings showing the sign relative to the site and structures, photos or videotapes of the proposed sign at both 20 feet in height and the proposed height from all directions that are deemed necessary by the village. 
(5)  Roof sign shall not exceed ten feet in height above the roof, shall meet the height requirements for the district in which it is located, and shall not exceed 300 square feet on all sides for any one premises. 
(6)  Window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the glass area of the pane upon which the sign is displayed. 
(7)  The total area of all signs except window signs, erected or placed on any one premises shall not exceed 60 percent of the signable area of a building as defined in section 48-302 herein or 400 square feet, whichever is smaller. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10C; Ord. No. 95-02; Ord. No. 02-12; Ord. No. 03-04; Ord. No. 09-01) 
Sec. 48-302. - Signs which may be erected or placed if a conditional use is granted. 
    The village may permit the erection of a ground sign in excess of the requirements as set forth in section 48-301(4) and the total signage square footage in excess of the requirements as set forth in section 48-301(7) through the granting of a conditional use permit when the signs are erected on property adjacent to an arterial street, or highway with a posted speed limit of 40 mph or greater. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10D; Ord. No. 95-02; Ord. No. 02-12; Ord. No. 03-04; Ord. No. 09-01) 
Sec. 48-303. - Signable area. 
    The signable area of a building is designated as the area of the facade of the building up to the roofline, which is free of windows and doors, or major architectural detail on which signs may be displayed. In computing signable areas, any facade, which faces and abuts upon a public street right-of-way, may be utilized. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10E; Ord. No. 95-02; Ord. No. 02-12; Ord. No. 03-04; Ord. No. 09-01) 
Sec. 48-304. - Search lights. 
    The village board may, by special use permit, allow the temporary use of a search light for advertising purposes in any nonresidential district provided that the search light will not be located in any public right-of-way, will not be located closer than ten feet to an adjacent property, and will not cause a hazard to traffic or adjoining properties. Special use permits for search lights shall not be granted for a period of more than five days in any six-month period. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10F; Ord. No. 95-02; Ord. No. 02-12; Ord. No. 03-04; Ord. No. 09-01) 
Sec. 48-305. - Facing. 
    No sign except those permitted in section 48-301 shall be permitted to face a residential district within 100 feet of such district boundary. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10G; Ord. No. 95-02; Ord. No. 02-12; Ord. No. 03-04; Ord. No. 09-01) 
Sec. 48-306. - Lighting and color. 
    Signs shall not resemble, imitate, or approximate the shape, size, form, or color of railroad or traffic signs, signals, or devices. Signs shall not obstruct or interfere with the effectiveness of railroad or traffic signs, signals, or devices. Signs shall not be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. Signs shall not be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility upon public ways. Signs may be illuminated but non-flashing. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10H; Ord. No. 95-02; Ord. No. 02-12; Ord. No. 03-04; Ord. No. 09-01) 
Sec. 48-307. - Construction and maintenance standards. 
(a)  Wind pressure and dead load requirements. All signs and other advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square foot of area; and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the village building code or other ordinance. 
(b)  Protection of the public . The temporary occupancy of a sidewalk or street or other public property during construction, removal, repair, alteration, or maintenance of a sign is permitted provided the space occupied is roped off, fenced off, or otherwise isolated. 
(c)  Maintenance . The owner of any sign shall keep it in good maintenance and repair, which includes restoring, repainting, or replacement of a worn or damaged legally existing sign and ensuring it is erected in a clean, sanitary, and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish, weeds, and grass. 
(d)  Supporting members, braces and other attachments. 
(1)  Supporting members or braces of all signs shall be constructed of galvanized iron, properly treated steel, copper, brass, or other non-corrosive incombustible material. 
(2)  All projecting signs, if placed at a right or other angle to the wall or roof of any building, shall be attached by such non-corrosive metal bolts, anchors, cable, or other metal attachments as shall ensure permanent and safe construction and shall be maintained free from rust or other defects. 
(3)  Every means or device used for attaching any sign shall extend through the walls or roof of the building should the zoning administrator determine the safe and permanent support of such sign so required and shall be securely anchored by wall plates and nuts to the inside of the walls or to bearings on the underside of two or more roof or ceiling joists in the walls or to bearings on the underside of two or more roof or ceiling joists in accordance with instructions given by the building inspector. 
(4)  Small flat signs containing less than ten feet of area may be attached to a building by the use of lag bolts or other means to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator. 
(5)  No signs, or any part thereof, or sign anchors, braces, or guide rods shall be attached, fastened, or anchored to any fire escape, fire ladder, or stand pipe and no such sign or any part of any sign or any anchor, brace, or guide rod shall be erected, put up, or maintained so as to hinder or prevent ingress or egress through such door, doorway, or window so as to hinder or prevent the raising or placing of ladders against such building by the fire department of the village, as necessity therefore may require. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10I; Ord. No. 95-02; Ord. No. 02-12; Ord. No. 03-04; Ord. No. 09-01) 
Sec. 48-308. - Existing signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs. Signs (except for temporary signs) lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter may be continued although the size or location does not conform to this chapter. However, all nonconforming signs shall be deemed to have exhausted their economic life after seven years from the time they become a nonconforming use. Nonconforming signs, after this seven-year period, shall either be made to conform to the terms of this chapter, or shall be removed by the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the property. Nonconforming signs, during the seven year grace period, shall be kept in good repair, but the cost of maintenance shall not be considered grounds for their continued use beyond the seven year grace period. The zoning officer or building inspector shall, after the seven year grace period, notify the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the property, of the expiration of the grace period. After 30 days, if the sign has not been made to conform to this chapter or removed, the zoning officer shall initiate the appropriate punitive action. 
(b)  Vacated and abandoned signs. Any sign or banner that is not removed within 30 days of the discontinuance of business operations or activities at the premises shall be considered a vacated/abandoned sign. The zoning officer or building inspector shall, after 30 days, notify the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the property to remove the vacated/abandoned sign within ten days of receiving a "notice of intent to remove." Should the vacated/abandoned sign not be removed by the owner, or his agent, within ten days, the sign will be removed by the village and all costs for removal, storage and disposal will be assessed to the property owner. Vacated/abandoned signs removed by the village may be disposed of at the discretion of the zoning officer or building inspector after 45 days of removal. Disposal may include destruction, sale, and sale at auction or any other means deemed necessary. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10J; Ord. No. 95-02; Ord. No. 02-12; Ord. No. 03-04; Ord. No. 09-01) 
Sec. 48-309. - Permit required; procedure. 
(a)  No sign shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered without a building permit, except those signs excepted in section 48-300; and all signs shall fully conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Application for a sign permit shall be made on forms provided by the zoning officer or building inspector and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon the sign is to be attached or erected. 
(3)  Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the sign. 
(4)  Written consent of the owner or lessee of the building, structure, or land to which or upon which the sign is to be affixed. 
(5)  A scale drawing of such sign indicating the dimension, the materials to be used, the type of illumination, if any, and the method of construction and attachment. 
(6)  A scale drawing indicating the location and position of such sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures. 
(7)  Copies of any other permit required and issued for the sign, including the written approval by the electrical inspector, in the case of illuminated signs, who shall examine the plans and specifications, re-inspecting all wiring and connections to determine if the same complies with the electrical code. 
(8)  Additional information as may be required by the building inspector, zoning officer, or village plan commission. 
(c)  Sign permit applications shall be filed with the building inspector, who shall review the application for its completeness and accuracy and approve or deny, in writing, the application within 30 days of receipt from the zoning administrator unless the time is extended by written agreement with the applicant. A sign permit shall become null and void if work authorized under the permit has not been completed within six months of the date of issuance. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10K; Ord. No. 95-02; Ord. No. 02-12; Ord. No. 03-04; Ord. No. 09-01) 
Secs. 48-310-48-336. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WELL HEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-337. - Purpose. 
    The residents of the village depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe potable water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose of this article is to establish an overlay district which would contain land use regulations and restrictions to protect the village's municipal water supply and well fields from land uses which pose a threat to the quality and quantity of the groundwater being extracted, and to promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the village residents. 
(Prior Code, § 16.25I; Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 48-338. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural uses includes pesticide or fertilizer storage and use, septage or sludge spreading, animal waste land-spreading, animal waste facilities and animal confinement facilities related to the production of crops and use of livestock for commercial purposes. 
    Aquifer means a saturated, permeable geologic formation that contains and will yield significant quantities of water. 
    Cone of depression means the area under which the water level in an aquifer is lowered by the pumping of a well. 
    Facility means something created, built, installed, or established to serve a particular purpose. 
    Five-year time of travel (TOT) means the area up-gradient of a pumping well from the outer boundary of which it is determined or estimated that groundwater and potential contaminants will take five years to reach the pumping well. 
    Geothermal well means a well that supplies water solely to heat or cool a structure. 
    Groundwater divide means ridge in the water table or potentiometric surface of an aquifer from which groundwater moves away in both directions. The line of highest hydraulic head in the water table or potentiometric surface. 
    Nonconforming use means an existing legal use of land, structure, building or accessory use, which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
    Non-potable water well means a well used to supply water for irrigation, geothermal systems, hydrogeologic monitoring, dewatering, fire suppression, waterscapes, or any other purpose except for drinking or culinary purposes. 
    Recharge area means area in which water reaches the zone of saturation by surface infiltration and encompasses all areas or features that supply groundwater recharge to a well. This area extends beyond the corporate limits of the village. 
    Well field means a piece of land used primarily for the purpose of locating wells to supply a municipal water system. 
    Well head means the specific location of the center of a municipal well (a hole or shaft dug or drilled to obtain water). 
    Well head protection overlay district means that area that lies within the boundary established by a 1,200-foot radius drawn from the center of each individual municipal well head. As additional information is available the overlay district may be more precisely defined by the boundary of the recharge area of each individual municipal well. 
(Prior Code, § 16.25III; Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 48-339. - Applicability; compliance required. 
    The regulations specified in this article shall apply to all lands that lie within the five-year time of travel (TOT) of each village municipal well or a minimum of 1,200 feet within the corporate limits of the village and its extraterritorial area. No new use or change in use of any structure, land, or water shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered and no development shall commence without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 16.25II(1), II(2); Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 48-340. - New wells not permitted in water utility service area. 
    No new potable water wells will be permitted in the village water utility water service area if a municipal water main exists immediately adjacent or readily accessible to the property requesting the well. 
(Prior Code, § 16.25II(3); Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 48-341. - Non-potable wells. 
(a)  Location. All non-potable water wells shall be installed on the highest point of the property and hydraulically up-gradient from any known or potential pollution source. 
(b)  Connection to potable water system prohibited . No portion of the non-potable well system shall be connected to the potable water system. 
(c)  Geothermal well permits. A non-potable well that is used to supply water solely to heat and/or cool a structure (geothermal well) shall obtain a water well permit prior to starting construction. The geothermal well shall be a closed loop system type. The location of the proposed well shall be submitted with the permit application as well as accurately marking the location of the proposed well on the property. All well permit requests shall be submitted to the public works director. The public works director will review the application and may conduct an on-site inspection of the location of the proposed well. 
(Prior Code, § 16.25II(4)-II(6); Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 48-342. - Well head separation distances. 
    Wells shall be adequately separated from potential sources of contamination. Unless a hydrogeologic investigation indicates lesser separation distances would provide adequate protection of a well from contamination, the following minimum horizontal separation distances between a well and the following land uses and facilities shall be provided: 
(1)  Fifty feet between a well and a storm sewer main. 
(2)  Two hundred feet between a well and any sanitary sewer main, lift station, or single-family residential fuel oil tank. A lesser separation distance may be allowed for sanitary sewer mains where the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main materials and joints and pressure tested in a place to meet current AWWA 600 specifications. In no case may the separation distance between a well and a sanitary sewer main be less than 50 feet. 
(3)  Four hundred feet between a well and septic tank receiving less than 8,000 gallons per day, a cemetery or a stormwater drainage pond. 
(4)  Six hundred feet between a well and any gasoline or fuel oil storage tank installation that has received written approval under Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 310.10 from the department of industry, labor and human relations or its designated agent. 
(5)  One thousand feet between a well and land application of municipal, commercial or industrial wastewater lagoons or storage structures; manure stacks or storage structures; and septic tanks or soil absorption units receiving 8,000 gallons or more per day. 
(6)  One thousand two hundred feet between a well and any solid waste storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor, processing, wood burning, one time disposal or small demolition facility; sanitary landfill; coal storage area; salt or deicing material storage area; gasoline or fuel oil storage tanks that have not received written approval; bulk storage facilities; and pesticide or fertilizer handling or storage facilities. 
(Prior Code, § 16.25IV; Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 48-343. - Specific uses. 
(a)  Prohibited. The following underlying uses are prohibited within the well head overlay district: 
(1)  Animal waste storage facilities. 
(2)  Asphalt products manufacturing. 
(3)  Bulk fertilizer and pesticide storage facilities. 
(4)  Bus or truck terminals. 
(5)  Dry cleaning facilities. 
(6)  Electroplating. 
(7)  Exterminating facilities. 
(8)  Garage and vehicular towing. 
(9)  Gas stations. 
(10)  Hazardous and toxic materials storage and use. 
(11)  Hazardous and toxic waste facilities. 
(12)  Junkyards or auto salvage yards. 
(13)  Landfills or waste disposal facilities. 
(14)  Non-municipal spray wastewater facilities. 
(15)  Non-municipal wastewater treatment facilities. 
(16)  Paint and coating manufacturing. 
(17)  Printing shops. 
(18)  Public and municipal maintenance garages. 
(19)  Radioactive waste facilities. 
(20)  Salt storage. 
(21)  Septage or sludge spreading. 
(22)  Tire and battery service. 
(23)  Underground storage tanks. 
(24)  Vehicle repair and establishments, including body repair. 
(b)  Permitted. The following underlying land uses are permitted within the well head protection overlay district as long as they are in compliance with this article: 
(1)  Parks, provided there are no on-site waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities associated with such use. 
(2)  Playgrounds. 
(3)  Wildlife areas. 
(4)  Non-motorized trails, such as biking, skiing, nature and fitness trails. 
(5)  Residential uses. 
(6)  Agricultural uses. 
(7)  Commercial and industrial uses, except those listed as prohibited. 
(c)  Request for approval of other permitted uses. Individuals or facilities may request the village to permit other land uses in the well head protection overlay district, that are not expressly prohibited herein. All requests shall be made in writing to the village and shall include a report containing the following information, at a minimum: 
(1)  A listing of all hazardous, toxic, and other regulated material to assist in the determination of the threat posed by any potential contaminants entailed in the proposed land use by generation or disposal. 
(2)  A map designating the location of existing wells and other public water supply systems and facilities in relation to the proposed land use, including significant geologic and natural features. 
(3)  Whether public sanitary sewers are available or proposed at the location. 
(4)  Septic tank location, size, and capacity, or sewage lift stations, force mains, and grease traps. 
(5)  Expected types and amounts of discharge to sewers, to the ground and to surface waters. 
(6)  A proposed emergency plan to detect and control hazardous material leaks and spills, including, but are not limited to, inspections, notification of official emergency containment and clean-up procedures. 
Additional information may be requested by the public works director to include, but not be limited to, mapping of sensitive geologic or natural resources, a separate plan for stormwater runoff control and management. 
(d)  Cost recovery associated with contamination of water supply from permitted land use. Fees shall be levied by the village against the property to cover the actual costs associated with the emergency response and mediation measures required by the village in the event of contamination from the land use is permitted. 
(Prior Code, § 16.25V; Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 48-344. - Nonconforming uses. 
    Insofar as standards in this article are not inconsistent with provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), state statutes and the village zoning code, they shall apply to all nonconforming uses. The existing legal use of the structure or building or its accessory use, which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use shall be permitted unless they are made in conformity with the provisions of this article. For the purposes of this subsection, the words "modification" and "addition" shall include, but not be limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing structure or accessory use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications or additions; such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components. 
(2)  If a nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the land, structure or building shall conform to the appropriate provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 16.25VI; Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 48-345. - Requirements for existing facilities. 
(a)  Facilities shall provide copies of all federal, state and local facility operation approvals or certificate and on-going environmental monitoring results to the village. 
(b)  Facilities shall provide additional environmental or safety structures/monitoring as deemed necessary by the public works director, which may include, but not limited to, stormwater runoff management and monitoring. 
(c)  Facilities shall replace equipment or expand in a manner that improves the existing environmental and safety technologies already in existence. 
(d)  Facilities shall have the responsibility to devise and file with the public works director a plan for the immediate notification of the village in the event of an emergency. 
(e)  In the event an individual or facility causes the release of any contaminants which endangers the district, the village shall be notified immediately, the activity causing the release shall immediately cease and a cleanup satisfactory to the public works director shall occur. 
(f)  The facility shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup, including village costs, and including consultant fees at invoice amount, and administrative costs for oversight, review and documentation. 
(Prior Code, § 16.25VII; Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 48-346. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    It is unlawful to construct or use any structure, land or water in violation of any of the provisions of this article. In case of violation, the village board may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this article. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, plus the cost of the prosecution for each violation. If in default of payment, such penalties shall be added to the real estate property tax bill as a lien against the property. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 16.25VIII; Ord. No. 10-03) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - PRIOR CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the prior code of the village, as supplemented through August 12, 2013, that are included herein. Sections of the prior code, as supplemented, not listed have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances subsequently adopted, see the table immediately following this table. 
Prior Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1.01 2-1 1.02B 2-23 - 2-24 1.03 2-58 1.03A 2-77 1.03B 2-78 1.03D 2-80 1.03E 2-81 1.03F 2-82 1.03G.1 2-83 1.03G.2 2-83 1.03G.2.a 40-20 1.03G.2.b 40-20 1.03H 2-84 1.03J 2-85 1.03K 2-86 1.03L 2-87 1.04 2-141 1.04A 2-181 1.04C 2-183 1.04D 2-182 1.04E 2-186 1.04F 2-187 1.04G 2-188 1.04H 2-189 1.04I 2-180 1.04J 2-185 1.04K 2-121 1.05B 2-24 1.05C 2-143 1.05D.1 2-142 1.05D.2 2-145 1.05D.3 2-142 1.05D.4 2-142 1.05E 2-146 1.05F 2-145 1.05G 2-144 1.05H 2-147 1.05J 2-148 1.05K 2-25 1.05L 2-26 1.05M 2-27 1.05N 10-1 1.05O 2-216 1.06 2-466 1.07A 2-338 1.07B 2-339 1.07C 2-340 1.07D 2-341 1.07E 2-342 1.07F 2-343 1.07G 2-344 1.08A 2-362 1.08B 2-364 1.08C 2-365 1.08D 2-366 1.08E 2-367 1.08F 2-368 1.08G 2-363 1.08H 2-369 2.01 40-19 2.02 2-217 2.03A 2-218 2.03B 2-59 2.04 2-215 2.05 2-247 2.07 2-248 2.08 2-219 2.10 24-1 2.11A 2-276 2.11B 2-277 2.11C 2-278 2.11D 2-275 - 2-279 2.12 40-46 2.12A 40-47 2.12B 40-48 2.12C 40-49 2.12D 40-49 2.12E 40-51 2.12F 40-50 2.12G 40-52 2.12H 40-53 2.12I 40-54 2.12J 40-44 2.12K 40-45 3.01A 14-1 3.01B 14-2 3.02 14-23 3.03 14-24 3.04 14-25 3.05 14-26 - 14-27 3.06 14-23 3.07 14-27 3.11A 24-21 3.11B 24-22 - 24-25 3.11C 24-23 3.21 18-1 3.21A 18-23 3.22B.1 18-24 3.22B.2 18-25 - 18-27 3.22B.3 18-26 3.22B.3.c 18-28 3.22B.3.d 18-28 3.23C 18-55 3.22C.1 18-29 3.22C.2 18-29 3.22C.3 18-29 - 18-31 3.22C.4 18-30 3.22C.5 18-28 3.22C.6 18-32 3.24A.1 18-84 3.24A.2 18-85 3.24A.3 18-85 3.24A.4 18-85 3.24B 18-86 3.24C 18-87 3.24D 18-88 3.24G 18-90 3.24H 18-33 3.24J 18-114 3.25 18-89 3.26 18-115 3.27 18-113 3.28 18-91 3.29B.1 18-135 3.29B.4 18-135 3.29B.7 18-133 3.29B.8 18-135 3.29C 18-132 3.29D 18-94 3.31 18-95 3.32A.1 18-191 3.32A.2 18-191 3.32A.3 18-191 3.32A.4 18-192 3.32A.5.a 18-190 3.32A.5.b 18-190 3.32A.5.e 18-193 3.32A.5.f 18-193 3.32B 18-195 3.32C.1 18-214 3.32C.3 18-216 3.32C.4 18-217 3.32C.2 18-215 3.32E 18-215 3.32H 18-2 3.33 18-92 3.34 18-93 3.35 18-2 3.41A 14-59 3.41B 14-58 3.41C 14-60 3.41D.1 14-63 3.41D.2 14-63 3.41D.3 14-63 3.41D.4 14-63 3.41D.5 14-62 3.41D.6 14-62 3.41D.7 14-63 3.41D.8 14-63 3.41D.9 14-61 4.01A 42-1 4.01B 42-2 4.02(intro.) 42-25 4.02A 42-26 4.02B 42-26 4.03 42-60 4.04A 42-86 4.04B 42-86 4.04C 42-86 4.04D 42-86 4.04E 42-81 4.04F 42-81 4.04G 42-82 4.04H 42-82 4.04J 42-87 4.04M 42-84 4.05A 42-118 4.05B 42-119 4.06 42-120 4.07A 42-164 4.07B 42-139 4.07C 42-164 4.07D 42-164 4.07E 42-165 4.07F 42-166 4.07G 42-167 4.07H 42-167 4.07I 42-168 4.07J 42-169 4.07K 42-140 4.08A 42-28 4.08B 42-61 4.08C 30-4 4.08D 32-25 4.09 42-27 4.10 42-3 4.11 42-3 5.01 36-26 5.02 36-1 5.03 34-2 5.04 36-2 5.05 42-85 5.06 36-3 5.07A 2-2 5.07B 2-2 5.07C 2-2 5.07D 2-2 5.07E 2-2 5.07F 8-86 - 8-88 5.07G 36-25 5.07H 8-95 5.07I 2-2 5.07J 2-2 5.07K 2-2 - 36-27 6.01A 4-1 6.01B 4-21 6.01C 4-22 6.01D 4-23 6.01E 4-24 6.01F 4-27 6.01G 4-28 6.01H 4-25 - 4-26 - 4-31 - 4-86 - 4-87 6.03A 10-54 6.03B 10-56 6.03C.1 10-25 6.03C.2 10-25 6.03C.3 10-25 6.03C.4 10-57 6.03C.5 10-58 6.03C.6 10-60 6.03D 10-62 6.03E.1 10-85 6.03E.2 10-61 6.03E.3 10-86 6.03E.4 10-87 6.03E.5 10-88 6.03E.6 10-89 6.03F 10-63 6.05 26-2 6.06 10-3 7.01A 30-13 7.01B 30-12 7.01C 18-96 - 30-50 7.01D 30-3 7.01E 30-11 7.01G 30-47 7.02B 30-4 7.02D 30-4 7.02E 30-5 7.02F 30-8 7.03A 30-10 7.03C 30-6 7.03D 30-7 7.04 30-48 7.05 30-45 7.06 30-49 7.08 32-19 7.09A 32-20 7.09B 32-24 7.09C 32-24 7.09D 32-24 7.09E 32-24 7.09F 32-24 7.09G 32-24 7.09H 32-24 7.09I 32-24 7.09K 32-23 7.09L 32-21 - 32-22 7.10 30-2 7.13 30-1 7.14 30-9 7.15 30-46 7.16A 28-30 7.16B 28-29 7.16C 28-31 7.16D 28-32 7.16E 28-34 7.16F 28-33 7.16G 28-35 8.01 28-3 8.02.1 28-1 8.02.2 28-4 8.02.3 28-5 8.04A 28-60 8.04B 28-61 8.04C 28-62 8.04D 28-63 8.04E 28-64 8.05 28-65 8.06 28-2 8.06A 6-1 - 6-25 8.06B.1 6-3 8.06B.2 6-53 8.06B.3 6-55 8.06B.4 6-54 8.06C.1 6-56 8.06C.2 6-53 8.06C.3 6-32 8.06C.4 6-58 8.06C.5 6-25 8.06C.6 6-57 8.06D.1 6-1 8.06D.3 6-90 8.06D.4 6-91 8.06D.5 6-92 8.06D.6 6-26 8.06D.2(a) 6-94 8.06D.2(b) 6-96 8.06D.2(c) 6-95 8.06D.2(d) 6-93 8.06D.2(e) 6-97 8.06D.2(f) 6-98 8.06E.1 6-28 8.06E.2 6-29 8.06E.3 6-30 8.06E.4 6-28 8.06E.5 6-31 8.06E.6 6-2 8.07A 20-23 9.01 34-1 - 34-3, - 34-50 - 34-51 9.04 20-1 9.05 6-27 9.06 46-1 9.07A 34-26 9.08A 34-25 9.08B 34-27 - 34-28 9.08C 34-25 9.08D 34-29 9.08E 34-27 9.09 6-57 9.10A 34-47 - 34-80 9.10C 34-48 9.10D 34-48 9.10E 34-49 9.10F 34-52 9.10G 34-53 9.10I.1 34-81 9.10I.2 34-82 9.11 8-361 9.12 20-2 10.01A 8-55 10.01B 8-21 10.02A.1 8-86 10.02A.2 8-87 10.02A.3 8-88 10.02A.4 8-89 10.02A.5 8-90 10.02A.6 8-91 10.02A.7 8-122 10.02A.8 8-123 10.02A.9 8-92 10.02A.10 8-24 10.02A.11 8-54 10.02A.12 8-124 10.02A.13 8-125 10.02C 8-126 10.03B 8-93 10.03C 8-94 10.03D 8-22 10.03E 8-23 10.04A 8-119 10.04B 8-56 10.05 8-120 10.06 8-121 10.07 8-130 10.08 8-131 10.09 8-127 10.10 8-128 10.11 8-25 10.13 8-129 10.14A 8-304 10.14B 8-329 10.14C 8-305 10.14D 8-330 10.14E 8-331 10.14F 8-332 10.14G 8-357 10.14H 8-357 10.14I 8-358 10.14J 8-359 10.14K 8-334 10.14L 8-360 10.14M 8-333 11.01 8-161 11.03 8-162 11.04 8-163 11.05 8-164 11.06 8-165 11.07 8-166 11.08 8-167 11.09 8-168 12.02 8-190 12.03 8-191 12.04 8-192 12.06 8-193 12.07 8-264 12.08 8-265 12.09 8-194 12.10 8-266 12.11 8-267 12.12 8-196 12.13 8-197 12.14 8-198 12.15 8-199 12.16 8-200 12.17 8-201 12.18 8-195 12.23 8-229 12.25 8-230 12.26 8-228 12.27 8-233 12.28 8-234 12.29 8-231 12.30 8-232 12.31 8-235 12.32(1) 8-268 12.32(2) 8-269 12.32(3) 8-270 12.32(5) 8-271 12.32(6) 8-272 12.32(7) 8-273 12.32(8) 8-274 12.32(9) 8-275 12.33 8-202 12.35 8-276 12.36 8-277 12.38 8-1 13.01 46-21 13.02 46-22 13.03 46-23 13.04.1 46-100 13.04.2 46-101 13.04.3 46-102 13.04.4 46-103 13.05 46-104 13.06 46-77 13.07 46-78 13.08.1 46-52 13.08.2 46-53 13.10.1 46-54 13.10.2 46-55 - 46-56 13.10.3 46-57 13.10.4 46-58 13.10.5 46-59 13.11 46-24 13.12 46-23 13.13 46-23 14.01B 48-2 14.01C 48-2 14.01D 48-3 14.01E 48-4 14.02 48-1 14.03A 48-5 14.03B 48-31 14.03C 48-32 14.03D 48-6 14.03E 48-33 14.04A 48-102 14.04B 48-103 14.04C 48-104 14.04D 48-105 14.04E 48-106 14.04F 48-107 - 48-108 - 48-109 14.04G 48-110 14.04H.1 48-111 14.04H.2 48-111 14.04H.3 48-111 14.04H.4 48-111 14.04H.5 48-111 14.04H.6.a 48-208 14.04H.6.b 48-209 14.04H.6.c 48-210 14.04H.6.d 48-211 14.04H.6.e 48-212 14.04H.6.f 48-213 14.04H.6.g 48-214 14.04H.6.h 48-215 14.04H.6.i 48-216 14.04I.1 48-173 14.04I.2 48-174 14.04I.3 48-177 14.04I.4 48-175 14.04I.5 48-176 14.05 48-34 14.06A 48-99 14.06B 48-100 14.06C 48-101 14.06D.1 48-136 14.06D.2 48-137 14.06D.3 48-138 14.06D.4 48-139 14.06D.5 48-140 14.06D.6 48-141 14.06D.7 48-142 14.06D.8 48-143 14.06D.9 48-144 14.06D.10 48-145 14.06D.11 48-146 14.06D.12 48-147 14.06D.13 48-148 14.06D.14 48-149 14.06D.15 48-150 14.06D.16 48-151 14.06D.17 48-152 14.06D.18 48-152 14.06D.19 48-152 14.06D.20 48-152 14.07A 48-241 14.07B 48-242 14.07C 48-243 14.07D 48-244 14.07E 48-267 14.10A 48-298 - 48-299 14.10B 48-300 14.10C 48-301 14.10D 48-302 14.10E 48-303 14.10F 48-304 14.10G 48-305 14.10H 48-306 14.10I 48-307 14.10J 48-308 14.10K 48-309 14.11A 10-107 14.11B 10-108 - 10-109 14.11C.1 10-110 14.11C.2 10-110 14.11C.3 10-110 14.11C.4 10-110 14.11C.5 10-111 14.11C.8 10-112 14.11E 10-113 14.11F 10-114 14.11G 10-115 14.11H 10-116 14.11I 10-121 14.11I.1 10-119 14.11I.7 10-120 14.11J 10-121 14.11K 10-117 14.11L 10-118 14.12A 48-61 14.12B 48-62 14.12C 48-63 14.12D 48-64 14.12E 48-65 14.12F 48-66 - 48-67 14.12G 48-68 14.12H 48-69 14.12I 48-70 14.13B 48-35 - 48-36 15.01A 38-1 15.01B 38-2 15.01C 38-3 15.01D 38-5 15.01E 38-6 15.01F 38-7 15.02A 38-8 15.02B 38-9 15.02C 38-4 15.02D 38-10 15.02E 38-11 15.02F 38-9 15.02G 38-12 15.02H 38-13 15.03A 38-32 15.03B 38-33 15.03C 38-61 15.03D 38-61 15.03E 38-62 15.03F 38-63 15.03G 38-85 15.03H 38-86 15.03I 38-87 15.03J 38-88 15.03K 38-120 15.03L 38-120 15.03M 38-121 15.03N 38-34 15.03O 38-35 15.03P 38-36 15.04A 38-141 15.04B 38-142 15.04C 38-143 15.04D 38-144 15.04E 38-145 15.04F 38-146 15.04G 38-147 15.04H 38-148 15.04I 38-149 15.05A 38-167 15.05B 38-168 15.05C 38-169 15.05D 38-170 15.05E 38-171 15.05F 38-172 15.05G 38-173 15.05H 38-174 15.05I 38-175 15.05J 38-176 15.05K 38-177 15.05L 38-178 15.05M 38-179 15.05N 38-180 15.05O 38-181 15.05P 38-182 15.05Q 38-183 15.05R 38-184 15.06A 38-207 15.06B 38-208 15.06C 38-209 15.06D 38-210 15.06E.1 38-229 15.06E.2 38-230 15.06E.3 38-231 15.06E.4(a) 38-232 15.06E.4(b) 38-233 15.06E.4(c) 38-234 15.06E.4(d) 38-235 15.06E.4(e) 38-236 15.06E.4(f) 38-266 15.06E.4(f)1 38-267 15.06E.4(f)2 38-268 15.06E.4(f)3 38-269 15.06E.4(f)4 38-270 15.06E.4(g) 38-289 15.06E.4(h) 38-290 15.07 38-14 16.01 44-1 16.02 44-33 16.02D 44-35 16.03 44-55 16.04 44-108 16.04(1) 44-109 16.04(2) 44-109 16.04A 44-117 16.04B 44-111 16.04C 44-112 16.04D 44-112 16.04E 44-113 16.05 44-16 16.06 44-17 16.07F 44-118 16.08 44-34 16.09A 44-80 - 44-81 16.09B 44-81 16.10 44-82 16.11 44-110 16.12 44-114 16.13 44-116 16.14 44-81 16.15 44-115 16.16 44-56 16.17 44-57 16.18 44-51 16.19 44-51 16.20 44-52 16.21 44-53 16.22 44-54 16.23 44-36 16.24 44-32 16.25I 48-337 16.25II(1) 48-339 16.25II(2) 48-339 16.25II(3) 48-340 16.25II(4) 48-341 16.25II(5) 48-341 16.25II(6) 48-341 16.25III 48-338 16.25IV 48-342 16.25V 48-343 16.25VI 48-344 16.25VII 48-345 16.25VIII 48-346 17.01 44-150 17.02 44-151 17.03 44-258 17.04 44-259 17.05 44-260 17.06 44-261 17.07 44-175 17.08 44-262 17.09A 44-288 17.09B 44-289 17.09C 44-290 17.09D 44-291 17.10 44-232 17.11 44-204 17.12A 44-316 17.12B 44-316 17.12C 44-316 17.12D 44-316 17.12E 44-316 17.12F 44-317 17.12G 44-318 17.13 44-152 17.14 44-153 18.02 12-19 18.02A 12-20 18.02B 12-21 18.02C 12-22 18.02D 12-23 18.02E 12-24 18.02F 12-25 18.03 12-54 18.04 12-55 18.05 12-56 18.06 12-57 18.07 12-58 18.08 12-59 18.09 12-60 18.10 12-61 18.11 12-62 18.13 12-63 20.01 2-398 20.02 2-399 20.03 2-400 20.04 2-397 20.05A 2-401 20.05B 2-402 20.05C 2-403 20.06A 2-435 20.06B 2-436 20.06C 2-437 20.07 2-438 20.08 2-439 21.01 1-2 21.02A 1-6 21.02B 1-9 21.03 1-4 21.04 1-15 21.05 1-12 21.06 1-1 21.07 1-17 22.01 2-307 22.02 2-308 22.03 2-309 22.04 2-310 22.05 2-311 22.06 2-312 22.07 2-313 22.08 2-314 22.09 2-315 22.10 2-316 22.11 2-317 MH-17.01 26-1 MH-17.02(1) 26-56 MH-17.02(2) 26-57 MH-17.02(3) 26-58 MH-17.02(4) 26-59 MH-17.02(5) 26-61 MH-17.02(6) 26-57 MH-17.02(7) 26-57 MH-17.03(1) 26-81 MH-17.03(2) 26-82 MH-17.03(3) 26-83 MH-17.03(4) 26-85 MH-17.03(5) 26-87 MH-17.03(6) 26-84 MH-17.03(7) 26-23 MH-17.03(8) 26-87 MH-17.03(9) 26-82 MH-17.04 26-184 MH-17.03(10) 26-86 MH-17.05(1) 26-185 MH-17.05(2) 26-187 MH-17.05(3) 26-187 MH-17.05(4) 26-188 MH-17.05(5) 26-186 MH-17.06 26-24 - 26-25 MH-17.07 26-118 MH-17.08 26-119 MH-17.09 26-120 MH-17.10 26-123 MH-17.11 26-122 MH-17.12 26-60 - 26-124 MH-17.13 26-125 MH-17.14 26-126 MH-17.15 26-127 MH-17.16 26-128 MH-17.17 26-129 MH-17.18 26-128 MH-17.19 26-128 MH-17.20 26-130 MH-17.21 26-131 MH-17.22 26-161 MH-17.23 26-121 MH-17.24 26-162 MH-17.25 26-163 MH-17.26 26-26 MH-17.27 26-164 MH-17.28 26-165  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of ordinances included herein. Ordinances not listed have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 00-01 - 42-86 Ord. No. 00-05 - 24-21-24-23 - 24-25 Ord. No. 00-06 - 24-21-24-23 - 24-25 Ord. No. 00-07 - 14-1, 14-2 Ord. No. 00-12 - 42-86 Ord. No. 00-13 - 44-175 Ord. No. 00-15 - 42-86 Ord. No. 00-16 - 42-86 Ord. No. 01-03 - 34-2 Ord. No. 01-04 - 8-168 Ord. No. 01-07 - 32-25 - 42-28 - 42-61 Ord. No. 01-08 - 44-258 Ord. No. 01-11 - 42-86 Ord. No. 01-13 - 42-1, 42-2 Ord. No. 01-14 - 32-25, 42-28 - 42-61 Ord. No. 02-01 - 42-1, 42-2 Ord. No. 02-02 - 42-3 Ord. No. 02-05 - 14-58-14-63 Ord. No. 02-06 - 48-102-48-111 - 48-173-48-177 - 48-208-48-216 Ord. No. 02-07 - 48-99-48-101 - 48-136-48-152 - 48-241-48-244 - 48-267 Ord. No. 02-08 - 42-86 Ord. No. 02-09 - 30-1 Ord. No. 02-11 - 8-120 Ord. No. 02-12 - 48-298-48-309 Ord. No. 02-13 - 42-86 Ord. No. 02-14 - 18-94 - 18-132, 18-133 - 18-135 Ord. No. 3-10 - 2-121, 2-141 - 2-180-2-183 - 2-185-2-189 Ord. No. 03-04 - 48-298-48-309 Ord. No. 03-05 - 30-1 Ord. No. 03-07 - 30-1 Ord. No. 03-09 - 6-27 Ord. No. 03-12 - 8-129 Ord. No. 03-13 - 28-2 Ord. No. 03-14 - 2-58 - 2-77, 2-78 - 2-80-2-87 - 40-20 Ord. No. 03-15 - 2-217 - 2-275-2-279 Ord. No. 03-16 - 2-121 - 2-141 - 2-180-2-183 - 2-185-2-189 Ord. No. 03-18 - 30-1 Ord. No. 04-04 - 44-108, 44-109 - 44-111-44-113 Ord. No. 04-06 - 42-118, 42-119 Ord. No. 04-13 - 2-121, 2-141 - 2-180-2-183 - 2-185-2-189 Ord. No. 04-14 - 42-86 Ord. No. 04-15 - 44-80, 44-81 - 44-117 Ord. No. 04-17 - 44-51 Ord. No. 04-18 - 42-86 Ord. No. 04-21 - 42-86 Ord. No. 05-05 - 42-139, 42-140 - 42-164-42-169 Ord. No. 05-06 - 40-44-40-54 Ord. No. 05-07 - 44-175 Ord. No. 05-09 - 38-4 - 38-8-38-13, - 38-167-38-184 Ord. No. 05-15 - 40-44-40-54 Ord. No. 05-16 - 30-45 Ord. No. 06-01 - 42-86 Ord. No. 06-03 - 18-94, 18-115 - 18-132, 18-133 - 18-135 Ord. No. 06-04 - 32-20-32-24 Ord. No. 06-06 - 48-61-48-70 Ord. No. 06-07 - 34-1 - 34-3 - 34-50, 34-51 Ord. No. 06-08 - 48-99-48-101 - 48-136-48-152 Ord. No. 06-09 - 2-121, 2-141 - 2-180-2-183 - 2-185-2-189 Ord. No. 07-01 - 6-57, 28-2 Ord. No. 07-08 - 38-4 - 38-8-38-13 - 38-167-38-184 Ord. No. 07-09 - 32-20-32-24 Ord. No. 07-10 - 42-118, 42-119 Ord. No. 07-11 - 18-96, 30-3 - 30-11-30-13 - 30-47, 30-50 Ord. No. 07-12 - 38-4 - 38-8-38-13 Ord. No. 08-02 - 4-1 - 4-21-4-28 - 4-31 - 4-86, 4-87 Ord. No. 08-03 - 42-120 Ord. No. 08-05 - 4-1 - 4-21-4-28 - 4-31 - 4-86, 4-87 Ord. No. 08-07 - 2-2 - 36-25, 36-27 Ord. No. 08-08 - 18-23-18-32 - 18-94, 18-132 - 18-133, 18-135 Ord. No. 09-01 - 48-298-48-309 Ord. No. 09-02 - 44-175 Ord. No. 09-03 - 2-24-2-27 - 2-142-2-148 - 2-216 - 10-1 Ord. No. 09-04 - 30-1 Ord. No. 09-06 - 30-46 Ord. No. 09-09 - 34-25-34-29 Ord. No. 09-10 - 8-168 Ord. No. 09-11 - 32-20-32-24 Ord. No. 09-12 - 44-80, 44-81 - 44-117 Ord. No. 10-01 - 24-21-24-23 - 24-25 Ord. No. 10-02 - 4-1 - 4-21-4-28 - 4-31 - 4-86, 4-87 - 30-6, 30-7 - 30-10 Ord. No. 10-03 - 8-168 - 48-337-48-346 Ord. No. 10-05 - 28-2 Ord. No. 10-07 - 2-58 - 2-77, 2-78 - 2-80-2-87 - 40-20 Ord. No. 10-08 - 2-121, 2-141 - 2-180-2-183 - 2-185-2-189 Ord. No. 10-10 - 30-1 Ord. No. 10-11 - 2-309, 2-314 Ord. No. 10-16 - 2-121, 2-141 - 2-180-2-183 - 2-185-2-189 Ord. No. 11-02 - 2-315, 2-316 Ord. No. 11-05 - 42-118, 42-119 Ord. No. 11-06 - 2-466 Ord. No. 12-01 - 4-1 - 4-21-4-28 - 4-31 - 4-86, 4-87 Ord. No. 12-02 - 42-86 Ord. No. 12-03 - 18-96 - 30-3 - 30-11-30-13 - 30-47, 30-50 Ord. No. 12-05 - 30-1 Ord. No. 12-08 - 2-58 - 2-77, 2-78 - 2-80-2-87 - 40-20 Ord. No. 12-09 - 18-23-18-32 Ord. No. 13-03 - 2-466 Ord. No. 13-04 - 2-466 Ord. No. 14-01 I 30-13 Ord. No. 14-02 I 42-86 Ord. No. 15-11 - 30-9 Ord. No. 93-01 - 38-207-38-210 - 38-229-38-236 - 38-266-38-270 - 38-289, 38-290 Ord. No. 93-02 - 38-141-38-149 Ord. No. 93-09 - 44-56 Ord. No. 93-10 - 44-175 Ord. No. 93-14 - 38-167-38-184 Ord. No. 94-04 - 44-153 Ord. No. 94-06 - 48-99-48-101 - 48-136-48-152 Ord. No. 94-07 - 44-32 Ord. No. 94-08 - 10-107-10-121 Ord. No. 94-10 - 48-99-48-101 - 48-136-48-152 Ord. No. 94-13 - 24-21-24-23 - 24-25 Ord. No. 95-02 - 48-298-48-309 Ord. No. 95-05 - 34-47-34-49 - 34-52, 34-53 - 34-80-34-82 Ord. No. 95-12 - 42-86 Ord. No. 95-16 - 6-57 Ord. No. 95-17 - 44-80, 44-81 - 44-108, 44-109 - 44-111-44-113 - 44-117 Ord. No. 95-22 - 24-1 Ord. No. 96-09 - 8-167, 8-168 Ord. No. 96-13 - 4-1 - 4-21-4-28 - 4-31 - 4-86, 4-87 Ord. No. 96-16 - 42-86 Ord. No. 97-01 - 44-80, 44-81 - 44-117 Ord. No. 97-02 - 38-167-38-184 Ord. No. 97-03 - 38-207-38-210 - 38-229-38-236 - 38-266-38-270 - 38-289, 38-290 Ord. No. 97-05 - 1-15 Ord. No. 99-09 - 2-121, 2-141 - 2-180-2-183 - 2-185-2-189 Ord. No. 99-18 - 36-2 Ord. No. 99-21 - 42-86 Ord. No. 99-24 - 28-1 - 28-4, 28-5 Ord. No. 13-05 I 2-466 Ord. No. 13-06 23.1.1 16-19 23.1.2 16-20 23.1.3 16-21 23.1.4 16-22 23.1.5 16-23 23.2.0 16-50 23.2.1 16-51 23.2.2 16-52 23.2.3 16-53 23.2.4 16-54 23.3.1 16-82 23.3.2 16-83 23.3.3 16-84 23.3.4 16-85 23.4.1 16-114 23.4.2 16-115 23.4.3 16-116 23.5.1 16-146 23.5.2 16-147 23.5.3 16-148 23.5.4 16-149 23.6.1 16-167 23.6.2 16-168 23.6.3 16-169 23.7.0 16-192 23.7.1 16-193 23.7.2 16-194 23.7.3 16-195 23.7.4 16-196 23.7.5 16-197 23.7.6 16-198 23.8.0 16-220 23.8.1 16-221 23.8.2 16-222 23.9.0 16-24 23.10.0 16-25 Ord. No. 14-01 II 30-12 Ord. No. 15-01 I 30-1 Ord. No. 15-03 I 30-9 Ord. No. 15-04 I(4.04(m)) 42-87 Ord. No. 16-01 I(7.17) 30-47 Ord. No. 16-02 I(7.01) 30-13 Ord. No. 16-03 I(1.04(k)) 2-184 Ord. No. 17-01 1-10       Added 20-31-20-40 Ord. No. 17-02 1-7 Adopting ordinance, p. xi Ord. No. 17-04 1 42-87(e) Ord. No. 17-05 1 30-1 Ord. No. 17-06 1-4       Added 10-161-10-164 Ord. No. 17-07 1-4       Added 10-191-10-194  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Wisconsin Statutes (Wis. Stats.). 
Wis. Stats. 
Section Section 

this Code 5.05 Ch. 2, Art. VII 6.26-6.57 2-465 7.15 2-462 7.30 2-463 7.31 2-463 7.32 2-463 8.05(4)(b) 2-464 13.48(13) 16-23 15.60 Ch. 2, Art. VII 16.61(3)(e) 2-344 ch. 19 2-143 19.01 2-120 19.21(4)(a) 2-344 19.31-19.39 2-341 19.34 2-341 19.35(1) 2-341 - 40-20 19.36 2-343 19.37(1) 2-342 19.41 Ch. 2, Art. VII 19.59 Ch. 2, Art. VII - 2-363 19.62 et seq. 2-143 19.84 2-143 19.85(1) 2-144 23.235 Ch. 46 (note) - 46-1 23.50 Ch. 12 (note) 26.13 Ch. 18 (note) 27.01 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) - Ch. 46 (note) 27.08 2-186 27.09 Ch. 46 (note) - 46-23 - 46-101 27.13 Ch. 32 (note) 29.001 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 29.038 Ch. 6 (note) - Ch. 28 (note) 29.601 Ch. 6 (note) 29.604 Ch. 6 (note) ch. 30 16-53 - 16-83 - 16-84 - 35-62 30.11 16-25 30.121(1) 48-1 30.2022 16-23 30.50 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 30.742 Ch. 32 (note) 30.77 Ch. 32 (note) 30.79 Ch. 32 (note) ch. 31 16-53 - 16-83 34.01 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 48.02(12) 30-46 59.69 16-19 - 16-23 - 16-192 - 16-222 59.69(10) 16-167 59.692 16-19 - 16-23 - 16-192 59.692(1v) 35-62 59.694 16-19 - 16-23 - 16-195 60.50 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 60.52 Ch. 44 (note) 60.55 Ch. 14 (note) - Ch. 18 (note) 60.555 Ch. 18 (note) 60.557 Ch. 18 (note) 60.565 Ch. 18 (note) 60.57 Ch. 18 (note) 60.66 Ch. 32 (note) ch. 61 2-1 61.187 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) - 2-1 61.195 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 61.20 2-23 61.24 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.25 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.26 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.261 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.27 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.28 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.29 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.32 Ch. 2 61.35 16-19 - 16-23 - 35-19 - 35-55 - 35-97 61.354 35-19 - 35-23 - 35-55 - 35-59 - 35-97 61.354(4)(b) 35-33 - 35-69 - 35-110 61.36 Ch. 44 (note) 61.39 Ch. 44 (note) 61.64 Ch. 18 (note) 61.65 2-187 - Ch. 18 (note) 62.09 Ch. 20 (note) - Ch. 24 (note) 62.11 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 62.11 1-10 62.12 Ch. 2 (note) - Ch. 2, Art. V 62.13 Ch. 2 (note) - 2-187 - Ch. 24 (note) - 24-21 62.16 Ch. 36 (note) 62.22 Ch. 36 (note) 62.225 Ch. 34 (note) 62.23 2-183 - 16-19 - 16-23 - 16-222 - 38-4 - 38-13 - Ch. 48 (note) 62.23(1) 48-1 62.23(6) 2-2 62.23(6)(e) 8-95 62.23(7) 16-192 62.23(7)(e) 2-182 - 16-195 62.23(7)(h) 16-167 - 48-344 62.231 Ch. 16 (note) - Ch. 48 (note) 62.234 Ch. 16 (note) - Ch. 48 (note) 62.25 2-400 65.01 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) - Ch. 2, Art. V 66.0101 Ch. 2 (note) 66.0103 1-1 66.0107 Ch. 30 (note) 66.0109 Ch. 30 (note) 66.0113 1-17 - Ch. 12 (note) 66.0113(1)(a) 8-331 66.0114 42-3 66.0119 Ch. 8 (note) - 8-167 - 8-330 - 8-333 - Ch. 18 (note) 66.0119(1)-(3) 35-31 66.0131 Ch. 2 (note) 66.0139 Ch. 2 (note) - 24-1 66.0301 12-19 66.0405 Ch. 28 (note) - Ch. 34 (note) 66.0407 Ch. 28 (note) - Ch. 46 (note) - 46-1 66.0409 Ch. 30 (note) - 30-13 66.0411 Ch. 30 (note) 66.0413 8-332 - Ch. 28 (note) 66.0413(2)(b) 8-131 66.0415 Ch. 10 (note) 66.0417 Ch. 20 (note) 66.0423 Ch. 10 (note) 66.0425 Ch. 36 (note) 66.0429 Ch. 36 (note) - Ch. 42 (note) 66.0431 Ch. 42 (note) 66.0435 Ch. 26 (note) - 26-2 - 26-86 66.0615 Ch. 40, Art. III - 40-46 66.0617 2-307 - 2-313 66.0703 2-275 - 2-276 66.0801 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 66.0805 44-1 66.0809 Ch. 44 (note) 66.0811 Ch. 44 (note) 66.0819 Ch. 44 (note) 66.0821 44-259 66.0825 Ch. 44 (note) 66.0907 36-1 66.1031 Ch. 36 (note) 66.60(16) 38-289 67.01 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) ch. 68 8-167 68.001 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) - Ch. 2, Art. VIII 68.01 2-398 70.01 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) - Ch. 40, Art. II 70.043 Ch. 26 (note) 70.119 Ch. 40 (note) 70.46(1) 2-181 70.47(6m)(c) 2-181 70.47(7)(af) 40-20 70.52 Ch. 40 (note) 70.65 Ch. 40 (note) - 40-19 70.68 Ch. 40 (note) 74.19 40-19 74.37 40-20 74.45 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 76.01 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 77.51 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 77.52(2)(a)1 40-46 77.98 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 77.99 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 79.005 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 79.10 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 85.095(1)(b) 35-23 - 35-59 86.03 Ch. 46 (note) 87.01 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 87.30 Ch. 16 (note) - 16-19 - 16-23 - 16-24 - Ch. 48 (note) 90.01 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 92.01 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) - Ch. 16 (note) 92.15 Ch. 6 (note) 95.001 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 95.19 Ch. 6 (note) 95.21 Ch. 6 (note) - 6-55 95.21(5)(a) 6-58 95.50 Ch. 6 (note) 100.01 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 101.01 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 101.123 20-23 101.60 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 101.65 Ch. 8 (note) 101.70 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) - Ch. 26 (note) 101.76 Ch. 8 (note) 101.80 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 101.86 Ch. 8 (note) 101.861 Ch. 8 (note) 101.91 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) - Ch. 26 (note) 101.96 Ch. 26 (note) 101.971 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 101.976 Ch. 18 (note) ch. 110 42-1 111.335 10-113 118.163 30-47 ch. 125 Ch. 4 (note) - 4-1 - 4-21 - 4-22 - 4-24 - 4-26 - 4-28 125.01 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 125.05 Ch. 4 (note) 125.07 28-29 125.10 Ch. 4 (note) - 4-1 125.12(2)(b) 2-400 125.14 Ch. 4 (note) - Ch. 28 (note) 125.17 4-56 125.l7(6)(a) 4-55 125.25 et seq. 2-400 - Ch. 4 (note) 125.32(3) 4-86 125.51 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 125.68(4) 4-86 134.01 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 134.65 30-1 134.66 30-1 139.01 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) - Ch. 40 (note) 139.30 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 139.75 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) ch. 145 8-119 145.01 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 160.001 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) - Ch. 44 (note) 164.01 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 164.06 6-53 ch. 167 30-50 167.10 Ch. 18 (note) - 18-96 167.11 Ch. 18 (note) 167.30 Ch. 32 (note) 167.31 Ch. 32 (note) 167.31(c) 30-13 170.01 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 169.01 Ch. 28 (note) 172.01 et seq. 6-25 172.01 Ch. 6 (note) 173.01 Ch. 6 (note) 173.13 6-92 ch. 174 6-3 174.001 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 174.01 6-92 174.042 6-56 174.05 Ch. 6 (note) - 6-53 174.052 6-53 174.07 Ch. 6 (note) - 6-56 175.25 Ch. 28 (note) 175.60 30-13 175.60(2g)(b) 30-1 182.0175 44-51 ch. 194 42-1 - 42-87 196.01 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 196.71 Ch. 44 (note) 197.01 Ch. 44 (note) 198.01 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 202.12 10-56 213.01 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) - Ch. 24 (note) 213.05 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 213.095 Ch. 18 (note) 213.11 Ch. 24 (note) 213.12 Ch. 18 (note) 227.01(1) 35-22 - 35-58 ch. 236 38-9 - 38-12 - 38-35 - 38-36 - 38-85 - 38-120 - 38-141 - 38-169 - 38-231 236.01 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 236.01 Ch. 48 (note) 236.02(12) 16-25 236.11 38-63 236.13 38-13 236.34 38-4 - 38-120 236.45 2-316 - Ch. 38 (note) - 38-1 250.01 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 251.001 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 251.02 Ch. 20 (note) 251.04 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 254.31(10) 34-1 254.57 Ch. 16 (note) 254.92 30-1 256.15 Ch. 18 (note) 280.01 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 281.01(10) 35-23 - 35-59 281.16 35-19 - 35-55 - 35-57 281.16(1) 35-23 - 35-59 281.33 35-23 - 35-59 ch. 283 34-1 283.01(13) 35-23 - 35-59 283.33 35-19 - 35-55 285.01 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 287.01(5m) 34-1 287.07(7)(h) 34-48 287.078(7)(bg) 34-48 287.09 Ch. 34 (note) 287.11 34-47 287.81 30-1 289.01 et seq. Ch. 34 (note) 289.01(17) 34-1 291.001 et seq. Ch. 34 (note) 302.46 12-24 323.01 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 323.02 14-1 323.10 et seq. 14-23 323.14 Ch. 14 (note) - 14-23 323.15 14-23 323.24 Ch. 14 (note) 323.50 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) - 14-25 323.52 Ch. 14 (note) 323.54 Ch. 14 (note) ch. 340-348 42-3 340-350 42-1 340.01 42-61 340.01(22) 2-308 340.01(43m) 42-118 341.35 Ch. 42 (note) 341.63 42-3 342.40 Ch. 42, Art. VI 342.40(3) 42-166, 42-167 345.11 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) - 12-58 345.11 42-3 345.18 Ch. 12 (note) - 12-58 345.20l Ch. 12 (note) - 12-58 345.20 42-3 345.21 Ch. 24 (note) 345.22 Ch. 24 (note) 345.26 Ch. 12 (note) - 12-58 - 42-3 345.27 42-3 345.28 42-3 345.52 42-3 345.55 Ch. 24 (note) 346.01 Ch. 42 (note) 346.37 et seq. 42-25 - 42-26 346.57 et seq. 42-60 346.58 42-60 346.59 42-60 346.91 18-32 346.94(13) Ch. 42, Art. VI 349.03 Ch. 42 (note) 349.06 Ch. 42 (note) - 42-1 - 42-2 349.11 42-60 349.13 Ch. 42 (note) 349.17 Ch. 42 (note) 349.23 Ch. 42 (note) 349.26 42-120 ch. 350 42-3 ch. 442 2-344 450.11(7) 30-1 ch. 460 10-161 10-163 10-164 ch. 463 10-191 10-193 10-194 562.105 Ch. 6 (note) 703.01 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 751.03 12-21 ch. 755 12-19 - 12-20 755.001 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 755.01 12-54 755.02 12-21 755.03 12-21 755.03(1) 12-22 755.04 12-21 755.10 12-57 767.225 30-46 767.41 30-46 775.10 12-57 785.01 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) - 12-24 785.06 Ch. 12 (note) - 12-24 800.001 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 800.02 Ch. 12 (note) 800.06 12-21 800.095(4) 8-1 800.12 Ch. 12 (note) - 12-24 813.12(1)(am) 28-29 814.65(1) 12-58 - 12-59 814.70 24-25 814.705 24-25 814.71 24-25 823.01 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. III 823.01 Ch. 28 (note) 880.01 Ch. 18 (note) 895.035 Ch. 4 (note) - 30-2 905.03 2-343 938.01 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 938.343 1-15 938.344 1-15 938.355(6)(d) 1-15 939.05 30-1 939.22 30-1 939.32(1)(b) 30-1 ch. 940 20-31 940.01-940.32 28-29 940.19(1) 30-1 940.225 28-29 940.32 28-29 941.01 30-1 - 42-1 - 42-3 941.03 42-1 941.10 Ch. 18 (note) - 30-1 941.11 Ch. 18 (note) 941.12 Ch. 18 (note) - 18-31 - 18-32 941.12(3) 30-1 941.13 Ch. 18 (note) - 30-1 941.20(1) 30-1 941.23 30-1 941.231 30-1 941.235 30-1 941.237 Ch. 4 (note) - 30-1 941.24 30-1 941.295(4) 30-13 941.2965 30-1 941.297 30-1 943.01 30-1 943.01(1) 30-2 943.017 30-1 943.07(4) 30-1 943.11 30-1 - 42-1 943.125 30-1 943.13 30-1 943.14 30-1 943.20 28-29 - 30-1 943.21 30-1 943.23 42-1 943.24 30-1 943.34(1) 30-1 943.37 30-1 943.41 30-1 943.46 30-1 943.50 30-1 ch. 944 10-162 10-192 20-31 945.01 et seq. 30-10 945.01 30-1 945.02 30-1 945.03 28-29 - 30-1 946.06 30-1 946.10 Ch. 2, Art. VII 946.11 Ch. 2, Art. VII 946.12 Ch. 2, Art. VII 946.13 Ch. 2, Art. VII - 2-367 946.40 30-1 946.41 30-1 946.42(1) 30-1 946.66 30-1 946.69 30-1 946.70(1) 30-1 946.72 1-14 946.72(2) 30-1 947.01 28-29 - 30-1 947.012 30-1 947.0125 30-1 947.013 28-29 947.013(1m) 30-1 947.02 30-6 947.045 42-1 947.06 30-1 ch. 948 20-31 948.02 28-29 948.025 28-29 948.45(1) 30-1 948.63 30-1 951.01 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) - 6-29 951.02 30-1 951.095 30-1 ch. 961 28-29 - 30-1 961.573(2) 30-1 961.574(2) 30-1 961.575(2) 30-1 967.02 Ch. 24 (note) 968.075(5)(a) 30-1 968.20 24-1 ch. 985 16-25 990.001 1-2 990.001(11) 1-9 990.01 Ch. 24 (note) 990.01(48) 1-2 990.03 1-12  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Wisconsin Statutes (Wis. Stats.). 
Wis. Stats. 
Section Section 

this Code 5.05 Ch. 2, Art. VII 6.26-6.57 2-465 7.15 2-462 7.30 2-463 7.31 2-463 7.32 2-463 8.05(4)(b) 2-464 13.48(13) 16-23 15.60 Ch. 2, Art. VII 16.61(3)(e) 2-344 ch. 19 2-143 19.01 2-120 19.21(4)(a) 2-344 19.31-19.39 2-341 19.34 2-341 19.35(1) 2-341 - 40-20 19.36 2-343 19.37(1) 2-342 19.41 Ch. 2, Art. VII 19.59 Ch. 2, Art. VII - 2-363 19.62 et seq. 2-143 19.84 2-143 19.85(1) 2-144 23.235 Ch. 46 (note) - 46-1 23.50 Ch. 12 (note) 26.13 Ch. 18 (note) 27.01 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) - Ch. 46 (note) 27.08 2-186 27.09 Ch. 46 (note) - 46-23 - 46-101 27.13 Ch. 32 (note) 29.001 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 29.038 Ch. 6 (note) - Ch. 28 (note) 29.601 Ch. 6 (note) 29.604 Ch. 6 (note) ch. 30 16-53 - 16-83 - 16-84 - 35-62 30.11 16-25 30.121(1) 48-1 30.2022 16-23 30.50 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 30.742 Ch. 32 (note) 30.77 Ch. 32 (note) 30.79 Ch. 32 (note) ch. 31 16-53 - 16-83 34.01 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 48.02(12) 30-46 59.69 16-19 - 16-23 - 16-192 - 16-222 59.69(10) 16-167 59.692 16-19 - 16-23 - 16-192 59.692(1v) 35-62 59.694 16-19 - 16-23 - 16-195 60.50 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 60.52 Ch. 44 (note) 60.55 Ch. 14 (note) - Ch. 18 (note) 60.555 Ch. 18 (note) 60.557 Ch. 18 (note) 60.565 Ch. 18 (note) 60.57 Ch. 18 (note) 60.66 Ch. 32 (note) ch. 61 2-1 61.187 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) - 2-1 61.195 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 61.20 2-23 61.24 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.25 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.26 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.261 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.27 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.28 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.29 Ch. 2, Art. III 61.32 Ch. 2 61.35 16-19 - 16-23 - 35-19 - 35-55 - 35-97 61.354 35-19 - 35-23 - 35-55 - 35-59 - 35-97 61.354(4)(b) 35-33 - 35-69 - 35-110 61.36 Ch. 44 (note) 61.39 Ch. 44 (note) 61.64 Ch. 18 (note) 61.65 2-187 - Ch. 18 (note) 62.09 Ch. 20 (note) - Ch. 24 (note) 62.11 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 62.11 1-10 62.12 Ch. 2 (note) - Ch. 2, Art. V 62.13 Ch. 2 (note) - 2-187 - Ch. 24 (note) - 24-21 62.16 Ch. 36 (note) 62.22 Ch. 36 (note) 62.225 Ch. 34 (note) 62.23 2-183 - 16-19 - 16-23 - 16-222 - 38-4 - 38-13 - Ch. 48 (note) 62.23(1) 48-1 62.23(6) 2-2 62.23(6)(e) 8-95 62.23(7) 16-192 62.23(7)(e) 2-182 - 16-195 62.23(7)(h) 16-167 - 48-344 62.231 Ch. 16 (note) - Ch. 48 (note) 62.234 Ch. 16 (note) - Ch. 48 (note) 62.25 2-400 65.01 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) - Ch. 2, Art. V 66.0101 Ch. 2 (note) 66.0103 1-1 66.0107 Ch. 30 (note) 66.0109 Ch. 30 (note) 66.0113 1-17 - Ch. 12 (note) 66.0113(1)(a) 8-331 66.0114 42-3 66.0119 Ch. 8 (note) - 8-167 - 8-330 - 8-333 - Ch. 18 (note) 66.0119(1)-(3) 35-31 66.0131 Ch. 2 (note) 66.0139 Ch. 2 (note) - 24-1 66.0301 12-19 66.0405 Ch. 28 (note) - Ch. 34 (note) 66.0407 Ch. 28 (note) - Ch. 46 (note) - 46-1 66.0409 Ch. 30 (note) - 30-13 66.0411 Ch. 30 (note) 66.0413 8-332 - Ch. 28 (note) 66.0413(2)(b) 8-131 66.0415 Ch. 10 (note) 66.0417 Ch. 20 (note) 66.0423 Ch. 10 (note) 66.0425 Ch. 36 (note) 66.0429 Ch. 36 (note) - Ch. 42 (note) 66.0431 Ch. 42 (note) 66.0435 Ch. 26 (note) - 26-2 - 26-86 66.0615 Ch. 40, Art. III - 40-46 66.0617 2-307 - 2-313 66.0703 2-275 - 2-276 66.0801 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 66.0805 44-1 66.0809 Ch. 44 (note) 66.0811 Ch. 44 (note) 66.0819 Ch. 44 (note) 66.0821 44-259 66.0825 Ch. 44 (note) 66.0907 36-1 66.1031 Ch. 36 (note) 66.60(16) 38-289 67.01 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) ch. 68 8-167 68.001 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) - Ch. 2, Art. VIII 68.01 2-398 70.01 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) - Ch. 40, Art. II 70.043 Ch. 26 (note) 70.119 Ch. 40 (note) 70.46(1) 2-181 70.47(6m)(c) 2-181 70.47(7)(af) 40-20 70.52 Ch. 40 (note) 70.65 Ch. 40 (note) - 40-19 70.68 Ch. 40 (note) 74.19 40-19 74.37 40-20 74.45 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 76.01 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 77.51 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 77.52(2)(a)1 40-46 77.98 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 77.99 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 79.005 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 79.10 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 85.095(1)(b) 35-23 - 35-59 86.03 Ch. 46 (note) 87.01 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 87.30 Ch. 16 (note) - 16-19 - 16-23 - 16-24 - Ch. 48 (note) 90.01 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 92.01 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) - Ch. 16 (note) 92.15 Ch. 6 (note) 95.001 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 95.19 Ch. 6 (note) 95.21 Ch. 6 (note) - 6-55 95.21(5)(a) 6-58 95.50 Ch. 6 (note) 100.01 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 101.01 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 101.123 20-23 101.60 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 101.65 Ch. 8 (note) 101.70 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) - Ch. 26 (note) 101.76 Ch. 8 (note) 101.80 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 101.86 Ch. 8 (note) 101.861 Ch. 8 (note) 101.91 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) - Ch. 26 (note) 101.96 Ch. 26 (note) 101.971 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 101.976 Ch. 18 (note) ch. 110 42-1 111.335 10-113 118.163 30-47 ch. 125 Ch. 4 (note) - 4-1 - 4-21 - 4-22 - 4-24 - 4-26 - 4-28 125.01 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 125.05 Ch. 4 (note) 125.07 28-29 125.10 Ch. 4 (note) - 4-1 125.12(2)(b) 2-400 125.14 Ch. 4 (note) - Ch. 28 (note) 125.17 4-56 125.l7(6)(a) 4-55 125.25 et seq. 2-400 - Ch. 4 (note) 125.32(3) 4-86 125.51 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 125.68(4) 4-86 134.01 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 134.65 30-1 134.66 30-1 139.01 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) - Ch. 40 (note) 139.30 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 139.75 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) ch. 145 8-119 145.01 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 160.001 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) - Ch. 44 (note) 164.01 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 164.06 6-53 ch. 167 30-50 167.10 Ch. 18 (note) - 18-96 167.11 Ch. 18 (note) 167.30 Ch. 32 (note) 167.31 Ch. 32 (note) 167.31(c) 30-13 170.01 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 169.01 Ch. 28 (note) 172.01 et seq. 6-25 172.01 Ch. 6 (note) 173.01 Ch. 6 (note) 173.13 6-92 ch. 174 6-3 174.001 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 174.01 6-92 174.042 6-56 174.05 Ch. 6 (note) - 6-53 174.052 6-53 174.07 Ch. 6 (note) - 6-56 175.25 Ch. 28 (note) 175.60 30-13 175.60(2g)(b) 30-1 182.0175 44-51 ch. 194 42-1 - 42-87 196.01 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 196.71 Ch. 44 (note) 197.01 Ch. 44 (note) 198.01 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 202.12 10-56 213.01 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) - Ch. 24 (note) 213.05 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 213.095 Ch. 18 (note) 213.11 Ch. 24 (note) 213.12 Ch. 18 (note) 227.01(1) 35-22 - 35-58 ch. 236 38-9 - 38-12 - 38-35 - 38-36 - 38-85 - 38-120 - 38-141 - 38-169 - 38-231 236.01 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 236.01 Ch. 48 (note) 236.02(12) 16-25 236.11 38-63 236.13 38-13 236.34 38-4 - 38-120 236.45 2-316 - Ch. 38 (note) - 38-1 250.01 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 251.001 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 251.02 Ch. 20 (note) 251.04 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 254.31(10) 34-1 254.57 Ch. 16 (note) 254.92 30-1 256.15 Ch. 18 (note) 280.01 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 281.01(10) 35-23 - 35-59 281.16 35-19 - 35-55 - 35-57 281.16(1) 35-23 - 35-59 281.33 35-23 - 35-59 ch. 283 34-1 283.01(13) 35-23 - 35-59 283.33 35-19 - 35-55 285.01 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 287.01(5m) 34-1 287.07(7)(h) 34-48 287.078(7)(bg) 34-48 287.09 Ch. 34 (note) 287.11 34-47 287.81 30-1 289.01 et seq. Ch. 34 (note) 289.01(17) 34-1 291.001 et seq. Ch. 34 (note) 302.46 12-24 323.01 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 323.02 14-1 323.10 et seq. 14-23 323.14 Ch. 14 (note) - 14-23 323.15 14-23 323.24 Ch. 14 (note) 323.50 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) - 14-25 323.52 Ch. 14 (note) 323.54 Ch. 14 (note) ch. 340-348 42-3 340-350 42-1 340.01 42-61 340.01(22) 2-308 340.01(43m) 42-118 341.35 Ch. 42 (note) 341.63 42-3 342.40 Ch. 42, Art. VI 342.40(3) 42-166, 42-167 345.11 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) - 12-58 345.11 42-3 345.18 Ch. 12 (note) - 12-58 345.20l Ch. 12 (note) - 12-58 345.20 42-3 345.21 Ch. 24 (note) 345.22 Ch. 24 (note) 345.26 Ch. 12 (note) - 12-58 - 42-3 345.27 42-3 345.28 42-3 345.52 42-3 345.55 Ch. 24 (note) 346.01 Ch. 42 (note) 346.37 et seq. 42-25 - 42-26 346.57 et seq. 42-60 346.58 42-60 346.59 42-60 346.91 18-32 346.94(13) Ch. 42, Art. VI 349.03 Ch. 42 (note) 349.06 Ch. 42 (note) - 42-1 - 42-2 349.11 42-60 349.13 Ch. 42 (note) 349.17 Ch. 42 (note) 349.23 Ch. 42 (note) 349.26 42-120 ch. 350 42-3 ch. 442 2-344 450.11(7) 30-1 ch. 460 10-161 10-163 10-164 ch. 463 10-191 10-193 10-194 562.105 Ch. 6 (note) 703.01 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 751.03 12-21 ch. 755 12-19 - 12-20 755.001 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 755.01 12-54 755.02 12-21 755.03 12-21 755.03(1) 12-22 755.04 12-21 755.10 12-57 767.225 30-46 767.41 30-46 775.10 12-57 785.01 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) - 12-24 785.06 Ch. 12 (note) - 12-24 800.001 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 800.02 Ch. 12 (note) 800.06 12-21 800.095(4) 8-1 800.12 Ch. 12 (note) - 12-24 813.12(1)(am) 28-29 814.65(1) 12-58 - 12-59 814.70 24-25 814.705 24-25 814.71 24-25 823.01 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. III 823.01 Ch. 28 (note) 880.01 Ch. 18 (note) 895.035 Ch. 4 (note) - 30-2 905.03 2-343 938.01 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 938.343 1-15 938.344 1-15 938.355(6)(d) 1-15 939.05 30-1 939.22 30-1 939.32(1)(b) 30-1 ch. 940 20-31 940.01-940.32 28-29 940.19(1) 30-1 940.225 28-29 940.32 28-29 941.01 30-1 - 42-1 - 42-3 941.03 42-1 941.10 Ch. 18 (note) - 30-1 941.11 Ch. 18 (note) 941.12 Ch. 18 (note) - 18-31 - 18-32 941.12(3) 30-1 941.13 Ch. 18 (note) - 30-1 941.20(1) 30-1 941.23 30-1 941.231 30-1 941.235 30-1 941.237 Ch. 4 (note) - 30-1 941.24 30-1 941.295(4) 30-13 941.2965 30-1 941.297 30-1 943.01 30-1 943.01(1) 30-2 943.017 30-1 943.07(4) 30-1 943.11 30-1 - 42-1 943.125 30-1 943.13 30-1 943.14 30-1 943.20 28-29 - 30-1 943.21 30-1 943.23 42-1 943.24 30-1 943.34(1) 30-1 943.37 30-1 943.41 30-1 943.46 30-1 943.50 30-1 ch. 944 10-162 10-192 20-31 945.01 et seq. 30-10 945.01 30-1 945.02 30-1 945.03 28-29 - 30-1 946.06 30-1 946.10 Ch. 2, Art. VII 946.11 Ch. 2, Art. VII 946.12 Ch. 2, Art. VII 946.13 Ch. 2, Art. VII - 2-367 946.40 30-1 946.41 30-1 946.42(1) 30-1 946.66 30-1 946.69 30-1 946.70(1) 30-1 946.72 1-14 946.72(2) 30-1 947.01 28-29 - 30-1 947.012 30-1 947.0125 30-1 947.013 28-29 947.013(1m) 30-1 947.02 30-6 947.045 42-1 947.06 30-1 ch. 948 20-31 948.02 28-29 948.025 28-29 948.45(1) 30-1 948.63 30-1 951.01 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) - 6-29 951.02 30-1 951.095 30-1 ch. 961 28-29 - 30-1 961.573(2) 30-1 961.574(2) 30-1 961.575(2) 30-1 967.02 Ch. 24 (note) 968.075(5)(a) 30-1 968.20 24-1 ch. 985 16-25 990.001 1-2 990.001(11) 1-9 990.01 Ch. 24 (note) 990.01(48) 1-2 990.03 1-12  
