CODE OF GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF JANESVILLE, WISCONSIN 
____________ 
Published in 2020 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: February 10, 2020 
Effective: March 1, 2020 
____________ 
  
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Richard Gruber, President 
Tom Wolfe, Vice-President 
Paul Benson 
Sue Conley 
Jim Farrell 
Douglas Marklein 
Paul Williams 
City Council 
____________ 
Mark Freitag 
City Manager 
____________ 
Wald Klimczyk 
City Attorney 
____________ 
David Godek 
City Clerk-Treasurer 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Janesville, Wisconsin. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code, as supplemented through May 31, 2019, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim C. Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Amanda Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. David Godek, City Clerk-Treasurer, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Janesville, Wisconsin. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Janesville, Wisconsin. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Janesville, Wisconsin. 2020. 
FILE ORDINANCE NO. 2020-780 
An ordinance to recodify the Code of General Ordinances of the City of Janesville effective March 1, 2020 at 12:01 am. 
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF JANESVILLE DO ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS: 
SECTION I. RECODIFICATION OF THE CODE. The Code of General Ordinances of the City of Janesville, a copy of which is available for inspection in the Clerk-Treasurer's Office, are hereby recodified into a new "Code of General Ordinances" and adopted effective March 1, 2020 at 12:01 am. 
SECTION II. SAVING CLAUSE. 
1.  All vested rights, pending actions, and prosecutions shall continue as though no revision or change has been made in the general ordinances. 
2.  Processes issued or proceedings commenced shall be unaffected by the revision and all such proceedings commenced or pending may be continued and concluded under the ordinance applicable at the time they were commenced. 
3.  This "Code of General Ordinances" shall not in any way alter or affect any special franchise ordinances, ordinances providing for the issue and sale of bonds or other securities of a nature other than general, as the same may now be existing; all such ordinances shall continue in full force and effect as before the passage of this ordinance. 
SECTION III. REPEAL. Except as herein above specifically exempted from the operation of this ordinance, all ordinances of the City of Janesville inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
SECTION IV. PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS OF ORDINANCES. Any person who is convicted of violating any ordinance contained in this Code for which a penalty is not expressly provided in the Code, shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than Ten Dollars ($10) nor more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each such violation, together with the costs of prosecution.. 
SECTION V. SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS. It is the intention of the Common Council of the City of Janesville that each chapter, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, and provision of this Code is severable and if any provision shall be held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of the Code nor any part thereof other than those affected by such decision. 
SECTION VI. PROCEDURE. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 66.0103 of the Wisconsin Statutes, this "Code of General Ordinances" shall not be printed at length in the official journal but shall be referred to therein by chapter, and after the adoption and passage of this "Code of General Ordinances" the same shall be published in book form. A copy of such code shall be kept permanently on file and open for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer; likewise the City Manager and City Clerk-Treasurer shall provide for the distribution and sale of copies thereof to the public generally at a reasonable cost designed only to cover the cost of publication. 
SECTION VII. NAME AND APPLICATION. This Code shall be referred to as the "Code of General Ordinances" of the City of Janesville and all ordinances of a general nature are hereby recodified into such Code by reference. 
SECTION VIII. Whenever the word person appears in the Code of Ordinances, it shall be construed to include partnerships, associations, and corporations. 
SECTION IX. Whenever additional regulations are added to the chapters of the Code without any specific penalty expressly stated, the penalty for violation of the regulations shall be the penalty already specified or hereafter adopted for violations of this revision ordinance. 
Motion by: Benson 
Second by: Williams 
Councilmember 	Aye 	Nay 	Pass 	Absent 
Benson 	X 			
Conley 	X 			
Farrell 	X 			
Gruber 	X 			
Marklein 	X 			
Williams 	X 			
Wolfe 	X 			
 
ADOPTED: February 10, 2020 
APPROVED: 
/s/   
      Mark A. Freitag, City Manager 	
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      David T. Godek, City Clerk-Treasurer 	
 	 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/   
      Tim Wellnitz, Assistant City 
      Attorney 	
 	 
Proposed by: City Clerk-Treasurer 
Prepared by: City Clerk-Treasurer  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Current City boundary, ward and precinct provisions are on file in the City Clerk's Office. 
State Law reference— Codification of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0103. 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Title of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of General Ordinances of the City of Janesville, Wisconsin," and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the "City of Janesville Code," the "Janesville Code," the "City Code" or the "JGO." 
(Code 1976, § 1.01.010; Ord. No. 77-1, § 1, 1977)  
Sec. 1-2. - Saving clause. 
(a)  This "Code of General Ordinances" shall not in any way alter or affect any special franchise ordinances, ordinances providing for the issue and sale of bonds or other securities or other ordinance of a nature other than general, as the same may be now existing; all such ordinances shall continue in full force and effect as before the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(b)  The prior Code and parts of Chapters 10 and 18 of the prior Code are not printed in the above adopted Code. Even though not printed, these specifically mentioned sections and parts of chapters are not hereby repealed. 
(Code 1976, § 1.01.020; Ord. No. 77-1, § 2(part), 1977)  
Sec. 1-3. - Severability of provisions. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1976, § 1.01.030; Ord. No. 77-1, § 2(part), 1977) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(11).  
Sec. 1-4. - Additions to Code. 
Whenever additions are made to any title of this Code, without an express penalty provision, the general penalty provision for that title, chapter or section shall apply to the addition. If there is no such general penalty, then Section 1-9 shall apply. 
(Code 1976, § 1.01.040; Ord. No. 77-1, § 2(part), 1977)  
Sec. 1-5. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the City of Janesville, Wisconsin, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
City means the City of Janesville, Wisconsin, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of Janesville, Wisconsin, and such territory outside of the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
Computation of time means the time within which an act is to be done. It shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, and if the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
Council means the City Council of the City of Janesville, Wisconsin. 
County means the County of Rock, Wisconsin. 
Law denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the State of Wisconsin, the ordinances of the City of Janesville, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
May is permissive. 
Month means a calendar month. 
Must and shall. Each is mandatory. 
Oath includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Ordinance means a law of the City of Janesville, provided that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive may be in the form of a resolution. 
Owner, applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, or the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
Personal property includes money, goods, chattel, things in action and evidences of debt. 
Preceding and following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property includes real and personal property. 
Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State means the State of Wisconsin. 
Street includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state. 
Tenant and occupant, applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Title of office. Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City of Janesville, Wisconsin. 
Week. The term "week" means a calendar week of seven days. 
Written includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed. 
Year means a calendar year. 
(1)  All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(2)  When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed as to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Code 1976, § 1.04.010) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes generally, Wis. Stats. § 990.01 et seq.  
Sec. 1-6. - City Hall defined. 
Whenever the term "City Hall" is found in this Code, such term shall be defined as meaning the municipal building. The terms "City Hall" and "municipal building" shall be interchangeable for purposes of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 1.04.020)  
Sec. 1-7. - Rules of construction; grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the City of Janesville, Wisconsin. 
(1)  Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the City Council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another more general provision imposed by the Code or other law, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
(2)  Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that, in appropriate cases, the terms "or" and "and" are interchangeable: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
(3)  Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the City to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
(4)  Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the City Council. 
(5)  Officers, boards, commissions. Whenever reference is made to officers, boards or commissions by title only, such as "Board of Directors" or "Recreation Department," such references shall be read as though followed by the words "of the City of Janesville, Wisconsin." 
(6)  Gender. Designation in the form of any gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
(7)  Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(8)  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(9)  Use of words and phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
(Code 1976, § 1.04.030)  
Sec. 1-8. - Prohibited acts include causing, permitting and related acts. 
Whenever in the ordinances of the City of Janesville, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Code 1976, § 1.04.040)  
Sec. 1-9. - Penalty where no penalty provided. 
(a)  In any case where there is a violation of any chapter for which no penalty is provided, the person violating the same shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense, except as provided in Subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  In any case where any ordinance or section of an ordinance of the City shall not provide a greater penalty for a second or subsequent conviction for a violation thereof, any person violating the same who has previously been convicted of a violation thereof shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense, except that where the penalty provided by any such ordinance or section for a first violation thereof is larger than the penalty provided in this subsection, such larger penalty shall be applicable. 
(c)  No violation of any ordinance of the City shall be a misdemeanor nor shall imprisonment be imposed as a punishment for violation of any ordinance of the City. 
(d)  Anytime the forfeiture and costs imposed by this section are not paid, the violator shall be imprisoned for a period of not less than two nor more than 60 days. 
(Code 1976, § 1.12.010) 
State Law reference— Ordinance violations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0109; imprisonment for failure to pay forfeiture and other remedies available to court for ordinance violations, Wis. Stats. § 800.09 et seq.  
Sec. 1-10. - Authorization for use of citation. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 66.0113, as from time to time renumbered or amended, the use of a citation to be issued for violations of ordinances, including, but not limited to, ordinances for which a statutory counterpart exists is authorized. 
(Code 1976, § 1.16.010)  
Sec. 1-11. - Officials authorized to issue citation. 
Citations authorized in Section 1-10 may be issued by law enforcement officers of the City and by designated City officials with respect to sections of the Code which are directly related to the official's area of responsibility. The officials granted authority to issue citations under this section may delegate the authority to other City employees within the designated official's department with the approval of the City Council, which approval is hereby granted. Citations may be issued by the following City officials: 
(1)  Police Chief; 
(2)  Law enforcement officers; 
(3)  Fire Chief; 
(4)  Fire Inspector; 
(5)  Director of the Department of Code Administration; 
(6)  Property Maintenance Specialist; 
(7)  Superintendent of the Janesville School District and/or his or her designees. 
(Code 1976, § 1.16.020; Ord. No. 82-304, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 1-12. - Form of citation. 
The form of the citation to be issued by City police officers or other designated City officials is incorporated herein by reference and shall provide for the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
(2)  The factual allegations describing the alleged violation; 
(3)  The time, date and place of the offense; 
(4)  The section of the ordinance violated, including specific sections of state law, administrative Codes or special Codes adopted by the City of Janesville ordinances by reference or otherwise; 
(5)  A designation of the offense in such manner as can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so; 
(6)  The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court; 
(7)  A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator: 
a.  That the alleged violator may make a cash deposit of a specified amount to be mailed to a specified official within a specified time; 
b.  That if the alleged violator makes such a deposit, he or she need not appear in court unless subsequently summoned; 
c.  That if the alleged violator makes a cash deposit and does not appear in court, he or she will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture and a penalty assessment and other relief and costs as required or permitted by law, as from time to time amended, not to exceed the amount of the deposit or will be summoned into court to answer the complaint if the court does not accept the plea of no contest; 
d.  That, if the alleged violator does not make a cash deposit and does not appear in court at the time specified, the court may issue a summons or a warrant for the defendant's arrest or consider the nonappearance to be a plea of no contest and enter judgment under Wis. Stats. § 66.0113(3)(d), or the municipality may commence an action against the alleged violator to collect the forfeiture, plus costs, fees, and surcharges imposed under Wis. Stats. ch. 814; 
e.  That if the court finds that the violation involves an ordinance that prohibits conduct that is the same as or similar to conduct prohibited by state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment or both, and that the violation resulted in damage to the property of or physical injury to a person other than the alleged violator, the court may summon the alleged violator into court to determine if restitution shall be ordered under Wis. Stats. § 800.093. 
(8)  A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit, the alleged violator shall sign an appropriate statement which accompanies the citation to indicate that he or she read the statement required under Subsection (7) of this section and shall send the signed statement with the cash deposit; 
(9)  Such other information as may be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 1.16.030; Ord. No. 82-304, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 1-13. - Schedule of cash deposits. 
The schedule of cash deposits for the various ordinances for which a citation may be issued are as follows: 
Ordinance Violated 		Cash Deposit Permitted 
Chapter 16, Article II 	Fire hazards—Theaters, Hotels and Nursing Homes 	$300.00 
Chapter 16, Article V 	Fire Code 	$300.00 
Chapter 16, Article VI 	Smoke Detector Ordinance 	$300.00 
Chapter 16, Article VII 	Fire Regulation 	$300.00 
Chapter 22, Article I 	Nuisance 	$300.00 
Chapter 24, Article III, Division 7 	Truancy/Habitual Truancy 	up to $500.00 
Chapter 38, Article X 	Vehicles and Traffic 	$300.00 
Chapter 34, Article VII 	Street, Sidewalks and Public Property 	$300.00 
Chapter 42, Article X 	Zoning Code 	$300.00 
Title 28 	Signs 	$300.00 
Title 10 	Building Code 	$300.00 
Title 18 	Housing Regulations 	$300.00 
 
In addition to the amount listed, the deposit must include the penalty assessment, costs and other relief and amounts required or permitted by law, as from time to time amended. 
(Code 1976, § 1.16.040; Ord. No. 82-304, § 1(part), 1982; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1, 1984)  
Sec. 1-14. - Receipt of cash deposits. 
Cash deposits are to be paid at the Clerk of Courts, Rock County Courthouse, 51 South Main Street, Janesville, Wisconsin 53545. Receipts shall be given for all cash deposits received. 
(Code 1976, § 1.16.050; Ord. No. 82-304, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 1-15. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to change, or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.  
Sec. 1-16. - Interpretation of Code. 
In all interpretations of this Code and ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the City Council, keeping in view at all times the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands.  
Sec. 1-17. - Substantive compliance with Code. 
A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code of Ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment.  
Sec. 1-18. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout this Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect.  
Sec. 1-19. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect.  
Sec. 1-20. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this title shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City repealed in this title, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This title shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or section thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-21. - Rates, charges, and fees established. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the City Council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the City pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the Council, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the City Council, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the City Council by ordinance, resolution or motion.  
Sec. 1-22. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-23. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed titles, chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the City Council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the City of Janesville, WI, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter or title) to be numbered, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters, titles, or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article, chapter, or title number, as the case may be.  
Sec. 1-24. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the City Council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in this Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this title," "this chapter," "this article," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into this Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-25. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the City Council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-9.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities, generally, Wis. Stats. ch. 66; City Manager plan for city government, Wis. Stats. § 64.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Common Council, generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.11; powers of Common Council, Wis. Stats. § 64.07. 
 
Sec. 2-19. - Regular. 
(a)  The Council shall meet annually on the third Tuesday of April for the purpose of organization, and regular meetings shall be held thereafter on the second and fourth Monday of each month. 
(b)  When a regular meeting date falls on a legal holiday, Christmas Eve or New Year's Eve, that regular meeting shall be cancelled but may be held on a different weekday to be determined by the Council President prior to the next regularly scheduled Council meeting, with prior notice to the Councilmembers. The Council President may also cancel or reschedule the second meeting of December. 
(c)  The Council President may reschedule a regular Council meeting which falls upon an election day, including, but not limited to, primaries, general elections and other public voting events. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.010)  
Sec. 2-20. - Special. 
Special meetings may be called by the president of the Council, or by any two Councilmembers, or by the City Manager, by written notice as required by Wis. Stats. § 62.11(2); provided however, that such notice of a meeting may be waived by any member. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.020)  
Sec. 2-21. - Time; place. 
Regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council Chambers at the City Hall at 6:00 p.m. Special meetings shall be held at the place and at the time designated in the notice thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.030)  
Sec. 2-22. - Order of business. 
The order of business shall be: 
(1)  Call to Order, Pledge of Allegiance, and Emergency Procedures; 
(2)  Roll call; 
(3)  Recognitions; 
(4)  Public comments on items on the agenda not requiring a public hearing and on matters which can be affected by Council action; 
(5)  City Manager update; 
(6)  Showcase Janesville presentation; 
(7)  Minutes of previous meeting; 
(8)  Consent items as outlined in City Council Policy Statement No. 65. In any order determined by the presiding officer; 
(9)  Old business; 
(10)  New business; 
(11)  City Council announcements; 
(12)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.040)  
Sec. 2-23. - Presiding officer; election. 
(a)  Annually, at their first meeting (organizational meeting) on the third Tuesday in April after regular elections, the City Council shall elect, by majority vote, one of their members to serve as President, and, by separate majority vote, one of their members to serve as Vice-President, for that term-of-office year. 
(b)  The President of the City Council, if present, shall preside at all meetings. In the President's absence, the Vice-President shall preside. If both the President and Vice-President are absent from the same meeting, the members attending shall select one of their members to preside. 
(c)  The President, Vice-President and presiding member shall have the power to vote on all matters, as do all other City Councilmembers, but no one shall have any veto power. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.050)  
Sec. 2-24. - Appointments; presidential authority; Council confirmation. 
All appointments to committees, boards and commissions, except as otherwise provided by law, shall be made by the president, subject to confirmation by the Council. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.060)  
Sec. 2-25. - Voting; method. 
The ayes and noes shall be called and recorded on the vote upon every ordinance and resolution. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.070)  
Sec. 2-26. - Quorum. 
A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of all members of the Council shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.080)  
Sec. 2-27. - Reading of ordinances; procedure. 
Every ordinance, or resolution in the nature of an ordinance, shall receive two separate readings previous to its passage. It shall be sufficient to have such ordinance read by title only. The title of each ordinance shall concisely state its subject and any applicable penalty provisions, but failure to follow this requirement shall not invalidate any ordinance. No such ordinance or resolution shall have its two readings on the same day, unless by suspension of the rules as provided in Section 2-31. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.090)  
Sec. 2-28. - Privilege of floor. 
Every member of the Council, prior to speaking upon any subject, shall address the presiding officer and, upon securing the privilege of speaking, shall not be interrupted except by a call to order. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.100)  
Sec. 2-29. - Committees; standing; special. 
The Committee of Public Works, Transportation Committee and Park Land Acquisition Committee shall be the only standing committees. Special committees shall be appointed from time to time as the Council may deem necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.110; Ord. No. 80-188, § 1, 1980)  
Sec. 2-30. - Committee; assignment notification; City Clerk's duties. 
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, in addition to all other duties prescribed by law, to notify in writing all committee members and all City officers of any matter referred to them or any special duty assigned to them. Such notice shall be given as soon as reasonably possible after such matter has been so referred or assigned. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.120)  
Sec. 2-31. - Suspension, reconsideration, rescission or amendment; Council approval. 
(a)  No rule, order, ordinance, resolution or motion, written or verbal, adopted during the same or any previous meeting of the City Council shall be suspended, reconsidered or rescinded without the concurrence of at least five members of the Council. For purposes of this chapter, the term "previous meeting" means any regular or special meeting of the City Council occurring since the third Tuesday of the immediately preceding April. Reconsideration, suspension and rescission can only be made by a Councilmember who voted on the prevailing side, may be seconded by any other Councilmember, and requires not less than five affirmative votes. 
(b)  This chapter and the need for reconsideration shall not apply to any negative vote. A "negative vote" is one which fails to adopt or enact any rule, order, ordinance, resolution or motion in the manner required by law, regardless of the number of votes originally cast in favor of adoption or enactment of the failed matter. In such cases, in the event that the same subject matter appears upon a subsequent agenda and is publicly noticed in the manner required by law, all motions and other actions pertaining to the subject matter may be made and/or re-introduced by any Councilmember and adopted or enacted by the vote required by law, notwithstanding any failure to adopt or enact such matter any time previously. 
(c)  This chapter and the need for reconsideration shall not apply to any subsequent minor amendment of any part, portion or provision of any chapter, resolution or motion previously adopted or enacted, if such amendments are otherwise permitted by law. For purposes of this chapter, the term "minor amendments" means those modifications which do not repeal, rescind, void, nullify, amend or reconsider the entire ordinance or resolution; or defeat the scope, purpose, intent or effect of the originally adopted or enacted ordinance or resolution; or would render such ordinance or resolution, in scope, intent, purpose, effect or express language, contrary to or substantially different from that which was originally adopted or enacted. 
(d)  If not made during the same meeting as the original vote upon the subject matter or action, a motion to reconsider, suspend or rescind must be included in the public notice and agenda of the subsequent meeting. 
(e)  A motion to reconsider, suspend or rescind must be based upon new information or a change in circumstances, which reason must be articulated by the moving Councilmember prior to vote thereon. 
(f)  Upon passage of the motion to reconsider, the subject matter or action under reconsideration is subject to discussion, debate and such other treatments as would have been in order during the original consideration. To be adopted or enacted, the matter or action must again be voted on and receive the minimum number of votes required by law. 
(g)  This chapter takes precedence and governs notwithstanding any ordinance, resolution, rule or provision of Robert's Rules of Order to the contrary. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.130)  
Sec. 2-32. - Robert's Rules of Order. 
The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the proceedings of the Council in all cases to which they are applicable, and where they are consistent with the laws of the state or any special rule adopted for the government of this Council. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.140)  
Sec. 2-33. - Appointment of Councilmembers to committees; Presidential authority; Council confirmation. 
All appointments of Councilmembers to committees, boards and commissions shall be made by the Council President, subject to confirmation by the Council. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0101 concerning Charter ordinances, this provision shall apply regardless of any other ordinance or Wisconsin state statute. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.150; Charter Ord. No. 80-A, § 1, 1980)  
Sec. 2-34. - City manager appointments; limitation of terms. 
Except as otherwise provided by state law or as set forth in Subsection (3) of this section, for all appointments made by the City Manager to committees, boards, and commissions, whether or not subject to City Council confirmation, the term of appointment shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  When the initial term of appointment is three years or less, the individual may be appointed for no more than two consecutive full terms of service on the same committee, board, or commission. 
(2)  When the initial term of appointment is more than three years, the individual may not be appointed for any additional consecutive term of appointment on the same committee, board, or commission. 
(3)  There shall be an exception to the provisions of this section for any appointee who is, by virtue of his or her unique knowledge or critical capacity within an unfinished project, considered by the City Manager to be indispensable at the time of his or her term expiration. He or she may then be appointed for an additional term. 
(Code 1976, § 2.04.160; Ord. No. 87-519, § 1, 1987)  
Secs. 2-35—2-56. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 2-57. - Treasurer; bond with sureties not required. 
The Treasurer of the City shall not be required to execute and deliver to the County Treasurer a bond with sureties to be approved by the County Treasurer as provided in Wis. Stats. § 70.67(1). The City obligates itself to pay, in case the Treasurer thereof fails to do so, all taxes of any kind required by law to be paid by such Treasurer to the County Treasurer. 
(Code 1976, § 2.08.010)  
Sec. 2-58. - Engineer; requirements; duties. 
(a)  The City Engineer shall be a registered professional engineer, competent to perform the usual duties of such office, among which duties shall be the following: 
(1)  To locate and, by suitable landmarks, show the boundary lines of public grounds, streets and other public ways; 
(2)  To locate and suitably mark sidewalk lines and curblines; 
(3)  To make and file with the City Clerk profiles of proposed grades for streets and other public ways for sidewalks, curbings, sewers, gutters and other surface drains; 
(4)  To prepare plans, maps, plats, profiles, specifications and estimates for public works or improvements including those required by the water department; 
(5)  To superintend the construction of all street pavements, and of all bridges, sewers and other public improvements; 
(6)  To locate and mark the boundary and grade lines of sidewalks and curbs for persons desiring such services for the purpose of properly locating and constructing any sidewalk, curbing or gutter; 
(7)  To perform all traffic engineering; 
(8)  To carry out or direct the usual functions of a City Planner by providing the City Plan Commission with all necessary data which will enable it to carry out its duties as specified in Wis. Stats. § 62.23; 
(9)  To perform any other work and render any other service appropriate to his or her office or delegated to him or her by the City Manager; 
(10)  To preserve in his or her office all field notes, maps, plans, profiles, papers, books, writings and records made by him or her or coming into his or her possession as City Engineer and to arrange and index the same in such manner that a ready reference may be had thereto; 
(11)  To make and keep systematic records in suitable books to be provided by the City therefor of all profiles of grades established by the Council, of all field notes of surveys of boundary lines of public grounds and of streets and other public ways, and of curblines and sidewalk lines, and also of the descriptions and locations of monuments, benchmarks and landmarks made or used by him or her in making any such surveys, or in making profiles of grades established by the Council. 
(b)  The files and records to be kept in the City Engineer's office, pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall be public files and records and shall permanently remain in such office and be open for inspection by the public. 
(c)  The City Engineer or any assistant or employee of the City Engineer is authorized to make surveys, establish boundary lines, assist in the making of plats, or do any other work of an engineering nature for and at the request of private parties; provided, however, that such work shall not be done during regular working hours and the doing of such work shall not be permitted to interfere with the work necessary to be done for the City; and provided, further, that the City Engineer or any assistant or employee who does such work shall file in the City Engineer's office records to show such surveys, boundary lines established, monuments placed and all other data which might be of value as a permanent record in such office. 
(d)  The City Engineer is authorized and required to charge private parties such amounts as in his or her judgment may be reasonable for services performed by himself or herself or his or her assistants or employees done during regular working hours. All such money collected shall be turned over by him or her to the City. 
(Code 1976, § 2.08.030)  
Sec. 2-59. - Utility Director; duties. 
The Utility Director shall plan, direct and administer all programs and activities of the water department, wastewater department, water and wastewater office staff and do all related work as required or as assigned by the City Manager. It shall be his or her duty to see that all rules and regulations adopted for the operation of the Water Department and the Wastewater Department are complied with and that all pertinent federal or state requirements which relate to the Water Department or Wastewater Department are enforced. 
(Code 1976, § 2.08.040; Ord. No. 85-428, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 2-60. - Superintendent of Streets and Sewers; duties. 
The Superintendent of Streets and Sewers shall have charge of the following: 
(1)  The repair, reconstruction, and sanitation of all streets; 
(2)  The construction of new storm sewers and maintenance of all sewers; 
(3)  The collection and disposition of all rubbish and garbage; 
(4)  The snow removal, sanding and ice control on all street and City sidewalks and public parking lots; 
(5)  Cutting of weeds on private and City property and cooperation with the Weed Commissioner in his or her duties; 
(6)  To cooperate with the Police in requiring that barriers be erected and warning lights be kept on all excavations or other construction in the streets; 
(7)  To advise the City Manager of all unlawful encroachments upon and obstructions to travel on sidewalks and streets and to report to the City Manager all failures and refusals to comply with his or her orders in respect thereto; 
(8)  To report to the City Manager all dangerous defects in streets, sidewalks and bridges which he or she is not authorized to remedy without the express direction of the City Manager; 
(9)  To have charge of the repair and maintenance of all machinery and automotive equipment owned by the City; and 
(10)  To carry on such other related duties as may be assigned to him or her by the City Manager. 
(Code 1976, § 2.08.050)  
Sec. 2-61. - Street commissioner; City Engineer to perform duties. 
The duties of the Street Commissioner have been assigned to the City Engineer and are listed under the duties of the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 2.08.060)  
Sec. 2-62. - Councilmembers; membership; term of office; compensation. 
The Council shall consist of seven members elected at large who shall hold office for two years and shall serve without compensation. Of the seven members of the Council, three shall be elected in the even-numbered years and four in the odd-numbered years. 
(Code 1976, § 2.08.070)  
Sec. 2-63. - Weed Commissioner; created; appointment; duties. 
There is created the office of Weed Commissioner to be filled by appointment in the same manner that other appointments are made. It shall be the duty of the Weed Commissioner to see that all the laws of the state and ordinances of the City covering the destruction of noxious weeds are enforced. The Weed Commissioner shall keep adequate records so that proper charge can be made against private property for services rendered in the performance of his or her duties. 
(Code 1976, § 2.08.100)  
Sec. 2-64. - Combined offices; City Manager authority; Council confirmation. 
The City Manager shall have power, subject to confirmation by the Council, to combine any of the City offices created by law or ordinance where the duties of such offices so combined are not incompatible and to vest the powers and duties of such combined offices in one officer. 
(Code 1976, § 2.08.110)  
Sec. 2-65. - Minor administrative offices; creation authority; Council confirmation. 
The City Manager shall have power, subject to confirmation by the Council, to create such minor administrative offices and positions such as sanitary inspector, welfare worker, health nurses, recreational director, etc., as may from time to time become necessary. The City Manager shall also have the power to discontinue such offices and positions according to his or her judgment of the needs of the City. 
(Code 1976, § 2.08.120)  
Sec. 2-66. - City officers and employees compensation, generally. 
The amount of salary or compensation to be paid all City officers and employees other than the City Manager shall be determined by the City Manager, subject, however, to the approval of the Council. The salary of the City Manager shall be fixed by the Council. 
(Code 1976, § 2.12.010) 
State Law reference— Councilmember compensation, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.09(6) and 64.08.  
Sec. 2-67. - Wisconsin retirement fund members; effective date; service credits. 
The City has elected by ordinance to place its employees under the Wisconsin Retirement System with the effective date January 1, 1944. Eligible City personnel are entered and prior service credits are at rates equal to two times the rates of the municipal credits for current services applicable to employees who were employed by the City on October 4, 1943. 
(Code 1976, § 2.12.020)  
Sec. 2-68. - Participation in supplementary retirement program. 
All employees of the City who are not covered by a collectively bargained agreement may, at the option of the employee, participate in the Supplementary Retirement Program administered by the International City Management Association Retirement Corporation pursuant to such rules and regulations as are established by the City or the International City Management Association Retirement Corporation, and the City Manager and the City Clerk are authorized to execute any and all documents and agreements necessary for such participation. Such participation in this supplementary retirement program shall also be extended to all employees of the City who are covered by a collectively bargained agreement which specifically provides for participation by the bargaining unit members. 
(Code 1976, § 2.12.030; Ord. No. 77-57, § 1, 1977; Ord. No. 82-281, § 1, 1982)  
Secs. 2-69—2-98. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-99—2-124. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HEALTH DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 2-125. - Board of Health; powers vested in City Manager. 
The Board of Health has been dispensed with by prior action of the Council. All the powers and duties of said board are vested in the City Manager. 
(Code 1976, § 2.16.010)  
Sec. 2-126. - Commissioner or officer; appointment; powers; duties. 
The City Manager shall appoint, in the same manner that other appointments to City offices are made, a regularly licensed physician as Health Commissioner or Health Officer who shall have all the powers and duties of such office as prescribed by the statutes of the state or ordinances of this City. The Health Officer shall be a full-time officer and he or she shall not engage in the private practice of medicine or in any other conflicting occupation. 
(Code 1976, § 2.16.020)  
Sec. 2-127. - Other officers; appointment; powers; duties. 
The City Manager shall appoint such other officers or employees in the Health Department, such as Sanitary Inspector, welfare worker and nurses, as he or she may deem necessary. All such officers and employees shall have such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the City Manager and Health Officer, or either of them. 
(Code 1976, § 2.16.030)  
Sec. 2-128. - Rules and regulations; approval; penalties. 
The Health Commissioner or Health Officer shall provide such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the preservation of health, to prevent the spread of communicable diseases, to cause the removal of all objects detrimental to health, and to enforce the health laws. All proposed rules and regulations shall be reported by him or her to the City Manager for his or her approval acting as a board of health. If the City Manager approves, he or she shall report the proposed rule or regulation to the Council. If the Council approves the same by a vote of a majority of its members, such rule or regulation shall have the force and effect of ordinances, including the same penalties as are provided for violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 2.16.040)  
Sec. 2-129. - Delegation of power and duties. 
The City Manager may delegate to either the Chief of Police, the Health Officer or the Assistant Health Officer any of the powers and duties conferred upon him or her by this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 2.16.050)  
Sec. 2-130. - Resisting health authorities. 
No person shall willfully resist or obstruct the Health Officer, or any of his or her assistants, in the performance of his or her duties. 
(Code 1976, § 2.16.060)  
Sec. 2-131. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 and not exceeding $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for each offense, and each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned in the county jail not less than five days not more than 60 days. 
(Code 1976, § 2.16.070)  
Secs. 2-132—2-152. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF REVIEW[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— City authorized to establish a board of review, Wis. Stats. § 70.46. 
 
Sec. 2-153. - Membership; appointment; Council approval; term of office. 
(a)  In order to create a more objective and unbiased Board of Review that will be able to examine objections to valuations with impartiality, the Board of Review shall consist of five residents of the City, none of whom shall occupy any public office or be publicly employed. 
(b)  The members of the board of review shall be appointed by the City Manager with the approval of the City Council and shall hold office as members of the board of review for a term of five years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. There shall be an exception to the provisions of Section 2-34 for any appointee to the Board of Review. 
(c)  The members of the Board of Review shall serve without salary. 
(d)  Alternate members of the Board of Review may be appointed from time to time and at any time by the City Manager with approval of the City Council. The City Manager shall decide the number of alternate members to appoint from time to time. Each alternate member shall be a resident of the City, shall not occupy any other public office, shall not be publicly employed, and shall hold office as an alternate for a single term of five years until his or her time expires or he or she resigns. Additional terms as an alternate shall be as set forth above. Each alternate so appointed shall be designated by seniority. In the event that a standing member of the Board of Review is removed or unable to serve for any reason, the alternate with the most seniority shall serve in his or her stead. 
(Code 1976, § 2.20.010; Ord. No. 87-519, § 3, 1987; Ord. No. 2018-721, § I, 5-14-2018 )  
Secs. 2-154—2-174. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - LIBRARY BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— City authorized to establish municipal library board, Wis. Stats. § 43.52. 
 
Sec. 2-175. - Created. 
The Library Board is created by statute, especially Wis. Stats. § 43.54, and exists by virtue of the statutes, and not by reason of any ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 2.24.010)  
Secs. 2-176—2-193. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
Sec. 2-194. - Powers; duties. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals has the same powers and duties as shown in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e). Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be City of Janesville residents, except that members currently serving as of June 30, 2017 shall be permitted to complete their term even if not a resident of the City of Janesville. 
(Code 1976, § 2.28.010)  
Secs. 2-195—2-231. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - COMMITTEE (BOARD) OF PUBLIC WORKS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Board of Public Works, generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.14 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-232. - Composition; City Engineer. 
As authorized and empowered by Wis. Stats. § 62.14, in particular Wis. Stats. § 62.14(1), the "Committee of Public Works" and "Board of Public Works" of the City shall be the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 2.32.010)  
Sec. 2-233. - Powers; duties. 
The City Engineer shall have all of the powers, duties, responsibilities, obligations, rights, titles and privileges vested by state law in the Committee of Public Works and the Board of Public Works. The City Engineer is hereby vested with all power and authority, and charged with all duties and acts as prescribed in the state statutes for a Board and/or Committee of Public Works. Whenever and wherever reference in any City Charter or General Ordinance, resolution, policy statement, by-law, rule, contract or other document is made to the Committee of Public Works or Board of Public Works, those terms shall henceforth mean the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 2.32.020)  
Sec. 2-234. - Charter ordinance. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0101, as from time to time amended or renumbered, concerning Charter Ordinances, this Charter Ordinance shall apply regardless of any other ordinance or Wisconsin state statute to the contrary which shall cease to be in effect in Janesville, pursuant hereto and Wis. Stats. § 66.0101(4) and other applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1976, § 2.32.030)  
Secs. 2-235—2-261. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— City fire departments, Wis. Stats. § 62.13; rest days for firemen, Wis. Stats. § 213.13. 
 
Sec. 2-262. - Membership. 
The Fire Department shall consist of a Chief, one or more mechanics, one or more fire prevention personnel, and such other firefighters and employees as may from time to time be appointed pursuant to the Statutes of Wisconsin, the ordinances and resolutions of the Council, and the rules and regulations governing such department. 
(Code 1976, § 2.36.010; Ord. No. 77-46, § 1, 1977)  
Sec. 2-263. - Chief; duties. 
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have command of the Fire Department of the City, subject to the direction of the City Manager. It shall also be the Chief's duty to see that all rules and regulations, which are now in force or may hereafter be adopted, pertaining to such department are enforced. The Chief shall make all inspections provided by law, and shall keep adequate and complete records of all activities of the Chief's department. The Chief shall also have the care and custody of all property used in the department and it shall be the Chief's duty to see that all equipment is kept in first class working order. 
(Code 1976, § 2.36.020)  
Sec. 2-264. - Captains, mechanics, electrician and fire prevention inspector; duties. 
The captains in the Fire Department and also the mechanics, electrician and fire prevention inspector shall exercise such authority and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Chief of the department. 
(Code 1976, § 2.36.030)  
Sec. 2-265. - Chief; fire investigation; recordkeeping. 
The Chief of the Fire Department shall investigate or cause to be investigated the cause of all fires which may occur in the City as soon as possible after they occur, and shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record thereof and of the evidence in each case, and shall file the same, or a copy thereof, in the office of the Chief. 
(Code 1976, § 2.36.040)  
Sec. 2-266. - Chief; inspections; right of entry when; report to City Manager. 
The Chief of the Fire Department shall make such inspections or cause such inspections to be made as may be necessary to ascertain whether any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated and, for that purpose, the Chief and the Chief's designees are authorized to enter any building and upon all premises at any reasonable time. In any case that any fire hazard or danger exists which should be remedied, it shall be the Chief's duty to give such directions in respect thereto as the Chief deems necessary. If such directions are not complied with, the Chief of the Fire Department is to report thereon to the City Manager. 
(Code 1976, § 2.36.050)  
Sec. 2-267. - Building alterations within fire limits; approval required. 
No person, partnership or corporation shall directly or indirectly erect or construct any building or structure nor add to, enlarge, improve, move, convert, extend or structurally alter any building or structure or cause the same to be done without first having obtained the approval of the Chief of the Fire Department when the building or structure is within the fire limits. 
(Code 1976, § 2.36.060; Ord. No. 82-301, § 4, 1982)  
Sec. 2-268. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the City a forfeiture not exceeding $50.00 together with the costs of prosecution for each offense. Each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In default of the payment of such penalty, such violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 2.36.080)  
Secs. 2-269—2-299. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning police departments in cities, Wis. Stats. § 62.13; statutory provisions concerning pensions, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.13(9), 66.90. 
 
Sec. 2-300. - Membership; appointment when; compensation. 
The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police and such other officers, assistants and employees as may from time to time be appointed, pursuant to the provisions of the statutes of Wisconsin, the ordinances and resolutions of the Council, and the rules and regulations governing such department. The City Manager shall also have the power to appoint from time to time such special police as may, in the City Manager's judgment, be deemed necessary, the same to serve either with or without compensation as ordered by the City Manager. 
(Code 1976, § 2.40.010; Ord. No. 77-46, § 2, 1977)  
Sec. 2-301. - Chief of Police; rules and regulations; enforcement authority; recordkeeping duties. 
The Chief of Police shall have command of the Police Force of the City, subject to the direction of the City Manager. It shall also be the Chief's duty to see that all rules and regulations which are now in force, or may hereafter be adopted, pertaining to such department, are enforced. The Chief shall keep adequate and complete records of all Police Department activities. 
(Code 1976, § 2.40.020)  
Sec. 2-302. - Captains of Police; authority; duties. 
The Captains of Police shall exercise such authority and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Chief of the Department. 
(Code 1976, § 2.40.030; Ord. No. 77-46, § 3, 1977)  
Sec. 2-303. - Powers and duties. 
The Chief of Police and all members of the department shall have such power and authority, and shall perform such duties as prescribed by the statutes of the state. It shall be their duty to enforce any and all statutes of the state government which may be applicable to the City, all ordinances of the City, and all rules, resolutions, regulations, and orders lawfully prescribed by the City Council or City Manager. It shall also be their duty to familiarize themselves with the provisions of the police manual and to govern themselves in accordance with the requirements of said manual. 
(Code 1976, § 2.40.040)  
Sec. 2-304. - Parking enforcement personnel; appointment; duties. 
(a)  The Chief of Police, by and with the approval of the City Manager, may appoint parking enforcement personnel who will be civilian personnel under the jurisdiction and direction of the Chief of Police. These appointments may include persons not primarily employed by the City, who shall be limited to enforcement on county property. 
(b)  Their duties shall be to patrol assigned areas during designated times to check for parking violations, to issue violation notices on forms prepared by the department, to answer inquiries and give directions to the public, to report defective or damaged meters and to perform other assigned duties related to those enumerated. 
(c)  Such parking enforcement personnel shall not be police officers and shall have no power to arrest. 
(Code 1976, § 2.40.050; Ord. No. 79-151, §§ 1, 2, 1979)  
Secs. 2-305—2-326. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Cities authorized to establish board of police and fire commissioners, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.13, 64.10. 
 
Sec. 2-327. - Appointment; powers; duties. 
(a)  A Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall be appointed in the manner provided and having the powers and duties specified in Wis. Stats. § 62.13. 
(b)  A commissioner shall be appointed for a single term of five years. There shall be an exception to the provisions of this section for any appointee who is, by virtue of his or her unique knowledge or critical capacity within an unfinished project, considered by the City Manager to be indispensable at the time of his or her term expiration. He or she may then be appointed for an additional term. 
(c)  The board shall be empowered to appoint auxiliary police on an inactive status to be placed on an active basis pursuant to provisions of Chapter 24, Article III, Division 5. 
(Code 1976, § 2.40.010; Ord. No. 87-519, § 2, 1987)  
Secs. 2-328—2-357. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - PLAN COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions authorizing any City authorized to establish City Plan Commission, Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
 
Sec. 2-358. - Creation; powers; duties; qualifications. 
There is created, under and pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23, a City Plan Commission to consist of seven members whose organization, powers, duties and qualifications shall be as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(Code 1976, § 2.48.010)  
Sec. 2-359. - Charter ordinance; Plan Commission membership and appointments; Council confirmation. 
The City Plan Commission shall consist of one member of the City Council and six City citizen members. The members of the Plan Commission shall select their own presiding officer, from time to time. The Councilmember on the Plan Commission shall be appointed by the Council President, subject to confirmation by the City Council, in accord with Janesville Charter Ordinance No. 80-A adopting Charter Ordinance Section 2-33. The City Manager shall continue to appoint the non-Councilmembers to the Plan Commission, which appointments shall remain not subject to Council approval. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0101, as from time to time amended or renumbered, concerning Charter Ordinances, this Charter Ordinance shall apply regardless of any other ordinance or Wisconsin state statute to the contrary which shall cease to be in effect in Janesville, pursuant hereto and Wis. Stats. § 66.0101(4) and other applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1976, § 2.48.020)  
Sec. 2-360. - Election; appointment; term of office. 
The member of the City Plan Commission from the Council, and likewise the citizen members of said commission, shall be elected or appointed for such terms and in such manner, all as provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.23, as from time to time amended or renumbered, except as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 2.48.030)  
Sec. 2-361. - Qualification; vacancy; compensation. 
All citizen members of the City Plan Commission shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications. Such members of the commission shall hold office until their respective successors are selected and qualified. Whenever a vacancy occurs in the term of any citizen member, a successor shall be appointed in the manner as provided by statute to fill such unexpired term. No member of such commission shall receive any compensation for his or her services as such member. 
(Code 1976, § 2.48.040)  
Sec. 2-362. - Powers; authority; duties; qualifications. 
The City Plan Commission shall have all the power, authority, duties and qualifications as are now, or may hereafter be, provided by the statutes of the state, and such further power, authority, duties and qualifications as may be prescribed by resolution or ordinance of the Council. 
(Code 1976, § 2.48.050)  
Secs. 2-363—2-382. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ELECTION 
 
Sec. 2-383. - Creation. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 7.52 and 7.53(2)(m), there is created a Board of Absentee Ballot Canvassers.  
Sec. 2-384. - Composition. 
The Board of Absentee Ballot Canvassers shall be composed of the City Clerk, or a qualified elector of the City designated by the City Clerk, and two other qualified electors of the City appointed by the City Clerk for a term of two years commencing on January 1 of each odd-numbered year, except that any member who is appointed to fill a permanent vacancy shall serve for the unexpired term of the original appointee. The City Clerk may appoint additional inspectors under Wis. Stats. § 7.30(2)(a), to assist the board in canvassing absentee ballots under this section. 
(Code 1976, § 2.50.020)  
Sec. 2-385. - Canvassing of absentee ballots. 
In lieu of canvassing absentee ballots at polling places under Wis. Stats. § 6.88, the board shall canvass all absentee ballots at all elections held in the City. 
(Code 1976, § 2.50.030)  
Sec. 2-386. - Counting of absentee ballots. 
At every election held in the City, the board shall, any time after the opening of the polls and before 10:00 p.m. on Election Day, publicly convene to count the absentee ballots for the City. The City Clerk shall give at least 48 hours' notice of any meeting under this section. 
(Code 1976, § 2.50.040)  
Sec. 2-387. - Posting. 
The City Clerk, no later than the closing hour of the polls, shall post at his or her office and on the Internet at a site announced by the City Clerk before the polls open, and shall make available to any person upon request, a statement of the number of absentee ballots that the City Clerk has mailed or transmitted to electors and that have been returned by the closing hour on Election Day. 
(Code 1976, § 2.50.050)  
Sec. 2-388. - Election inspector work shifts. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 7.30(1)(a), the City Clerk is authorized to set different working hours for election inspectors assigned to the same polling place. 
(Code 1976, § 2.51.010)  
Secs. 2-389—2-409. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management powers and duties of municipalities, Wis. Stats. § 323.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-410. - Defined. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means all measures undertaken by or on behalf of the state and its subdivisions to do any of the following: 
(1)  Prepare for and minimize the effect of a disaster or the imminent threat of a disaster. 
(2)  Make repairs to or restore infrastructure or critical systems that are destroyed or damaged by a disaster. 
(Code 1976, § 2.52.010)  
Sec. 2-411. - Purpose, generally. 
By reason of the increasing possibility of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness, and to ensure that preparations will be adequate to cope with such disasters, and to provide for the common defense, to protect the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare, and to preserve the lives and property of the people, it is declared necessary to: 
(1)  Establish a local civil defense organization; 
(2)  Provide for the exercise of necessary powers during civil defense emergencies; and 
(3)  Provide for the rendering of cooperation and mutual aid between this City and other political subdivisions. 
(Code 1976, § 2.52.020)  
Sec. 2-412. - Purpose; maximum coordination with existing services. 
It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the City that all emergency management functions of this City be coordinated to the maximum extent practicable with existing services and facilities of this City and with comparable functions of the federal, state and county government and other political subdivisions and of various private agencies to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may occur. 
(Code 1976, § 2.52.030)  
Sec. 2-413. - Emergency; regulations. 
Whenever necessary to meet a civil defense emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the City Council, the City Manager and, in his or her absence, the Deputy City Manager may, by proclamation, promulgate and enforce such orders, rules and regulations relating to the conduct of persons and the use of property as shall be necessary to protect the public peace, health and safety, and preserve lives and property and to ensure the cooperation necessary in civil defense activities. Such proclamation shall be posted in three public places and may be rescinded by the City Council by resolution at any time. 
(Code 1976, § 2.52.040; Ord. No. 79-159, § 2, 1979)  
Sec. 2-414. - Emergency; declaration; warnings or alerts; plan of action; termination when. 
(a)  Upon the declaration by the Governor, by the City Manager or the Deputy City Manager in the absence of the City Manager, or by the City Council of a state of emergency, the City Manager shall issue all necessary proclamations as to the existence of such state of emergency and shall issue such disaster warnings or alerts as shall be required in the emergency management plan. 
(b)  The emergency management organization shall take action in accordance with the emergency management plan only after the declaration of an emergency is issued in an official disaster warning. Such state of emergency shall continue until terminated by the issuing authority provided that any such declaration not issued by the Governor may be terminated at the discretion of the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 2.52.050; Ord. No. 79-159, § 3, 1979)  
Sec. 2-415. - Obstruction of enforcement unlawful; violation; penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil defense organization in the enforcement of any order, rule, regulation, or plan issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any order, rule, regulation, or plan issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall forfeit not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 together with the costs and disbursements of the action. In default of payment thereof, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or otherwise penalized by the court as provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 2.52.060; Ord. No. 79-159, § 4, 1979)  
Secs. 2-416—2-428. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS 
 
Sec. 2-429. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Direct financial assistance shall mean monies, in the form of a grant or other agreement or included as part of a contract, cooperative agreement, or any other arrangement, including a redevelopment agreement under Wis. Stats. § 66.1333(5), as from time to time amended or renumbered, economic development agreement, contract under Wis. Stats. § 66.1105(3), as from time to time amended or renumbered, or assistance provided under Wis. Stats. § 66.1109, as from time to time amended or renumbered, that the City directly provides or otherwise directly makes available to assist in the erection, construction, repair, remodeling, demolition of a private facility. The term "direct financial assistance" does not include any of the following: a public works contract, a supply procurement contract, a contract of insurance of guaranty, a collective bargaining agreement, or any other contract under which monies are not directly provided or otherwise directly made available for that assistance. 
Person shall mean each person, firm, partnership, corporation, cooperative, joint venture, organization and entity of whatsoever kind or nature. 
Public works construction shall mean building or work involving the erection, construction, remodeling, or demolishing of a public work for the City. The term "public works construction" does not include a project in which the labor for the project is provided by unpaid volunteers, minor service or maintenance work, warranty work, or work under a supply and installation contract. The term "public works construction" includes all of the following: 
(1)  A highway, street, bridge, building, or other infrastructure project. 
(2)  A project erected, constructed, repaired, remodeled, demolished by one local governmental unit for another local governmental unit under a contract under Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0301(2), 83.03, 83.035, or 86.31(2)(b), as from time to time amended or renumbered, or under any other statute specifically authorizing cooperation between local governmental units. 
(3)  A project in which the completed facility is leased, purchased, lease purchased, or otherwise acquired by, or dedicated to, a local governmental unit in lieu of the local governmental unit contracting for the erection, construction, repair, remodeling, demolition of the facility. 
(4)  A road, street, bridge, sanitary sewer, or water main project in which the completed road, street, bridge, sanitary sewer, or water main is acquired by, or dedicated to, a local governmental unit, including under Wis. Stats. § 236.13(2), as from time to time amended or renumbered, for ownership or maintenance by the local governmental unit. 
Publicly funded private construction project shall mean a construction project in which the developer, investor, or owner of the project receives direct financial assistance from the City for the erection, construction, repair, remodeling, demolition, including any alteration, painting, decorating, or grading, of a private facility, including land, a building, or other infrastructure. The term "publicly funded private construction project" does not include a project in which the labor for the project is provided by unpaid volunteers, minor service or maintenance work, warranty work, or work under a supply and installation contract. The term "publicly funded private construction project" does not include a project of public works or a housing project involving the erection, construction, repair, remodeling, demolition of any of the following: 
(1)  A residential property, if the project is supported by affordable housing grants, home improvement grants, or grants from a local housing trust fund. 
(2)  A residential property containing four dwelling units or less. 
(3)  A residential property that contains retail, office, or commercial components, if the project is intended to increase the supply of affordable housing in a community. 
(Code 1976, § 2.56.010)  
Sec. 2-430. - Application. 
(a)  This chapter shall be applicable to any public works construction project as required by Wis. Stats. § 66.0903 as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(b)  This chapter shall be applicable to any publicly funded private construction project. 
(Code 1976, § 2.56.020)  
Sec. 2-431. - Minimum wage scale. 
(a)  Establishment of minimum wage scale. Prior to the bidding or letting of a public works construction contract, the City Engineer or his or her designee shall determine the prevailing wage rate, hours of labor, and hourly basic pay rates for all trades and occupations required to complete the contemplated public works construction. In making this determination, the City Engineer shall obtain and incorporate a current schedule of prevailing wage rates from the Department of Workforce Development (DWD) and shall require the contractor to compensate its employees at the prevailing wage rate in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0903 and DWD 290 of the Administrative Code, as from time to time amended or renumbered. Except for known increases contained within the prevailing wage schedules received from DWD, the prevailing wage rates shall not change during any public works construction contract. For publicly funded private construction projects under this section, the owner or developer of the real property for which the construction is taking place shall determine the prevailing wage rate, hours of labor, and hourly basic pay rates for all trades and occupations required to complete the contemplated publicly funded private construction project. In making this determination, the owner or developer of the real property shall obtain and incorporate a current schedule of prevailing wage rates from the Department of Workforce Development (DWD) and shall require all contractors or subcontractors to compensate its employees at the prevailing wage rate in compliance state law. 
(b)  Incorporation of minimum wage scale in construction contracts. Whenever the City shall bid any public works construction contract or owner or developer of the real property for which a publicly funded private construction project is taking place enters a contract, the bidding documents and construction contracts shall contain the minimum rate of wage scale and hours of labor as determined in Subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Workers to be paid according to minimum wage scale. No laborer, worker, or mechanic employed directly upon the site of a public works construction contract or publicly funded private construction project by the contractor, or by a subcontractor, agent, or other person, doing or contracting any part of the work, may be paid less than the prevailing wage rate in the same or most similar trade or occupation; nor may he or she be permitted to work a greater number of hours per day or per calendar week than the prevailing hours of labor determined under this subsection, unless he or she is paid for all hours in excess of the prevailing hours of labor at a rate of at least 1½ times his or her hourly basic rate of pay. An employee's classification shall not be changed to a classification of a lesser rate during the contract. 
(d)  Resolving questions about minimum wage scale and/or hours. Questions regarding employee classification, rate of pay, or hours of labor shall be resolved by reference to the established practice that predominates in the industry and on which the trade or occupation classification is based. The determination of the City Engineer shall be final. 
(Code 1976, § 2.56.030)  
Sec. 2-432. - Records and compliance. 
(a)  Contractor records. Each contractor, subcontractor, or agent thereof participating in a public works construction contract or publicly funded private construction project covered by this chapter shall keep full and accurate records clearly indicating the name and trade or occupation classification of every laborer, worker, or mechanic employed thereby in connection with the project. The contractor records shall include an accurate record of the number of hours worked by each employee and the actual wages paid therefor. The contractor shall require, and each subcontractor or agent shall provide, the contractor with evidence of compliance with the provisions of this subsection. 
(b)  Evidence of compliance. Upon completion of the public works construction project and prior to the final payment therefor, each contractor shall file with the Janesville City Engineering Department an affidavit stating that the contractor has fully complied with the provisions and requirements of this chapter, and that the contractor has received evidence of compliance from each of the contractor's subcontractors and agents. No final payment shall be made until such an affidavit is filed in proper form and order. For publicly funded private construction projects, the evidence and affidavit of compliance from each agent or subcontractor shall be filed with the contractor. The contractor may not authorize final payment until the affidavit is filed in proper form and order. 
(c)  Complaints. Complaints made against any of the provisions of this chapter may be investigated by the City Engineer or his or her designee, or may be referred to DWD in accordance with state law. The City Engineer or his or her designee, may demand and examine copies of any weekly payrolls and other records and information relating to the wages paid to laborers, workers, and/or mechanics on public works construction contracts or publicly funded private construction projects covered by this chapter. 
(d)  Inspection. 
(1)  The contractor shall at all times maintain all records pertaining to the contract and make all such records available for inspection by the City and each and every of its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, representatives, or agents. 
(2)  Inspection by the City and related others shall be permitted by the contractor even without prior notice during normal business hours. 
(3)  Failure to permit any inspection shall constitute a separate violation, each day's continuance constituting a separate violation. 
(Code 1976, § 2.56.040)  
Sec. 2-433. - Posting of wage scale. 
For the information of the employees working on the public works construction contract or publicly funded private construction project, the minimum wage rates and hours of labor determined under Section 2-431(a) shall be kept posted by the contractor in at least one conspicuous and easily accessible place at the site of the public works construction contract or publicly funded private construction project. 
(Code 1976, § 2.56.050)  
Sec. 2-434. - Use of city employees on building or public works construction. 
No provision in this chapter shall be interpreted as in any way limiting the City's right to use City employees to perform building or work or public works construction consistent with state statutes. 
(Code 1976, § 2.56.060)  
Sec. 2-435. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any rate of wage, hours of labor, related to or other provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeiture to the City of not less than $100.00 nor more than $5,000.00 for each violation, together with the costs of prosecution. Upon default in forfeiture payment, such person shall be incarcerated for not more than 90 days or otherwise penalized as provided by law. 
(b)  The failure to pay the required wage to an employee for any one week or part thereof shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Each day that a person fails to pay the required wage to an eligible employee once it is determined that such wage should have been or should be paid shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  In addition to and not in lieu of any other penalty or forfeiture provided in this chapter, the City may seek injunctive relief. 
(e)  In addition to and not in lieu of any other penalty or forfeiture provided in this chapter, the City may disqualify, refuse to prequalify, and/or refuse to contract with any person who violates any provision of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 2.56.070)  
Secs. 2-436—2-458. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RECORDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-459—2-489. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY RECORDS 
 
Sec. 2-490. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authority means any of the following City entities having custody of a City record; an office, elected official, agency, board, commission, committee, council, department or public body corporate ad politic created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted subunit of the foregoing. 
Custodian means that officer, department head, division head, or employee of the City designated under Section 2-492 or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any City records or file, deposit or keep such records in his or her office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such public records and who is required by this chapter to respond to requests for access to such records. 
Record means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an authority. The term "record" includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), and computer printouts. The term "record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working; materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have no relation to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at a public library. 
(Code 1976, § 2.58.010; Ord. No. 83-322, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 2-491. - Duty to maintain records. 
(a)  Except as provided under Chapter 2, Article VIII, Division 3, each officer and employee of the City shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his or her predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his or her office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the officer or employee or his or her deputies, or to the possession or control of which he or she or they may be lawfully entitled as such officers or employees. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term of employment, or whenever the office or position of employment becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his or her successor all records then in his or her custody and the successor shall receipt therefore to the officer or employee, who shall file said receipt with the City Clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and receipted for by the officer's or employee's supervisor, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt. 
(Code 1976, § 2.58.020; Ord. No. 83-322, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 2-492. - Legal custodian. 
(a)  Each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records and the records of his or her office, but the official may designate an employee of his or her staff to act as the legal custodian. 
(b)  Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the City Clerk or the Clerk's designee shall act as legal custodian for the City Council and for any committees, commissions, boards, or other authorities created by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, except the Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Planning Services Manager shall act as legal custodian for the Plan Commission. The Building and Development Services Manager shall act as the legal custodian for the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Human Resources Director shall act as the legal custodian for the Police and Fire Commission. 
(c)  The following persons shall act as legal custodians for records maintained by the City: 
(1)  The City Attorney shall act as legal custodian for records in the City Attorney's Office; 
(2)  The Director of Neighborhood and Community Services shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Department of Neighborhood and Community Services, except as otherwise specified hereafter: 
a.  The Transit Director shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Transit Division; 
b.  The Recreation Director shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Recreation Division; 
c.  The Housing Services Director shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Housing Services Division. 
(3)  The Public Works Director shall act as legal custodian for records in the Department of Public Works, except as otherwise specified hereafter: 
a.  The City Engineer shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Engineering Division; 
b.  The Planning Manager shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Planning Division; 
c.  The Building Manager shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Building Division; 
d.  The Utility Director shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Water Utility and the Wastewater Utility; 
e.  The Operations Director shall act as the legal custodian for the Operations Division; 
f.  The Parks Director shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Parks Division; 
(4)  The Chief of Police shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Police Department; 
(5)  The Fire Chief shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Fire Department; 
(6)  The Economic Development Director shall act as legal custodian for records in the Economic Development Office; 
(7)  The Library Director shall act as the legal custodian for Hedberg Public Library; 
(8)  The Human Resources Director shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Human Resources Office; 
(9)  The Finance Director shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Finance Office; 
(10)  The City Assessor shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Assessor's Office; 
(11)  The City Manager shall act as the legal custodian for records in the City Manager's Office; 
(12)  The Deputy City Manager shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Deputy City Manager's Office; 
(13)  The Information Technology Manager shall act as the legal custodian for records in the information technology division; and 
(14)  The City Clerk-Treasurer shall act as the legal custodian for records in the Clerk-Treasurer's office and for all records for which a different legal custodian has not otherwise been designated. 
(d)  Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his or her absence or disability or in case of vacancy. 
(e)  The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and to carry out the duties of an authority under Wis. Stats. ch. 19, subch. II, and this chapter. The designation of a legal custodian does not affect the powers and duties of an authority under this section. 
(f)  The legal custodian or designee shall review the requested records prior to release and shall not disclose or permit the disclosure of records or portions of records which are specifically exempt from disclosure. 
(g)  The legal custodian or designee shall provide the requested records to the City Attorney for review prior to release, except for routine matters. 
(Code 1976, § 2.58.030; Ord. No. 83-322, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 2-493. - Public access to records. 
(a)  Except as provided in Section 2-495, any person has a right to inspect a record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(b)  Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office hours. 
(c)  A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to City employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record. 
(d)  The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged. 
(e)  A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and copying records as follows: 
(1)  The reasonable cost of photocopying charged to and paid by requesters shall be established and may be adjusted, from time to time, by the City Clerk-Treasurer. 
(2)  If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing shall be charged. 
(3)  The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and audio or videotapes, shall be charged to the requester. 
(4)  If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also be charged to the requester. 
(5)  There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost therefore exceeds $5.00, in which case the actual cost shall be determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester. 
(6)  The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and may require payment in advance, if the estimate exceeds $50.00. 
(7)  Elected and appointed officials of the City shall not be required to pay for public records they may reasonably require for the proper performance of their official duties. 
(f)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.34, and the guidelines therein listed, each authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization and the established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 2.58.040; Ord. No. 83-322, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 2-494. - Access procedures. 
(a)  A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or the information requested. However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under Wis. Stats. § 19.37. Except as provided below, no request may be refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may be refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a fee is required under Section 2-493(e)(6). A requester may be required to show acceptable identification whenever the requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or regulations so require. 
(b)  Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the reason therefor. If the legal custodian, after conferring with the City Attorney, determines that a written request is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the request may first be required to itemize his or her request in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance. 
(c)  A request for a record may be denied as provided in Section 2-495. If a request is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written denial of a request shall inform the requester that if the request for the record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under Wis. Stats. § 19.37(1), or upon application to the attorney general or the district attorney. 
(Code 1976, § 2.58.050; Ord. No. 83-322, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 2-495. - Limitations on right to access. 
(a)  As provided by Wis. Stats. § 19.36, the records that are exempt from inspection under this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law; 
(2)  Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids by the state; 
(3)  Computer programs, although the material used as input for a computer program or the material produced as a product of the computer program is subject to inspection; and 
(4)  A record or any portion of a record containing information qualifying as a common law trade secret. 
(b)  As provided by Wis. Stats. § 43.30, public library circulation records are exempt from inspection under this section. 
(c)  As provided by Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), as from time to time amended or renumbered, any and all income and expense data, information, forms and records pertaining to income method valuation and assessment of property provided by a property owner or possessor, or persons acting on his or her behalf to the City Assessor shall be kept confidential, except for persons using the information in the discharge of duties imposed by law or of the duties of the office or by order of a court. The information that is provided under this subsection, unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is not subject to the right of inspection and copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1) or any other City ordinance notwithstanding. In the event that a property owner or his or her agent or representative makes the information public by appearance or use at a Board of Review hearing, or makes the information public at any other time or place, then such information shall cease to be confidential and shall be considered public, in which event, the assessor and/or his or her staff, representatives and agents may use the information publicly for any purposes, including, but not limited to, at the Board of Review hearing and related proceedings without prior notice to the property owner or possessor. 
(d)  In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the City Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in part, if he or she determines that the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Records of deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing; 
(2)  Records of deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensation, performance, or discipline of any City officer or employee, or the investigation of charges against a City officer or employee, unless the officer or employee consents to such disclosure; 
(3)  Records concerning strategy for crime detection or prevention; 
(4)  Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase or sale of City property, investing of City funds, or other City business whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure; 
(5)  Financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person referred to in such history or data; 
(6)  Communications between legal counsel for the City and any officer, agent or employee or the City, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in which the City or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is likely to become involved, or communications which are privileged under Wis. Stats. § 905.03. 
(e)  If a record contains information that may be made public and information that may not be made public, the legal custodian of the record shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the information that may not be made public from the record before release. The legal custodian shall confer with the City Attorney prior to releasing any such record. If in the judgment of the legal custodian and the City Attorney there is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be withheld from disclosure. 
(f)  There is no right to access to any record which has been legally destroyed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2, Article VIII, Division 3. 
(Code 1976, § 2.58.060; Ord. No. 83-322, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 2-496. - Preservation through microfilm. 
Any City officer, or the director of any department or division of City government, may keep and preserve public record in his or her possession by means of microfilm, PDF, or other photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the standards for photographic reproduction set forth in Wis. Stats. § 16.61(7)(a) and (b), and shall be considered preserved along with other files of the department or division, shall be open to public inspection and copying according to the provision of state law and of this chapter, and may be destroyed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2, Article VIII, Division 3. 
(Code 1976, § 2.58.070; Ord. No. 83-322, § 1(part), 1983)  
Secs. 2-497—2-520. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC RECORDS 
 
Sec. 2-521. - Financial records. 
City officers may destroy non-utility records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete, after completion of any required audit by the Bureau of Municipal Audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 442, but not less than seven years after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular transaction, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the State Public Records Board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such shorter period. 
(Code 1976, § 2.60.010; Ord. No. 82-308, (part), 1982)  
Sec. 2-522. - Utility records. 
City officers may destroy utility records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete, after completion of any required audit by the Bureau of Municipal Audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 442, subject to state public Service Commission regulations, but not less than seven years after the record was effective, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the State Public Records Board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such shorter period, except that water stubs, receipts of current billings and customer's ledgers may be destroyed after two years. 
(Code 1976, § 2.60.020; Ord. No. 82-308, (part), 1982)  
Sec. 2-523. - Audio and video recordings. 
City officers may destroy, erase, and/or reuse any audio or video recordings made for security purposes after 121 days if approved by the Public Records Board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e) and the notice requirements are met in Section 2-525 unless waived by the State Historical Society of Wisconsin and the Rock County Historical Society. These recordings include, but are not limited to, police officer body cameras, bus surveillance video, N. Parker Drive parking garage surveillance video, Transit Center surveillance video, and/or similar video or audio recording devices at similar places, and/or upon any such medium or device. 
(Code 1976, § 2.60.030)  
Sec. 2-524. - Other records. 
City officers may destroy any other records of which they are the legal custodian and which are considered obsolete, but not less than seven years after the record was effective unless another period has been set by statute, and then after such a period, or unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state Public Records Board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such a shorter period. 
(Code 1976, § 2.60.040; Ord. No. 82-308, (part), 1982)  
Sec. 2-525. - Historical society notification. 
Prior to the destruction of any public record described in Sections 2-521, 2-522, 2-523, or 2-524 at least 60 days' notice in writing shall be given to the State Historical Society of Wisconsin and to the Rock County Historical Society. 
(Code 1976, § 2.60.050; Ord. No. 82-308, (part), 1982)  
Sec. 2-526. - Governmental meeting recordings. 
Any audiotape recordings of a governmental meeting of the City may be destroyed, erased or reused no sooner than 90 days after the minutes of the meeting have been approved and published, if the purpose of the recording was to make minutes of the meeting. 
(Code 1976, § 2.60.060; Ord. No. 83-322, § 3, 1983)  
Sec. 2-527. - Electronic records management. 
Chapter 12 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code (Wis. Admin. Code ch. 12) relating to electronic records management standards and requirements is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 2.60.070)  
Sec. 2-528. - Auto delete software. 
No City elected or appointed official shall load or use auto delete software of any kind that auto deletes e-mails, text messages or other electronic messages, etc., on any devices of any kind, including, but not limited to, computers, tablet devices, phones, or cell phones, or on any social media site used for City work purposes regardless of where the software is located. 
(Code 1976, § 2.60.080)  
Sec. 2-529. - Limitation. 
This chapter shall not be construed to authorize the destruction of any public record after a period less than prescribed by statute or State Administrative Regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 2.60.090; Ord. No. 82-308, (part), 1982; Ord. No. 83-322, § 2, 1983)  
Chapter 4 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS LICENSING, REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power of municipalities to prohibit criminal conduct, Wis. Stats. § 66.0107; obscene material or performance, Wis. Stats. § 944.21. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Preamble; purpose. 
(a)  It is a lawful purpose of the City Council for the City of Janesville to enact regulatory ordinances protecting and promoting the general welfare, peace, security, health and safety of its citizens, and good order of the City and its neighborhoods. 
(b)  The City is empowered to enact such ordinances pursuant to Article XI, Section 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution, and Wis. Stats. §§ 62.11(5), 62.23, 66.0101, 66.0107, and other Home Rule, police power and applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, all as from time to time amended or renumbered, for the public health, welfare, peace, tranquility, good order and public benefit. 
(c)  It is the purpose of this chapter and its component related ordinances herein to regulate public nudity and sexually oriented activities to protect and promote the general welfare, peace, security, health and safety of its citizens, and good order of the City and its neighborhoods; to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City; to reasonably license such activities to facilitate the public welfare; and to limit the negative, adverse and undesirable secondary effects flowing from such establishments. 
(d)  The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials, or adult entertainment; nor is it the intent or effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials or adult sexually oriented entertainment protected by the First Amendment, nor to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment in their intended market; nor is it the intent or effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials. 
(e)  The City Council, based upon the actual experience, studies, findings and reports of other cities, communities and local governments from across the United States, including, but not limited to, Erie, Pennsylvania; Seattle and Renton, Washington; Detroit, Michigan; Phoenix and Tucson, Arizona; Los Angeles and Whittier California; Times Square, New York, New York; Cleveland, Ohio; Austin, Dallas, Houston, El Paso and Amarillo, Texas; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Indianapolis, Indiana; St. Paul and Minneapolis, Minnesota; to name a few, find that: 
(1)  Adult oriented entertainment establishments and public nudity in such establishments by performers, employees and patrons, can and do contribute to the impairment of the character and quality of surrounding residential neighborhoods; 
(2)  Contribute to the decline and the value of surrounding properties; 
(3)  Contribute to physical deterioration and blight of neighborhoods; 
(4)  Have a deleterious effect on both existing businesses around them and surrounding residential areas, including increased transiency, increased levels of criminal activities including prostitution, promotion of prostitution, rape, sexual assaults, other assaults, other sex related crimes; robbery; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual molestation; molestation of a child; disorderly conduct; disturbances of the peace; drinking in public; littering; and other violations of the law; 
(5)  Contribute to the impairment of the character and quality of a surrounding residential neighborhood; 
(6)  Contribute to a decline in the value of surrounding properties which in turn could and often do have a detrimental effect upon development, growth of nearby development and tax incremental financing districts; 
(7)  Harm the economic welfare of the communities; 
(8)  Negatively and adversely affect the quality of life in the communities; 
(9)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to unhealthy activities that are generally uncontrolled by owners and operators without regulations and that there is presently no mechanism without this chapter to effectively make the owners and operators of such establishments responsible for the activities that occur upon the premises; 
(10)  Crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex-related crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where sexually oriented businesses are located; 
(11)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. See, e.g., California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 111 (1972). See also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377; 
(12)  Offering and providing such booths and/or cubicles encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 376-77; 
(13)  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. See, e.g., Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, 698 (1986). See also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 376-77; 
(14)  Many adult entertainment establishments provide live entertainment in which physical contact between performers and customers, often sexual in nature, occurs and can occur, thus facilitating the transmission of various diseases, including AIDS; 
(15)  In Milwaukee and Kenosha Counties, Wisconsin; the City of Waukesha, Wisconsin; Chattanooga, Tennessee; Newport News, Virginia; and Marion County, Indiana, to name a few locales, it has been found that the viewing booths in adult oriented establishment have been and are being used by patrons of said establishments for engaging in sexual acts, particularly between males, including, but not limited to, intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation and masturbation, resulting in unsafe and unsanitary conditions in said booths; 
(16)  Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is a sexually transmitted disease which destroys the body's immune system, is fatal, and has no known cure; 
(17)  The viral agents responsible for AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases have all been isolated at one time or another from semen; 
(18)  At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, genital chlamydia trachomatis, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non-A, Non-B amebiasis, salmonella infections, and shigella infections. See, e.g., Study of Fort Meyers, Florida; 
(19)  As of December, 1996, the total number of reported cases of AIDS in the United States caused by the immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was 581,429. See, e.g., Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at www.cdc.gov; 
(20)  In 1989, statistics from the State of Wisconsin had indicated that as of July 25, 1986, 96 cases of AIDS were reported in the State including 54 that resulted in death and that Wisconsin could expect a tenfold increase in reported cases between 1986 and 1991; 
(21)  As of January 1, 1995, the State of Wisconsin Department of Health and Social Services, Division of Public Health is projecting between 900 and 1,300 new cases of AIDS during 1995 and 1996; 
(22)  The total number of cases of genital chlamydia trachomatis infections in the United States reported in 1997 was 526,653, an eight percent increase over the year 1996. See, e.g., Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at www.cdc.gov; 
(23)  The total number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported during the 12-year period 1985-1997 was 387,233. See, e.g., Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at www.cdc.gov; 
(24)  The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level, with a total of 1,901,365 cases reported during the period 1993 to 1997. See, e.g., Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at www.cdc.gov; 
(25)  The surgeon general of the United States in his or her report of October 22, 1986, advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug use, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn; 
(26)  According to the best scientific evidence available, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. See, e.g., Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at www.cdc.gov; 
(27)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's commission on Pornography (1986) at 377; 
(28)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that bodily fluids, including semen and urine, are found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view adult oriented films. See, e.g., Final report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377; 
(29)  Nude dancing in adult establishments encourages prostitution, increases sexual assaults, and attracts other criminal activity. See, e.g., Barnes v. Glen Theatre, 501 U.S. 560, 583, (1991); 
(30)  Nude dancing in adult establishments increases the likelihood of drug-dealing and drug use. See, e.g., Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F. 2d 1053, 1056 (9th Cir. 1986); 
(31)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics that should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns; 
(32)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators of sexually oriented businesses. Further, such licensing procedure will place a heretofore non-existent incentive on operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the City. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein; 
(33)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on the premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult establishments; 
(34)  The disclosure of certain information by those ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and criminal activity; 
(35)  The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license has been convicted of a sex-related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention to this chapter; 
(36)  Such secondary effects are detrimental to the public health, safety, peace, tranquility, and general good order of the community and welfare of the citizens. 
(f)  The United States Supreme Court and various Federal and state courts have held that a local unit of government, such as the City of Janesville, may rely upon and incorporate by reference such findings and experiences into its own findings and legitimate concerns about the adverse and undesirable secondary effects arising from and pertaining to adult oriented entertainment establishments, public nudity therein, crime, prostitution, gambling, littering, and the other adverse secondary impacts described in this chapter, and jointly and severally use such findings and determinations of the United States Supreme Court in previous rulings, as well, including, but not limited to, City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 146 L. Ed. 2d 265, 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697 (1986); Iacobucci v. City of Newport, Ky, 479 U.S. 92 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres , 426 U.S. 50 (1976); California v. LaRue , 409 U.S. 109 (1972); United States v. O'Brien, 39 U.S. 367 (1968); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F. 3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Key, Inc. v. Kitsap County , 793 F. 2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); South Florida Free Beaches, Inc. v. City of Miami, 734 F. 2d 608 (11th Cir. 1984); and N.W. Enterprises v. City of Houston, 27 F. Supp. 2d 754 (S.D. Tex. 1998), as the basis for content neutral regulation of such establishments and the behavior therein without affecting the substance of verbal or non-verbal speech, with the legitimate intent and goal of reducing or eliminating such negative secondary effects to as great a degree as possible. 
(g)  The Janesville City Council believes that the experiences, evidence and studies from the other cities and communities cited, set forth herein, and/or considered by the City Council in whole, part or summary, are relevant and important in understanding and addressing the secondary effects adult entertainment and oriented establishments can and do have upon neighborhoods, persons, economies, the areas surrounding such establishments and the City of Janesville. 
(h)  The City Council of the City of Janesville rely upon the findings, studies, evidence and experiences of such other cities and communities, and previous applicable United States Supreme Court and other Federal and state court holdings, and hereby adopt and incorporate such findings, studies, evidence, experiences and court rulings and holdings herein by reference as if fully set forth verbatim as part of their findings and basis for this chapter and its regulations. 
(i)  Adult oriented establishments in proximity to residential areas, churches, parks, and schools may and do often lead to an increase in criminal activities in the surrounding areas and the City desires to protect the youth of the community from the deleterious effects such businesses can have on adjacent areas by restricting their close proximity to places of worship, schools and residential areas; and protect its citizens and residents from increased crime, ordinance violations, such as, but not limited to, disorderly conduct, drinking in public, possession of intoxicants by underage persons, public disturbances of the peace, littering, illegal drug use and sales, prostitution and gambling. 
(j)  Among these secondary effects described in greater detail above are the potential increase in prostitution and other sex-related offenses, as well as other crimes and offenses, the potential depreciation of property values in neighborhoods where bars and taverns featuring nude dancing exist, health risks associated with the spread of sexually transmitted diseases, and the potential for infiltration by organized crime for the purpose of unlawful conduct. 
(k)  The City Council of the City of Janesville recognize they lack authority to regulate obscenity in light of Wis. Stats. § 66.0107(3) and do not intend by adopting this chapter to regulate obscenity, since nudity in and of itself is not obscene, and declare their intent to enact an ordinance addressing the secondary effects of live, totally nude, non-obscene, erotic dancing in bars, taverns and other adult oriented establishments. 
(l)  The City Council recognize that the U.S. Supreme Court has held that nude dancing is expressive conduct within the outer perimeters of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and therefore entitled to some limited protection under the First Amendment, and the governing body further recognizes that freedom of speech is among our most precious and highly protected rights, and wishes to act consistently with full protection of those rights. 
(m)  This governing body desires to minimize, prevent and control these adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Janesville; protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods; deter the spread of urban blight; and assure and facilitate the health, welfare, peace, tranquility and good order of the City of Janesville and its residents and neighborhoods. 
(n)  The governing body has determined that enactment of this chapter legitimately promotes the valid goals and intent of minimizing, preventing and controlling the negative and adverse secondary effects associated with such activities, and does so in a content neutral manner while preserving numerous other means of free expression while regulating only certain behavior in a uniform yet limited manner. 
(o)  The United States Supreme Court in the case of City of Renton vs. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41, 106 S. Ct., 925, 89 L. Ed., 2d, 29 (1986) and Young vs. American Mini Theaters, 427 U.S. 50, 96 S. Ct., 2440, 49 L. Ed., 2d, 310 (1976) have approved efforts by local governments to regulate the location of adult oriented establishments through land use plans. 
(p)  A reasonable regulation of the location of adult entertainment establishments will provide for the protection of the image of the community and its property values and protect the residents of the community from the adverse secondary effects of an adult oriented establishment, while providing to those who desire to patronize adult oriented establishments, such an opportunity in areas within the City which are appropriate for a location of adult oriented establishments, while reasonably regulating the disorderly effects of public nudity as herein defined. 
(q)  Pursuant to the City of Janesville's authority, and in furtherance of the legitimate and reasonable health, welfare, peace, tranquility, safety, good order police power interest intent, goals and content neutral objectives of the City Council as set forth in this chapter and related ordinances, that the City Council hereby find compelling and substantial, it is the intent of the City Council to adopt by ordinance reasonable regulations, including the licensing and restricting the location of adult oriented establishments, as defined herein, to promote the City of Janesville's interest in protecting and preserving the quality of its neighborhoods, commercial districts, and quality of urban life through effective land-use planning, as well as the other legitimate governmental goals and objectives articulated and enumerated elsewhere in this chapter, all of regulations are found the least intrusive. 
(r)  Although the provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, the City Council deems it to be in the interests of the City of Janesville to provide for licensing, regulation and zoning of adult oriented establishments, including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, adult mini-motion picture establishments, adult motion picture theaters and adult cabarets to combat and curb the adverse, undesirable and harmful secondary effects of such establishments. 
(s)  The Plan Commission and City Council of the City of Janesville each separately conducted a public hearing in conjunction with and prior to the consideration and adoption of this proposed ordinance and heard testimony from proponents and opponents of the proposed ordinance, with the Plan Commission recommending the adoption of the zoning code provisions of this proposed ordinance as amendments to our existing zoning code. 
(t)  The proposed licensing, regulation and zoning ordinance jointly and severally serve and directly promote substantial and legitimate government interest and do not unreasonably limit alternative avenues of communication. Based upon the above findings and recitals, the City Council of the City of Janesville hereby adopt this chapter and its various reasonable, content-neutral and legitimate governmental interest components, provisions, re-creations, regulations and amendments. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.010)  
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment that: 
(1)  As one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazine, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motions picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
b.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use with specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  Has a facility, including, but not limited to, booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, for the presentation of adult entertainment, as defined in this chapter, including adult oriented films, movies or live performances for observation by patrons therein; or an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, for sale, rent, trade, lease, inspection or viewing, books, films, video cassettes, magazines or other periodicals, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities as defined herein. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, tavern, restaurant, cafe, or any other alcohol license and/or non-alcohol licensed commercial establishment, premises or property that regularly, commonly, habitually or consistently features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; 
(2)  Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassette, slides, photographic reproductions, or other image producing devices that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
(4)  Persons who engage in exotic or erotic dancing or performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or customers; or 
(5)  Features, provides, employs, displays, permits or allows live topless or bottomless, nude or partially nude dancers, strippers, performers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers. 
Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any motion picture, live performance, display or dance of any type, that has as its dominant theme or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any actual or simulated specified sexual activities or the exposure of any specified anatomical areas as herein defined. 
Adult entertainment establishment. See Adult oriented establishment. 
Adult entertainment license means a license required and issued under this chapter. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material having as its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to actual or simulated specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as herein defined for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material having as its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to actual or simulated specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as herein defined for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult oriented establishment means: 
(1)  Any premises, property, establishment, site, building, location, or part or portion thereof, including, but not limited to, adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult video store, adult entertainment establishments, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture establishments or adult cabarets, and those locations in which any person, directly or indirectly engages in, permits, employs, solicits, offers, produces, gives, displays, presents, conducts and/or provides live or recorded nude or semi-nude dancing, singing, performances, exhibits, and/or activities. 
(2)  It further includes any premises or business to which public patrons or members are invited or admitted with or without fee or charge, and that are so physically constructed or arranged so as to: 
a.  Provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments, or stalls separate from the common area of the premises for the purposes of viewing adult oriented motion pictures; and/or 
b.  Wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, and/or live adult entertainment of any kind occurs, whether or not such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated, offered, provided or maintained for remuneration or a profit, direct or indirect. 
(3)  The term "adult oriented establishment" further includes, without being limited to, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that is physically arranged and used as such whether or not advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio, or any other term of like import. 
Booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls means: 
(1)  Enclosures that are specifically offered to the public or members of an adult oriented establishment for hire or for a fee as part of a business operated on the premises that offers as part of its business the adult entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure. This shall include, without limitation, all enclosures wherein the entertainment is dispensed for a fee, but a fee is not charged for mere access to the enclosure. 
(2)  Exceptions: Booth, cubicle, room, compartment or stall shall not mean or include such enclosures that are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, which enclosures are not held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or for the purpose of viewing entertainment for a fee, are not open to any persons other than employees; nor shall this definition apply to private motel and hotel sleep rooms, boarding house rooms, private residences and places of abode, or other similar establishments licensed by the State of Wisconsin pursuant to Chapter 50 of the Wisconsin Statutes (Wis. Stats. ch. 50), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
City Council means the City Council for the City of Janesville, County of Rock County, State of Wisconsin. 
Genitals means the visible and related human sex organs, including, but not limited to, the penis, testicles and vulva. 
Nudity or state of nudity means the intentional or knowing showing or revealing of a human bare buttock, anus, perineum, anal region, anal or natal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, testicle, female genitals, or vulva, or female nipple, female areola, or female breast below the point immediately above the top of the areola, whether or not in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, with less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing or revealing of human male genitals in a discernible erect or turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Operator means any person, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, joint venture, assembly, organization or legal or other entity, of whatever kind or nature, whether for profit, non-stock or non-profit, and includes the agent, person in charge, manager and/or other principal, that owns, leases, rents, possesses, operates, conducts, maintains, manages, oversees in any capacity or manner, or acts as a principal of any adult oriented establishment or adult entertainment establishment, or who by law or operation of facts directly or vicariously is, acts, holds himself or herself out to be an operator and/or responsible for the adult entertainment establishment and the activities occurring therein. 
Person includes, but is not limited to, an operator, other legal entity, patron, employee, performer or other natural person. 
Principal business purposes means if materials offered for sale or rental depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas generate ten percent or more of the business' income, or account for ten percent (or more of inventory, or occupy ten percent or more of total floor space. A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store for purposes of this chapter. Such other business purposes shall not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult book store or adult video store so long as one of its principal purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials that depict or describe "specified sexual activities or "specified anatomical areas." 
Private viewing means viewing by one person in a separate room, booth, cubicle or facility. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, perineum, anal region, natal or anal cleft, female nipples, female areola, and female breasts below the point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible erect or turgid state, even if opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes actual or simulated: 
(1)  Showing or revealing of his or her human genitals, the pubic region, perineum, anal region, natal or anal cleft, female nipples, female areola, whether or not in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, with less than a fully opaque covering. 
(2)  Showing of acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sado-masochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus. 
(3)  Fondling or touching of human genitals, the pubic region, perineum, anal region, natal or anal cleft, female nipples, female areola, whether of himself or herself or another. 
Turgid means swollen, in a state of distension, or erect. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.020)  
Sec. 4-3. - License—Required; adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Except as exempted elsewhere in this chapter, from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, no adult oriented establishment or adult entertainment establishment shall be operated or maintained in the City of Janesville by any person without first obtaining and holding an annual adult entertainment license to operate issued by the City. 
(b)  An adult entertainment license may be issued only for one adult entertainment or oriented establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person who desires to operate more than one adult entertainment or oriented establishment must have a separate annual license for each location and site. 
(c)  No license or interest in a license may be transferred from person to person or from place to place. 
(d)  No license under this chapter may be issued for any property or business not zoned for adult entertainment establishments in the City. 
(e)  All adult oriented establishments and adult entertainment establishments existing at the time of the passage of this chapter shall submit an application for a license within 60 days of the passage of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.030)  
Sec. 4-4. - License—Application; issuance. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain and hold a license shall make application to the City Clerk-Treasurer. 
(b)  The application shall request the information required by this chapter and otherwise appear as to form as the City Clerk-Treasurer may from time to time provide. 
(c)  The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the City Clerk-Treasurer. 
(d)  Each fully completed application shall be signed and dated by the applicant or a duly appointed agent for the applicant before a notary public, and filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer together with all diagrams and other information required by this chapter. 
(e)  The original and renewal license fee shall be paid by the applicant at the time the license is issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer. 
(f)  Each applicant for a license shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's legal name, current address, home telephone number, if any. 
(2)  Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(3)  The street address of the adult oriented establishment to be operated by the applicant. 
(4)  If the applicant is other than a natural person, the application shall specify: The name of the entity, the date and state of incorporation or registration, the name and address of the registered agent; the names of all principals, officers, directors, members, and general partners; the names of all managers and persons in charge; and the names of all shareholders who will directly and regularly participate in the management of the business. 
(5)  The trade or other name under which the establishment is to be operated. 
(6)  A general description of the services to be provided. 
(7)  If the establishment is not already in operation, the expected start-up date it will be open to the public. 
(8)  Every applicant shall provide with the application: 
a.  A sketch or diagram showing an accurate configuration of the premises sought to be licensed, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a reasonable designated scale with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to a reasonable accuracy. 
b.  Certified copy of domestic articles of incorporation or registration; or if a foreign entity, a certified copy of authority to do business in the state, together with all amendments thereto. 
c.  True and correct photocopy of proof of ownership to the property where the establishment is located and/or of a legal right to lease, possess and use such property/location with the owner's signature. 
d.  An accurate diagram showing that the location for which application is being made satisfies all zoning and distancing requirements of this and related ordinances. 
(g)  All questions on each application must be completed truthfully and in full in order to be processed. No license under this chapter may be issued unless the application is complete on its face with all questions answered and required information provided. An incomplete application may be rejected and not processed by the City Clerk-Treasurer and no license shall be issued for an incomplete application. 
(h)  Every applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement an application with new information received or occurring subsequent to the date that the application was originally submitted, including all renewals thereof. 
(i)  A photocopy of the filed application shall be distributed promptly by the City Clerk-Treasurer to the City Police Department and to the applicant. 
(j)  The Police Department must provide information relevant to the new or renewal application to the City Clerk-Treasurer expeditiously. 
(k)  Within 21 days of receiving a fully completed, executed, dated, and notarized application with all required attachments and addenda thereto for a new license or an application to renew a license, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted or denied, and, if denied, the reasons therefor. 
(l)  Failure or refusal of the applicant to: 
(1)  Provide information required by the application or this chapter; 
(2)  Execute and date the application; 
(3)  File a fully complete and truthful application with all attachments and documentation required by this chapter; 
(4)  Supplement information previously provided as required by this chapter; 
(5)  Appear at a reasonable time or place for examination under oath regarding such application; shall each constitute an admission and acknowledgement by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such license and the same shall be grounds for administrative denial thereof by the City Clerk-Treasurer. Such acts may also form the basis for suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of the license by the City Council after a hearing in the manner provided for in this chapter. 
(m)  The issuance of a license under this chapter is a privilege and not a right. 
(n)  Upon expiration, revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of a license issued under this chapter, the issued license shall revert back to the City. 
(o)  Prior to issuance of a license under this chapter, the premises shall be inspected by the appropriate City Code and fire officials, and county and state health officials. No license may be issued unless and until the premises satisfies every applicable city, county and state ordinance and code provision for building, plumbing, fire, electric, HVAC, zoning, parking, health, sanitation, and related laws. Those responsible for such inspections shall inform the City Clerk-Treasurer. 
(p)  A new and renewal license issued under this chapter shall state on its face the name of the person or entity to whom it is granted, the date of issuance, the date it expires, the address of the establishment, the City Clerk-Treasurer's signature. 
(q)  Renewal applications need not be accompanied by the requirements set forth in this section except for signature and dating before a notary and the payment of the fee, unless there is a change requiring new or supplemental documentation, in which event such must be provided by the renewing applicant at the time the renewal is submittal. Failure to provide such required information and documentation may alone be sufficient grounds for denial of a renewal application. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.040)  
Sec. 4-5. - Standards for issuance of license. 
(a)  To be issued a new license to operate an adult entertainment establishment, an applicant must meet the following standards. If the applicant is a natural person; individual: 
(1)  The applicant must be at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated any provision of this chapter within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(b)  The City Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a license to the applicant if all of the requirements of this chapter are timely and fully satisfied. 
(c)  The City Clerk-Treasurer shall not issue a license to the applicant if all of the requirements of this chapter are not timely and fully satisfied, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide the information required by this chapter; 
(2)  The applicant has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form or required documentation, sketch or diagram; 
(3)  The applicant if a natural person or principal, officer, director or member is under the age of 18 years; 
(4)  The property is not properly zoned; 
(5)  The premises fails any inspection required by law. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.050)  
Sec. 4-6. - Fees; new; renewal. 
(a)  A license fee shall be paid for a new (original) license at the time that the license is issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer. 
(1)  There shall be no pro-ration of a new license fee. 
(2)  There shall be no pro-ration or refund upon any suspension, revocation or voluntary surrender of a license. 
(3)  A new license application and fee are required for each separate new location and upon any change of ownership involving ten percent or more beneficial or actual change in ownership interest in the establishment. 
(4)  The license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(b)  The annual renewal license fee shall be paid at the time that the license is issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer. 
(1)  There shall be no pro-ration of a renewal license fee. 
(2)  There shall be no pro-ration or refund upon any suspension, revocation or voluntary surrender of a license. 
(3)  Renewal license applications are due no later than April 15 each year. 
(4)  In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty of $300.00 shall be assessed against and paid by any applicant who files an annual renewal application after April 15. 
(5)  The annual renewal license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.060)  
Sec. 4-7. - Display of license or permit. 
The license issued under this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adult entertainment or adult oriented establishment. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.070)  
Sec. 4-8. - License term; renewal of license or permit. 
(a)  Every license issued pursuant to this chapter, regardless of when issued during the year, shall terminate annually on June 30, unless sooner revoked or non-renewed and must be timely renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. 
(b)  Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the City Clerk-Treasurer. The application for renewal must be filed not later than April 15. 
(c)  If the City Police Department is aware of any information bearing on the operator's qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk-Treasurer. 
(d)  The Building and Fire Inspectors shall inspect the establishment prior to the renewal of a license to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and related codes. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.080)  
Sec. 4-9. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  License required. No person may own, lease, rent, possess, operate, conduct, maintain, manage, permit, oversee in any capacity or manner, act as a principal or agent of any adult oriented establishment or adult entertainment establishment, or use any real property or part thereof in the City for adult oriented entertainment activities or as an adult oriented entertainment establishment without first applying for, paying the fee for, being issued and holding a valid license required by this chapter. 
(b)  Nudity prohibited in alcohol licensed establishments. No person, with or without consideration, may perform or engage in any nudity or state of nudity, or sexually specified activity; or be in a state of undress, or display specified anatomical areas; nor may any operator, licensee, manager, agent, principal or person in charge of a premises of the licensee permit any entertainer, employee, patron or other person to perform or engage in any live act, live demonstration, live performance, live dance, or live exhibition that displays any specified anatomical area or that engages in any specified sexual activity, or to be in a state of undress upon the premises or property of an establishment that is or should be licensed as an alcohol licensed establishment, that: 
(1)  Shows or exposes his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, perineum, anus, natal or anal cleft with less than a complete and fully opaque covering; 
(2)  Shows or exposes any portion of the female nipple, areola or breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola with less than a complete and fully opaque covering; or 
(3)  Shows the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(c)  No minors allowed. No operator, employee, manager, agent, or other person in charge of an establishment, premises or property that is or that should be licensed under this chapter may allow or permit any minor (a person under 18 years of age) to enter, be present upon or loiter on or near the facility, or to view adult oriented entertainment or specified sexual activities. 
(d)  No touching of or by patrons or performers. No person who is an entertainer, employee or patron may knowingly or intentionally, and no licensee, operator, manager, agent, principal or other person in charge of a premises or establishment may knowingly or intentionally permit any entertainer, employee, patron or other person to, touch or come in contact with the genitals, perineum, anus, anal region, pubic area, vulva, natal or anal cleft of any other person, or the breasts, nipples or areola of any female, upon the premises, property or establishment that is or should be licensed under this chapter. 
(e)  Hours of operation. No licensee, operator or other person who owns, operates, manages, is the agent for, or is in charge of an establishment that is or should be licensed under this chapter, may conduct, permit or keep open, or operate any adult oriented activity: 
(1)  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday; and 
(2)  Between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday mornings. 
(f)  No establishment, premises or property for which a license is issued, or for which a license is required under this chapter, may be located or operated contrary to any zoning, distancing, land use or other requirements set forth in this chapter or any related City zoning or other ordinance. 
(g)  No person may violate any provision of this chapter. 
(h)  No person may cause, facilitate or combine with another person to violate any provision of this chapter or related law or ordinance. 
(i)  Certain activities prohibited. No person, with or without consideration, may perform or engage in, and no operator, licensee, manager, agent, principal or person in charge of a premises of the licensee may permit any entertainer, employee, patron or other person to perform or engage in, any act of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sado-masochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus upon the premises or property of an establishment that is or should be licensed under this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.090)  
Sec. 4-10. - Responsibilities of the licensee, operator, person in charge. 
(a)  Each operator, licensee, person in charge, manager, agent and principal shall be at least 18 years of age or older and shall comply with and obey every federal and state law, ordinance, code, rule and regulation at all times upon and within the immediate vicinity of the licensed facility. 
(b)  No minors allowed. No operator or employee of an adult oriented establishment shall allow or permit any minor (a person under 18 years of age) to loiter around, to enter or be present upon an adult oriented entertainment establishment or to allow any minor to view adult oriented entertainment as defined herein. 
(c)  The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. 
(d)  The operator shall maintain at least ten footcandles of light in the public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisles; provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one footcandle of illumination in said aisles, as measured from the floor. 
(e)  The licensee and operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its patrons with each of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.100)  
Sec. 4-11. - Exemptions. 
Exempt from the applicability of the provisions of this chapter are the following: Theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis and in which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering to customers of nudity or of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers, and where the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or promotion of, employees or others engaging in nude erotic dancing or nudity. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.110)  
Sec. 4-12. - Suspension, revocation and nonrenewal of license; appeals. 
(a)  The City Council may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew a license for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on any new or renewal application or material facts were omitted from any such application. 
(2)  The operator violated any provision of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by the City Council pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days in the event that the City Council finds that the operator, as defined, had no prior actual or constructive knowledge of the underlying facts for such violation and could not have had such actual or constructive knowledge by the operation of due diligence. 
(3)  The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license. 
(4)  Failure to pay any cost or fee required under this chapter or any other provision of law or ordinance. 
(5)  The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and immediately revoke the license. 
(b)  The Chief of Police or any person may file charges against an operator or licensee for violation of this chapter. Such charges shall be in writing and shall be signed and dated by the filing complainant who shall legibly provide his or her full name, address, and phone number, and with reasonable particularity describe the violation. A failure by a complainant to provide any of this information renders the complaint insufficient. A determination whether the filed written charges satisfy these requirements shall be made by the City Clerk-Treasurer before proceeding further. No action shall be pursued by the City upon an anonymous complaint unless independently verified by the Police Department, in which event the complaint may be signed, dated and filed by the Chief of Police. 
(c)  Upon receipt of such written filed charges, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall provide copies to the Chief of Police, City Manager and City Attorney, and shall provide written notice of such charges to the operator. 
(d)  The operator in writing may request a hearing before the City Council concerning the charges within ten days of receipt of notice of the violation. Service upon the operator, agent, any officer, director, partner or member shall be sufficient. If the operator fails to timely request such a hearing, the charges shall be deemed proven and true in any proceeding before the City Council concerning the license issued under this chapter, and if the City Council finds the charges sufficient the license shall be revoked, suspended or not renewed. 
(e)  If the operator timely requests a hearing on the charges as set forth above, a public hearing before the City Council shall be held within 15 days after receipt of the written request by the City Clerk-Treasurer. 
(f)  The City Clerk-Treasurer shall provide not less than ten days prior written notice of the hearing date, time and place to the appealing operator, the complainant who filed charges, the Chief of Police, City Manager and City Attorney. 
(g)  The City Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare and provide the proper legal notices of the public meeting, the closed session deliberations by the City Council, and the reconvening into open session to determine the sufficiency of the charges and any applicable penalty. The Clerk-Treasurer shall also arrange for and provide that the hearing be recorded in some customary manner. 
(h)  All parties may appear at the hearing, be represented by legal counsel, present evidence and witnesses in their respective behalf, cross-examine witnesses, and make opening and closing arguments. The length of opening and closing arguments by a party shall not exceed 15 minutes. 
(i)  The filed written charges shall form the basis of the complaint against the operator who must respond to the allegations set forth therein. 
(j)  Refusal or failure by an operator to appear at the hearing shall be sufficient grounds to find the charges proven and true for all purposes. 
(k)  The hearing shall be open to the public. The hearing shall be recorded. The hearing is a quasi-judicial process. A quorum of the City Council is necessary to conduct a hearing. A hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual agreement of the parties or upon a majority vote of the Councilmembers attending and voting. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may convene into closed session to deliberate upon the record and then reconvene into open session to make their determination. A majority vote of all Councilmembers voting shall be necessary to carry any motion or to make any determination. For all voting purposes, an abstention or pass is not a vote. Decisions of the City Council can be conditioned or made contingent. The Council must first determine if the charge is proven and true. If so found, then the City Council shall decide what, if any, appropriate penalty or remedy should be imposed concerning the license for the proven violation. Imposition of the City's costs and expenses arising from such proceeding by the City Council against an operator found to be in violation of this chapter are discretionary. If imposed, such costs and expenses must be paid in full by the operator to the City Clerk-Treasurer within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing. 
(l)  The hearing shall be recorded. Either party may request and obtain a copy of the hearing in written form upon payment of the estimated transcribing fee therefore in advance and is obligated to pay the actual cost thereof upon completion. As an alternative to providing such written transcript, the City Clerk-Treasurer may provide a true and correct complete copy of the audio tape of the hearing. 
(m)  The City Council shall reduce their decision to writing within 20 days of the end of the hearing and provide true and correct copies of their decision to the operator, complainant, Chief of Police, City Manager and City Attorney and shall briefly set forth the reasons for their decision in such written notice. 
(n)  Appeal from the City Council's determination shall be taken to circuit court in Wisconsin in Rock County, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 68.13. Judicial review shall be governed by Wis. Stats. § 68.13, all as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(o)  If the operator makes a timely appeal, no suspension, revocation, nonrenewal or other conditions affecting the license shall take effect until a final determination is rendered by the circuit court, or as otherwise agreed by the City and operator. 
(p)  Under this chapter, any operator, person or licensee whose license is revoked or not renewed shall not be eligible to receive a license under this chapter for two years from the date of revocation or nonrenewal. 
(q)  No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used or licensed as an adult oriented establishment or adult entertainment establishment for six months from the date of revocation or nonrenewal of the license. 
(r)  In a zoning district in which a use licensed under this chapter is a nonconforming use under the zoning provisions of the City, no location or premises for which a license has been issued under this chapter shall be used as an adult entertainment establishment or adult oriented establishment if more than one year elapses from the date the nonrenewal or revocation of the license takes effect. For purposes of this subsection, a nonrenewal of a license takes effect when the licensed premises is no longer lawfully licensed due to annual expiration of the license without renewal, revocation, or for any other reason. 
(s)  Revocation, suspension, nonrenewal and/or non-issuance may be subject to such additional reasonable restrictions, conditions and regulations as the City Council may impose. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.120)  
Sec. 4-13. - Violations; penalties; other relief. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $100.00 and not more than $5,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for each offense. 
(b)  Each incident and each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  In default of the payment of such forfeiture, such person shall be subject to the remedies vested in the court for such non-payment. 
(d)  In addition to and not in lieu of any of the penalties and remedies set forth in this chapter, the City Council may conduct a hearing to revoke, suspend, not renew and/or not issue a license under this chapter and/or alcohol license, as applicable. 
(e)  In addition to and not in lieu of the penalties and remedies set forth in this chapter, the City may seek, obtain and enforce one and/or more forms of injunctive and other equitable and/or legal relief against the licensee and/or applicable person for said violation. 
(Code 1976, § 5.82.140)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Adoption by reference. 
Chapter 6 of the Code of General Ordinances of the City of Janesville, a copy of which has been on file and open to public inspection in the office of the City Clerk for a period of not less than two weeks prior to this adoption and which shall be permanently on file and open to public inspection in such office, is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.001; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 6-2. - State statutes adopted. 
(a)  Except as prohibited by law, all provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 125 describing and defining regulations and procedures with respect to alcohol beverages are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statutes so incorporated by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions, or modifications of the statutes incorporated by this chapter are also adopted and incorporated as a part of this chapter. 
(b)  The penalty for violating any statutory section adopted by Subsection (a) of this section shall be forfeiture as provided in the applicable penalty provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 125, together with the costs and disbursements of the action. In default of payment, the violator shall be imprisoned for not less than three nor more than 60 days. In addition to the above penalty, the City may suspend or revoke any license granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.010; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 6-3. - Definitions. 
The definitions provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 125 shall apply to this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.020)  
Sec. 6-4. - Local regulation in addition to state law. 
(a)  This chapter is in addition to the state law. Prosecution under the state law shall not in any way preclude a City prosecution under this chapter. 
(b)  If any specific provision of this chapter is different from but not in conflict with the state law adopted by reference in Section 6-2, the express regulation of this chapter shall be controlling. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.030; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 6-5. - Local restrictions on licensed premises. 
(a)  Alcohol beverage licenses shall be granted only to those premises authorized by state law, and no licenses shall be granted to private residences. 
(b)  No retail Class B license shall be issued for any premises less than 300 feet from any established public school, parochial school, hospital, church, licensed day care center, or licensed Youth Entertainment Center. This subsection shall not apply to any premises licensed continuously since June 30, 1947. Nor shall this subsection apply to the issuance of temporary special event fermented malt beverage licenses. 
(c)  The manufacture and/or sale of alcohol beverages covered by this chapter is declared to be a business. This chapter shall not extend or waive in any manner the requirements of the zoning ordinance. The requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be construed as a further limitation on the granting of licenses under this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.040; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 6-6. - Licenses; granted; issued; issuance extensions; extension fees; payment of license, when. 
(a)  No alcohol beverage license may be granted by the City Council unless the applicant has filed a written application on the required forms showing that the applicant is qualified to be licensed and that the premises may lawfully be used for the purpose intended. No alcohol beverage license may be issued unless the applicant has paid the license fee in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(b)  No alcohol beverage license may be issued by the City Clerk until such license is granted by the City Council. No alcohol beverage license, except a temporary special event fermented malt beverage license, may be issued until the City Clerk has been shown proof of application for a federal special tax stamp, and the premises are inspected and approved by the Health Department, the Fire Department and the Building Inspection Department. 
(c)  Each applicant who has been granted a license to sell alcohol by the City Council shall pay the applicable license fee in full to the City Clerk-Treasurer within 15 days of the date the license was granted. The date a granted alcohol license is to be issued shall be deemed no later than the 15th calendar day after the date the license is granted, not counting the date of the grant. Any failure to timely pay the applicable alcohol license fee in full voids the granted license and renders it of no further force or effect, without the necessity of any further action, review or notice by the City Council. Any applicant whose granted license has been voided under the provisions of this section may not rely upon any previously submitted application for the same premises but shall reapply de novo and follow the procedure required for a new license application. 
(d)  Each applicant who has been granted an original license to sell alcohol by the City Council shall have a period of 240 days to open. After the initial 240-day period the licensee may request one or more extensions of time within which to satisfy all conditions precedent and/or subsequent established by statute, ordinance, policy statement, and/or special condition imposed by the alcohol license advisory committee and/or City Council for issuance of the license. Each extension request shall be in writing accompanied by a non-refundable extension request fee which will be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. The fee shall be payable to and filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer. No extension request shall be considered or acted upon without a filed written application, payment of the extension fee, and payment in full of all alcohol fee. Granting an extension is completely discretionary, is a privilege, is not a right and may be granted if good cause and reasonable necessity are found by the alcohol license advisory committee, in which body the authority to review and grant extensions shall be vested. An extension may be granted for a period of time not to exceed 90 consecutive days, the exact duration subject to the discretion of the alcohol license advisory committee. A total of three extensions may be requested and granted if the applicant follows the procedure set forth herein and timely applies and pays the fee for consideration no later than the 15th day of the month preceding the current extension's expiration date. The alcohol license advisory committee may grant extensions beyond the total of three if the alcohol license advisory committee finds the precedent or subsequent conditions cannot be met because of a natural disaster. In the event that an applicant fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, or an extension expires without the issuance of a granted license or without a timely applied for and approved subsequent extension, such granted license shall be void and rendered of no further force or effect, without the necessity of any further action, review or notice by the City Council. Any applicant whose granted license has been voided under the provisions of this subsection may not rely upon any previously submitted application for the same premises but shall reapply de novo and follow the procedure required for a new license application. 
(e)  All fees paid hereunder are non-refundable. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.050; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982; Ord. No. 2017-705, § II, 11-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 2018-742, § II, 11-26-2018 ; Ord. No. 2019-750, § I, 4-8-2019; Ord. No. 2019-764, § I, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 6-7. - Fermented malt beverage licenses; intoxicating liquor licenses. 
(a)  Specific licenses for the sale of fermented malt beverages are authorized in this chapter. 
(b)  Specific licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor are authorized in this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.060)  
Sec. 6-8. - Licensee responsible. 
The licensee or agent for a corporate licensee shall be personally responsible for the faithful observance and performance, by himself or herself and all the licensee's employees, agents, or representatives engaged in or about the licensed premises, of all the conditions and provisions of this chapter, of Wis. Stats. ch. 125 and of any ordinance of the City and law of the state which may in any way relate directly to the business conducted by such licensee. A violation of any such ordinance or law by the licensee's employees, agents, or representatives constitutes a violation by the licensee. The licensee shall be responsible for the payment of any forfeiture or penalties assessed against the licensee or against such licensee's employees, agents or representatives while acting for or on behalf of the licensee. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.070; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 6-9. - Corporate alcohol license agent; resident of Rock County. 
The alcohol license agent for a corporation holding any alcohol license within the City shall be a resident of Rock County. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.080; Ord. No. 87-525, § 2, 1987)  
Sec. 6-10. - Operator's license required; applications; term; expiration; fee; review; issuance; provisional license. 
(a)  Operator (bartender) license required. No premises operated under a Class A, Class B, or Class C license may be open for business unless there is upon the premises either the licensee, the agent named in the license if the licensee is a corporation, or some person who has an operator's license and who is responsible for the acts of all persons selling or serving any alcohol beverages to customers. For the purpose of this subsection, any member of a licensee's immediate family 18 years of age or older shall be considered the holder of an operator's license. 
(b)  Regular operator's license. 
(1)  Operator (bartender) licenses may be issued only upon written application. 
(2)  Submitted applications shall be referred by the City Clerk to the Police Department for review and recommendation. The Police Department shall review each submitted application and recommend issuance or denial of the license. 
(3)  The City Clerk shall issue a regular operator (bartender) license to an applicant if the Police Department recommends issuance and the applicant is in compliance with all other requirements. The City Clerk shall deny issuance of a regular operator (bartender) license to an applicant when the Police Department recommends denial. 
(4)  If an application is denied, the City Clerk denial shall be in writing and shall set forth the reason for the denial. 
a.  An applicant may appeal a denial to the Alcohol License Advisory Committee (ALAC). The appeal must be in writing, setting forth the reason for the appeal, signed and dated by the applicant, and filed with the City Clerk within 30 days of the date of denial. Written appeals that conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter shall be copied and forwarded to the ALAC by the City Clerk. The Clerk shall provide written notice to the appellant of the date, time and place of the ALAC meeting at which the appeal will be considered. The ALAC shall conduct a hearing upon the appeal. The applicant may appear, be represented, and present evidence and witnesses. The ALAC shall decide by majority of those voting whether to overrule the administrative denial. Abstaining is not a vote. The ALAC may attach conditions and limitations to a granted operator license. Appeals that do not conform to these requirements shall not be considered by the ALAC. 
b.  An ALAC decision upholding denial may be appealed to the City Council and shall also be in writing, setting forth the reason for the appeal, signed and dated by the applicant, and filed with the City Clerk within 30 days of the date of denial. Written appeals that conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter shall be copied and forwarded to the City Council by the City Clerk. The Clerk shall provide written notice to the appellant of the date, time and place of the City Council meeting at which the appeal will be considered. The City Council shall conduct a hearing upon the appeal. The applicant may appear, be represented, and present evidence and witnesses. The hearing shall be recorded. The City Council shall decide by majority of those voting whether to overrule the administrative denial. Abstaining is not a vote. The City Council may attach conditions and limitations to a granted operator license. Appeals that do not conform to these requirements shall not be considered by the City Council. 
(5)  A submitted application that is incomplete or which contains false or misleading information must be denied and the applicant must wait six months before submitting another application. 
(c)  Provisional operator's license. The City Clerk shall issue a provisional operator's license to any person who has his or her provisional license application approved by the Police Department. No provisional operator's license shall be issued prior to approval of the applicant by the Police Department. 
(1)  A provisional operator's license shall not be issued to any person whose regular or provisional operator's license has ever previously been denied or revoked by the City. A provisional operator's license shall be void ab initio and of no force or effect if issued to any person whose regular or provisional operator's license has ever previously been denied or revoked by the City. Misuse of a provisional operator's license by an applicant shall constitute operation without a license and a violation of this chapter. 
(2)  A provisional operator's license is valid for a period not to exceed 60 days from the date of issuance by the City Clerk or until a regular operator's license is issued to the applicant by the City Clerk, whichever occurs first. 
(3)  The City Clerk may revoke any provisional license in the event that the City Clerk finds that the holder of such license made any false, misleading or incomplete statement on his or her application, or that the applicant has previously had his or her regular or provisional license denied or revoked by the City. 
(d)  Regular and provisional operator license fee. The fee for an original or renewed operator's license and a provisional operator's license shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. Neither fee shall be prorated. Original and renewed operator licenses shall expire on June 30th of each odd-numbered year. 
(e)  Temporary operator's license. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.17(4) the City Clerk shall issue a Temporary Operator's License to any individual that meets the criteria in Subsection (b) of this section and is employed by, or donating their services to, nonprofit corporations. 
(1)  No person may hold more than two licenses of this kind per year. 
(2)  The license is valid for any period from one day to 14 days, and the period for which it is valid shall be stated on the license. 
(3)  The fee for a temporary operator's license shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.090)  
Sec. 6-11. - License; posting required. 
Every person licensed to sell alcohol beverages under this chapter shall immediately post such license and keep the same posted while in force in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises. An operator shall post his or her license in the licensed premises where he or she is employed or shall carry such license on his or her person while on duty. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.100; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982; Ord. No. 87-525, § 1(part), 1987)  
Sec. 6-12. - Transfer of license location. 
Every alcohol beverage license may be transferred to another location within the same municipality subject to City Council approval and the payment of a transfer fee which shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. The City Council may refuse to approve the transfer if it finds that the proposed location is not acceptable because of zoning or noncompliance with a state or local law or regulation or that the establishment of licensed premises at the proposed location would adversely affect the neighborhood, local residents, or the general welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.110; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982; Ord. No. 87-525, § 1(part), 1987)  
Sec. 6-13. - Access requirements; licensed premises separate from retail stores; no other business on licensed premises; exceptions. 
(a)  No Class A or Class B license may be granted or issued unless there is access to the licensed premises directly from the street or sidewalk or from public hallways or stairways of any public building or area open to the public. No access to the licensed premises may be permitted through the premises of any other business, whether owned by the licensee or a different individual. If the licensed premises are located in a complex of retail stores, the licensed premises shall be separated from the other retail areas by solid walls of rigid construction. No openings are allowed in such walls. 
(1)  This restriction shall not apply to hotels and motels having more than 30 rooms which are equipped and in use for rental to guests as sleeping quarters nor to bowling alleys. 
(2)  Also exempt are combination grocery stores/restaurants but only the restaurant portion may hold an alcohol license and then only a Class B beer only and/or Class C wine only license. The grocery store/activities must be separate from the restaurant/alcohol licensed portion and activities by solid walls that may have one passage between the two uses so as to permit the use of a single restroom facility by all patrons. All alcohol sales and consumption shall only occur on the licensed restaurant premises. Storage of alcohol shall occur only upon a licensed portion of the premises which may include a non-contiguous area apart from the restaurant portion. No sales shall occur for off-premises consumption, notwithstanding anything in the statutes or ordinances to the contrary. 
(3)  Also exempt are grocery stores and supermarkets that hold a Class A license and whose business is other than the sale of petroleum based products or pharmaceutical products, provided that the total floor area for display and sales of all Class A products for sale in the establishment does not exceed 80 square feet, is contiguous and confined to said area, and with the ability to be physically and effectively separate and lock that portion of the premises so as to render it inaccessible to customers and other non-privileged persons during non-sale hours, as those are defined in Sections 6-53 and 6-54. 
(b)  No other business may be conducted on the licensed premises. This restriction shall not apply to: 
(1)  Food service on Class B premises; 
(2)  Selling wrapped food pursuant to a City food license on Class A licensed premises; 
(3)  A bowling alley, movie theater, pool hall, dart lanes for hand thrown darts, or enclosed archery lanes; 
(4)  Hotels and motels having more than 30 rooms which are equipped and in use for rental to guests as sleeping quarters; 
(5)  Combination grocery store/restaurants that hold a Class B beer only and/or Class C wine only license for the restaurant portion, but only the restaurant portion may hold an alcohol license. The grocery store/activities must be separate from the restaurant/alcohol licensed portion and activities by solid walls that may have one passage between the two uses so as to permit the use of a single restroom facility by all patrons. Storage of alcohol shall occur only upon a licensed portion of the premises which may include a non-contiguous area apart from the restaurant portion. All alcohol sales and consumption shall only occur on the licensed restaurant premises. No sales shall occur for off-premises consumption, notwithstanding anything in the statutes or ordinances to the contrary; 
(6)  Retail establishments that have as their principal business the sale of materials, supplies, and ingredients directly related to home-brewing of fermented malt beverages and winemaking that hold a Class A license; 
(7)  Grocery stores and supermarkets that hold a Class A license and whose business is other than the sale of petroleum based products or pharmaceutical products, provided that the total floor area for display and sales of all Class A products for sale in the establishment does not exceed 80 square feet, is contiguous and confined to said area, and with the ability to be physically and effectively separate and lock that portion of the premises so as to render it inaccessible to customers and other non-privileged persons during non-sale hours, as those are defined in Sections 6-53 and 6-54. 
(c)  Temporary special event fermented malt beverage licensees are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.120; Ord. No. 2019-766, § I, 9-23-2019)  
Sec. 6-14. - Inspection authorized; removal of unlawful objects; consent to use objects as evidence. 
The licensee shall consent to the entry of police or other duly authorized representatives of the City at all times the licensed premises is open for business and at other reasonable times for the purpose of inspection or search. The licensee shall consent to the removal from the licensed premises of all objects or items there in violation of City ordinance or state law and to the introduction of such objects or items in evidence in any prosecution that may be brought for such offense. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.130; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982; Ord. No. 87-525, § 1(part), 1987)  
Sec. 6-15. - Health and safety code compliance; Class B license; restaurant sanitation rules. 
(a)  No alcohol beverage license shall be issued unless the licensed premises complies with all ordinances and regulations adopted by the City, including, but not limited to, health, building, fire and sign codes. 
(b)  No Class B or Class C license shall be issued unless the licensed premises complies with rules promulgated by the Department of Health and Social Services governing sanitation in restaurants. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.140; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982; Ord. No. 87-525, § 1(part), 1987)  
Sec. 6-16. - Licensed premises; conducted in orderly manner; gambling not permitted. 
(a)  Each licensed premises shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be allowed at any time on a licensed premises. 
(b)  No gambling or game of chance of any sort shall be permitted in any form on any licensed premises. This restriction shall not prohibit the possession or operation of amusement devices nor the operation of bingo if licensed by the state. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.150; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982; Ord. No. 83-525, § 1(part), 1983; Ord. No. 87-525, § 1(part), 1987)  
Sec. 6-17. - Presence on licensed premises prohibited during closing hours. 
(a)  No person may permit anyone except the license holder, agent or employees on duty to remain on the premises of any Class A or Class B licensed establishment during the closing hours required by ordinance. 
(b)  No person except the license holder, agent or employees on duty may remain on the premises of any Class A or Class B licensed establishment during the closing hours required by ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.155; Ord. No. 83-326, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 87-525, § 1(part), 1987)  
Sec. 6-18. - Music in outside premises; Council approval required. 
(a)  If the licensed premises of any retail Class B licensee includes any area outside an enclosed building, the licensee may apply to the City Council for permission to provide live or recorded music in the outside area. The City Council may grant such permission after considering the size of the outside area, the type of music to be provided, the days and hours when the music will be provided, the neighborhood around the premises and after determining that permitting music in the outside area would not adversely affect the neighborhood, local residents or the general welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(b)  Outside music shall not be permitted except during those days of the week and hours of the day specifically granted by the City Council. In granting the application for outside music or upon the request of any two Councilmembers or the City Manager, the City Council may amend the days or hours the outside music is permitted or may revoke the approval for outside music. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.160; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982; Ord. No. 87-525, § 1(part), 1987)  
Sec. 6-19. - Outdoor seating. 
The Alcohol License Advisory Committee (ALAC) shall conduct a review of each Class B license application or amendment concerning outdoor alcohol use, other than special event licenses, and shall forward its findings and recommendations thereon to the City Council for its consideration. If an establishment includes outdoor seating, and is located adjacent or opposite a residential use, the ALAC shall, as a part of its review of the license application, conduct a public hearing. Said public hearing shall require the prior notification of property owners within 400 feet of the premises and shall be conducted prior to finalization of the findings of the ALAC. The public hearing shall permit each affected property owner or resident to address the ALAC in regards to the applicant's request. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.162)  
Sec. 6-20. - Extension of premises; temporary (outdoor parties). 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything in these ordinances to the contrary, the temporary extension of the alcohol licensed premises for a lawfully issued and held Class B fermented malt beverage and/or intoxicating liquor alcohol beverage license may be permitted at the discretion of the Alcohol License Advisory Committee (ALAC), upon prior review and recommendation of the Site Plan Review Coordinator, but upon the timely and full compliance by the licensee/applicant with each and every requirement set forth in this section. The grant and issuance of a Class B alcohol premises extension permit is a privilege, discretionary, and not a right. Denials may be appealed to the City Council. 
(b)  No person may use or permit the use of any area for the possession, storage, sale, or consumption of fermented malt beverages and/or intoxicating liquors without being granted and holding the appropriate alcohol beverage license and extension. 
(c)  The licensee desiring a temporary extension of their alcohol licensed premises shall apply on forms prepared and furnished by the City Clerk-Treasurer's Office. The form must be filed and the application fee paid by the applicant by the 15th of the month prior to the ALAC meeting. The applicant shall answer each question on the form fully and truthfully. 
(d)  The application fee must be paid to the City Clerk-Treasurer's Office prior to the ALAC taking any action on the application. The fee is non-refundable for any reason, even if the extension of premises is not granted. The fee includes the cost of publication, notification of neighbors, Clerk's Office processing, JPD review, other staff review, and enforcement. The fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(e)  Prior to approval, grant, or issuance, the applicant or duly authorized principal shall appear before the ALAC after a review and recommendation by the Site Plan Review Coordinator on the dates, times, and places furnished by the Clerk's Office, and shall provide all information requested timely and truthfully. 
(f)  As part of the application for a temporary extension of premises the applicant must provide a site plan for review. 
(g)  The ALAC may require the applicant to provide additional information and to furnish additional documentation as they each may request or require. The ALAC may impose such similar and/or different conditions, restrictions, and requirements as each governmental body decides in their own discretion, including, but not limited to, notice to neighbors, private security, no beer or alcohol outdoors, no outside live music or other sound amplification, hours of operation, designation of the extended premises, and/or such other and additional restrictions, conditions, and or requirements as each separately may discretionarily deem appropriate and in the best interest of the City, and its residents. 
(h)  The ALAC's decision may be appealed to the City Council, whose decision is binding and final. 
(i)  The following conditions and restrictions shall apply to the grant, issuance, and use of an alcohol beverage temporary extension of premises permit: 
(1)  No premises may be granted or issued more than two separate occasion extension permits per year. 
(2)  Each extension of premises permit shall be allowed during a single calendar day only and no two-day or multiple-day permits, functions, or events shall be licensed or permitted hereunder. 
(3)  Each extension of premises permit shall allow the possession, sale, and consumption of fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquors within the hours set by the City Council but in no event longer than the hours otherwise allowed by law. 
(4)  The outdoor use and occasion shall be confined to the temporarily extended premises and originally licensed premises and shall be contiguous with the licensed premises and solely upon such privately owned premises. An extension permit shall not include any public streets, walks, or other public property, unless permitted to do so in strict compliance with the conditions of the extension permit and the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  There shall be no amplified music or other amplified sound outside upon the extended licensed premises without express permission from the Alcohol License Advisory Committee. There shall be no other disturbing noise or disorderly conduct. All outside music shall cease no later than 10:00 p.m. on the day of the event. 
(6)  Outdoor activities must stop not later than 10:00 p.m., and all clean up must be completed not later than 11:00 p.m. on the day of the event. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.165)  
Sec. 6-21. - Drinking in public prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall drink or carry for the purpose of immediate consumption any alcohol beverage upon the streets, sidewalks, parks, public parking lots, public school property or other public property or upon any private parking lot or any other private areas that are open to public use. 
(b)  Any person carrying any open cup, can, glass, bottle or similar drinking vessel containing alcohol beverages upon the streets, sidewalks, parks, public parking lots, public school property, or other public property, or upon any private parking lot or any other private areas that are open to public use shall be in violation of this section. 
(c)  The City Council may grant exceptions to this section for municipal property, regularly established athletic fields and stadiums, school buildings or churches and sidewalk cafes operated in accordance with Section 12-165 that are lawfully included in the licensed premises description. 
(d)  Also exempt from the prohibitions of this and related ordinances are those abutting streets and sidewalks in B5 and B6 zoning districts closed under Article VI of Chapter 34 (Street Closure Ordinance) or Article XVI of Chapter 34 (Financial Gain on Public Property Ordinance) for civic, community, or neighborhood events, or events licensed under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(10)(b) (wine walks). 
(1)  In order to be exempt from the prohibitions of this and related ordinances, the sponsor of the event must apply by the 15th of the month prior to the event that the consumption of alcohol beverages be permitted during the event. The application for public consumption of alcohol must be accompanied by a non-refundable fee. The fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(2)  No glass bottles or glass containers are permitted on any public street, sidewalk, park, public parking lot, or other public property, or private parking lot exempt under Subsection (d) of this section. 
(3)  During an authorized event, individuals may purchase fermented malt beverages, coolers, wines, and intoxicating liquors from Class B licensed establishments and carry and consume such alcohol beverages upon the closed public streets, sidewalks, and terraces in compliance with Subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
(4)  Event sponsors must provide wristbands that must be worn by all individuals that will possess or consume alcohol during the event. All alcohol beverages must be in a clear plastic cup. 
(5)  No individual may bring fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors onto the grounds of a special event covered by Subsection (d) of this section that were not purchased from a Class B licensed establishment. 
(6)  All applications to allow the public consumption of alcohol under Subsection (d) of this section must be reviewed and approved by the Alcohol License Advisory Committee. If the Alcohol License Advisory Committee does not approve an event for exemption the applicant may appeal to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days. All decisions by the City Council are final. 
(e)  Also exempt from the prohibitions of this and related ordinances are for permits granted by the Recreation Director and/or his or her designee in accordance with Section 26-17 allowing the possession and consumption of fermented malt beverages and wines in the designated areas of Traxler Park, Riverside Park, Palmer Park, the Town Square, and Festival Street (River Street from Milwaukee Street to Court Street) and all abutting public property when Festival Street is rented for a private event. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.170; Ord. No. 2017-700, § I, 11-13-2017 ; Ord. No. 2019-747, § I, 2-11-2019 )  
Sec. 6-22. - Abandonment of premises. 
Any licensee holding a license to sell alcohol beverages who abandons such business shall forfeit any right or preference he or she may have to the holding of or renewal of such license. Abandonment shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of an alcohol beverage license. The closing of the licensed premises for at least 90 days shall be prima facie evidence of an abandonment. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter any newly licensed premise is not required to open initially for a period of 240 days. 
(Code 1976, § 10.36.050; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982; Ord. No. 87-525, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. No. 2019-764, § II, 10-14-2019)  
Sec. 6-23. - License revocation; relicensing. 
Whenever any license is revoked, at least 60 days from the time of such revocation shall elapse before another license may be granted for the same premises and 12 months shall elapse before any other license may be granted to the person whose license was revoked. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.190; Ord. No. 82-320, § 1(part), 1982; Ord. No. 87-525, § 1(part), 1987)  
Sec. 6-24. - Substantial change in beneficial ownership; new alcohol license required. 
(a)  A new alcohol license is required for each substantial change in the beneficial ownership of any alcohol licensed business or interest. For purposes of this section, the term "beneficial ownership" includes, but is not limited to, any and all direct and indirect legal, equitable and financial rights, titles, interests of whatsoever kind and nature. 
(b)  For a corporation, the term "substantial change" includes, but is not limited to, each and every action of whatsoever kind and nature affecting, singularly or in aggregate, 20 percent or more of the issued shares or stock. 
(c)  For a partnership, the term "substantial change" includes, but is not limited to, each and every action of whatsoever kind and nature affecting the number of general partners, or which singularly or in aggregate affect 20 percent or more of the individual and/or aggregate general and/or limited partner beneficial ownership interest. 
(d)  For a sole proprietor, the term "substantial change" includes, but is not limited to, each and every change in the beneficial ownership of the business. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.200; Ord. No. 87-526, § 2, 1987)  
Sec. 6-25. - Public facility; fermented malt beverages and intoxicating beverages prohibited. 
The drinking or possession of fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor is prohibited within the limits of any public parks, facility or other public property included in this chapter, except as specifically permitted by other City ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.210)  
Sec. 6-26. - Possession, sale and consumption of fermented malt beverages, and intoxicating liquors permitted at specific public parks, city facilities and other public property. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Beer, fermented malt beverages and fermented malt beverage based wine coolers mean those beverages as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 125, as from time to time amended, and/or as defined and/or interpreted by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue, as from time to time modified. 
City means the City of Janesville and its lawfully authorized officials, officers, employees, agents and representatives. 
Lessee means the person managing, leasing and/or operating the City of Janesville owned public golf course under a written lease agreement with the City of Janesville and the lessee's lawfully authorized officials, officers, employees, agents and representatives. 
(b)  Anything contrary to elsewhere in the Code of General Ordinances of the City of Janesville notwithstanding, the possession, sale and consumption of fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquors is permitted at the following public parks, City facilities or other public property, but only in strict accord with the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Riverside Golf Course. 
(2)  Blackhawk Golf Course. 
(3)  Rotary Gardens. 
(4)  Dawson Park and Field. 
(5)  The Tallman House, Hellen Jeffris Wood Museum and Visitor Center. 
(c)  Only the lessee of such property may apply for a Class B license, and then only if the lease permits such activity. 
(d)  Only fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquors purchased from the City or the City's licensee may be sold, possessed and consumed on the property. No fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors of any kind may be brought, transported, possessed, consumed, or sold by any person other than the City or the City's lessee. 
(e)  All fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquors shall be sold, possessed, and consumed only in non-glass disposable containers. 
(f)  Only those persons of lawful drinking age may possess and consume alcohol under this chapter, and underage persons but only if such underage person's parent or guardian accompanies the underage person and permits the possession or consumption of the permitted alcohol, as those terms are understood in Wisconsin alcohol laws. No underage person shall possess or consume any permitted alcohol with the parent or guardian present at the time of such underage person's consumption or without the express permission of such parent or guardian. 
(g)  The City Council of the City hereby expressly and forever reserve unto themselves all rights, privileges, and prerogatives to amend, condition, modify, and otherwise limit, at any time, any alcohol beverage license or permit granted or issued by the City to the lessee, but only after public hearing and public action thereon in open session, the public peace, health, safety, welfare, and good so requiring. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.220)  
Sec. 6-27. - Possession, sale and consumption of fermented malt beverages, and wine permitted at specific public parks, city facilities and other public property. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Beer, fermented malt beverages and fermented malt beverage based wine coolers mean those beverages as defined in Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes (Wis. Stats. ch. 125), as from time to time amended, and/or as defined and/or interpreted by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue, as from time to time modified. 
City means the City of Janesville and its lawfully authorized officials, officers, employees, agents and representatives. 
Lessee means the person managing, leasing and/or operating the City of Janesville owned public golf course under a written lease agreement with the City of Janesville and the lessee's lawfully authorized officials, officers, employees, agents and representatives. 
(b)  Anything contrary to elsewhere in the Code of General Ordinances of the City of Janesville notwithstanding, the possession, sale and consumption of fermented malt beverages and wine is permitted at the following public parks, City facilities or other public property, but only in strict accord with the provisions of this chapter: Janesville Ice Arena. 
(c)  Only the lessee of such property may apply for a Class B license, and then only if the lease permits such activity. 
(d)  Only fermented malt beverages and wine purchased from the City or the City's licensee may be sold, possessed and consumed on the property. No fermented malt beverages or wine of any kind may be brought, transported, possessed, consumed, or sold by any person other than the City or the City's lessee. 
(e)  All fermented malt beverages and wine shall be sold, possessed, and consumed only in non-glass disposable containers. 
(f)  Only those persons of lawful drinking age may possess and consume alcohol under this chapter, and underage persons but only if such underage person's parent or guardian accompanies the underage person and permits the possession or consumption of the permitted alcohol, as those terms are understood in Wisconsin alcohol laws. No underage person shall possess or consume any permitted alcohol with the parent or guardian present at the time of such underage person's consumption or without the express permission of such parent or guardian. 
(g)  The City Council of the City hereby expressly and forever reserve unto themselves all rights, privileges, and prerogatives to amend, condition, modify, and otherwise limit, at any time, any alcohol beverage license or permit granted or issued by the City to the lessee, but only after public hearing and public action thereon in open session, the public peace, health, safety, welfare, and good so requiring. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.230)  
Sec. 6-28. - Sale, possession and consumption of beer, FMB wine coolers, wines and champagnes, and intoxicating liquor permitted at the Janesville Senior Center. 
(a)  Anything to the contrary elsewhere in the Code of General Ordinances of the City of Janesville ("City") notwithstanding, the transport to, storage, possession, sale, distribution, provision, use, and consumption of fermented malt beverages, fermented malt beverage based wine coolers, wines, champagnes, and intoxicating liquor alcohol beverages, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 125, as from time to time amended and/or as defined and/or interpreted by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue (alcohol beverages) are permitted at the Janesville Senior Center but only in designated areas and only in strict accord with the provision of this chapter. 
(b)  Designated areas shall be these specific geographic areas established and permitted by the City Council of the City. Designated areas shall constitute the alcohol licensed premises. 
(c)  The storage, possession, use, sale, and consumption of alcohol beverages shall only be permitted, stored, possessed, used, and/or consumed within a designated area. 
(d)  In no event shall a designated area include any area outside of the senior center building, unless the City Council of the City expressly so permits. 
(e)  Only the City may sell or allow the consumption of alcohol beverages at the Janesville Senior Center and then only in designated areas. 
(f)  No personal shall carry on, possess, transport, store, sell, use, or consume any alcohol beverages at the Janesville Senior Center contrary to any provision of this chapter, any other ordinance or statute governing alcohol, or contrary to any conditions or permissions provided by the Senior Center Director, Recreation Director, City Manager, and/or his or her designees. 
(g)  The storage, sale, possession, use, and consumption of alcohol beverages at the Janesville Senior Center shall only be permitted in strict accord with the requirements, terms, conditions, restrictions, permitting, fee payment, and regulations set forth in this chapter, and those set forth at any time by the Senior Center Director, Recreation Director, City Manager, and/or his or her designees. 
(h)  In the event of any conflict between any provision of this chapter and any set forth in any condition or permission of the Senior Center Director, Recreation Director, City Manager, and/or his or her designees, the more restrictive provision shall take precedence and govern. 
(i)  The City may sell alcohol beverages at the Janesville Senior Center at any time and in the manner permitted by law. 
(j)  There shall always be present at least one City licensed alcohol beverage operator (bartender) on duty at all times that any alcohol activities occur. 
(k)  Only those persons of lawful alcohol drinking age may purchase alcohol beverages at the Janesville Senior Center. 
(l)  Persons who have not attained the Wisconsin lawful alcohol beverage drinking age (underage persons) shall not be provided, purchase, possess, use, or consume alcohol beverages at the Janesville Senior Center even if accompanied by or granted permission by such underage person's accompanying parent or guardian. 
(m)  The City Council hereby expressly and forever reserve unto themselves all rights, privileges, and prerogatives to amend, condition, modify, and otherwise limit, at any time, any permission and/or alcohol beverage license or permit granted or issued by the City, the public peace, health, safety, welfare, and good so requiring. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.232)  
Secs. 6-29—6-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES 
 
Sec. 6-53. - Sale of fermented malt beverages in Class A stores 6:00 a.m.—9:00 p.m. 
(a)  The sale of fermented malt beverages upon the premises of a Class "A" (liquor store) fermented malt beverage alcohol licensed premises shall cease daily at 9:00 p.m. and shall not resume until 6:00 a.m. the following morning. No fermented malt beverages may be sold between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. upon any Class "A" fermented malt beverage alcohol licensed premises. This restriction by ordinance is authorized by Wis. Stats. § 125.32(3)(b) and (d), as from time to time amended or renumbered, and is hereby enacted in conformity therewith. 
(b)  By enacting this chapter the City Council for the City of Janesville hereby find that this chapter and the enactment of more restrictive fermented malt beverage sales hours is for the betterment of the community; directly facilitates the health, welfare, peace, safety and tranquility of the community; directly and indirectly will reduce the probability and/or problem of the purchase of fermented malt beverages by underage persons within the community; and will directly and indirectly reduce the consumption of fermented malt beverages by underage persons within the community. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.240)  
Sec. 6-54. - Sale of intoxicating liquor in Class A stores 6:00 a.m.—9:00 p.m. 
The sale of intoxicating liquor upon the premises of a "Class A" (liquor store) intoxicating liquor alcohol beverage licensed premises shall cease daily at 9:00 p.m. and shall not resume until 6:00 a.m. the following morning. No intoxicating liquor may be sold between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. upon any "Class A" intoxicating liquor alcohol beverage licensed premises. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.242)  
Sec. 6-55. - Licenses; when required; application of this chapter. 
No person may sell, manufacture, rectify, brew or engage in any other activity for which this chapter provides a license without holding the appropriate license issued under this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.250)  
Sec. 6-56. - License term; expiration. 
(a)  Licenses to sell fermented malt beverages shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year. Such licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(b)  Licenses may be issued after July 1 in any licensing year. Such licenses shall expire on the following June 30. The fee for such licenses shall not be prorated. 
(c)  Six-month Class B licenses may be issued at any time over a period of six months in any calendar year, for which 75 percent of the license fee shall be paid. Such licenses are not renewable during the calendar year in which issued. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.260)  
Sec. 6-57. - Class A licenses; issuance based on population; exceptions; exceeding quota; location restrictions. 
(a)  The City may issue Class A licenses for the sale of fermented malt beverages for premises within the municipality. A Class A license authorizes retail sales of fermented malt beverages for consumption off the premises where sold and in original packages and containers. 
(b)  Not more than one Class A fermented malt beverage license may be issued for each 3,500 or fraction thereof of the population of the City according to the most recent official annual population estimate of the Wisconsin Department of Administration, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Licenses issued to hotels having more than 30 rooms which are equipped and in use for rental to guests as sleeping quarters shall not be counted in the number permitted under the limitation in this section. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the City Council may, by at least a majority vote of all the members of the City Council, grant a new retail Class A fermented malt beverage license in excess of the quota set forth in Subsection (b) of this section. Such license is not intended to perpetually increase the quota, but rather to exceed the quota when issuance of a license would promote redevelopment of an underutilized commercial property or establishment of a new business within the community until such time as a Class A license is available as set forth in Subsection (b) of this section. The quota may be exceeded if the establishment meets all other provisions as set forth in this chapter and the following criteria shall be met: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit to the City Clerk a petition for exceeding quota. The petition shall include a business plan of operation and the relevant experience, background, and signatures of the individual, partners or directors, officers and agent of a corporation of limited liability company, as well as the signature of the owner or owners of the building or land and any and all other information required in Section 6-6; 
(2)  The applicant shall supply proof of ownership, lease, or an option to purchase or lease land or a building that is properly zoned for the proposed venture; 
(3)  The Alcohol License Advisory Committee shall review the application, the reports of impacted departments, and all other information before it and make a recommendation to the City Council. 
(e)  A Class A fermented malt beverage license may be issued only to a person who is also applying for a retail Class A license to sell intoxicating liquor. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.270)  
Sec. 6-58. - Class B licenses; issuance based on population; exceptions; effect of annexation on renewal. 
The City may issue Class B licenses for the sake of fermented malt beverages from premises within the municipality. 
(1)  Class B license authorizes retail sales of fermented malt beverages to be consumed either on the premises where sold or off the premises. 
(2)  Not more than one Class B fermented malt beverage license may be issued for every 900 or fraction thereof of the population of the City according to the official population estimate of the Wisconsin Department of Administration which is the basis for determining per capita state shared taxes for the November distribution, except as provided in this chapter. 
(3)  The following Class B fermented malt beverage licenses shall not be included in the number limitation set forth above: 
a.  Class B licenses for restaurants; 
b.  Class B beer only licenses; 
c.  Class B licenses issued to clubs and lodges; 
d.  Class B licenses issued to hotels having more than 30 rooms which are equipped and in use for rental to guests as sleeping quarters; 
e.  Class B temporary special event licenses. 
(4)  The annexation of territory containing Class B fermented malt beverage licensed premises shall increase the quota of Class B fermented malt beverage licenses, if necessary, to allow the relicensing of all existing Class B fermented malt beverage licensed premises in the municipality after such annexation. All licensees holding existing Class B fermented malt beverage licenses shall not lose such licenses except for cause, and the licenses may be renewed irrespective of the number limitation, if the licensees are otherwise satisfactory. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.280)  
Sec. 6-59. - Class B licenses for restaurants; issuance based on population; requirements. 
(a)  The City may issue Class B fermented malt beverage licenses for restaurants in addition to any other Class B fermented malt beverage licenses granted pursuant to this chapter. There shall not be more than one Class B fermented malt beverage license for restaurants issued for every 3,300 or fraction thereof of the population of the City according to the last decennial federal census. 
(b)  All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to the licenses created by this section, unless in direct conflict therewith, in which case the express provisions of this section shall prevail. 
(c)  Additional requirements for the Class B fermented malt beverage license for restaurants shall be as follows: 
(1)  Such license shall be issued only to establishments which are bona fide restaurants. The following criteria shall be used in determining whether or not an establishment is a bona fide restaurant: 
a.  The principal business of the establishment must be to cater to and serve full-course meals to the general public. 
b.  The business shall be advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are prepared and served, space being provided with adequate kitchen and dining room equipment and persons being employed to prepare, cook and serve meals for guests. 
c.  Tables shall be of adequate size to accommodate the service of full course meals in accordance with the number of chairs at each table. 
(2)  The licensed establishment must derive at least 65 percent of its gross revenue from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages. The 65 percent shall be determined by taking the average monthly gross revenue of the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages over the period of a calendar year. 
(3)  a.  After the first 90 days of operation following initial issuance of the license, the licensee shall file with the City Clerk an affidavit prepared by a certified public accountant. Such affidavit shall state the percent of gross revenue from the sale of food and non-alcohol beverages and the percent of gross revenue from the sale of fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquor for such initial 90-day period. 
b.  After the second 90 days of operation following initial issuance of the license, the licensee shall file with the City Clerk his or her notarized statement showing the percent of gross revenue from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages and the percent of gross revenue from the sale of fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquor for such second 90-day period. 
c.  Thereafter, such notarized statement of the licensee shall be filed with the renewal application and shall include sales for the entire previous calendar year. 
d.  The Liquor License Advisory Committee may, at any time it is deemed necessary, request the licensee to file an affidavit of a certified public accountant to verify the percent of gross revenue as shown on the licensee's notarized statement. 
(4)  The licensee, by application for and receipt of this license, agrees to an examination of his or her business records, for the purpose of verification of the percent of food sales, by the City Manager or his or her delegated representative at all reasonable times. 
(d)  Failure to file the required affidavit, failure to maintain the required percent of food sales, or failure to comply with any of the requirements for the Class B fermented malt beverage license for restaurants shall be grounds for nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation of the Class B fermented malt beverage license for restaurants. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.290)  
Sec. 6-60. - Class B beer only licenses; issuance based on population; requirements. 
(a)  The City may issue Class B beer only licenses in addition to any other license granted pursuant to this chapter. There shall not be more than one Class B beer only license issued for every 3,300 or fraction thereof of the population of the City according to the last decennial federal census. 
(b)  All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to the licenses created by this section, unless in direct conflict therewith, in which case the express provisions of this section shall prevail. 
(c)  Additional requirements for the Class B beer only license shall be as follows: 
(1)  Such license shall be issued only to restaurants where at least 50 percent of the gross revenue is from the sale of food. 
(2)  Licensees may sell or offer for sale in cans, bottles, and/or by draft, and for consumption upon the licensed premises only, beer, beer coolers, and such other fermented malt beverages as are specifically permitted by the Wisconsin Statutes, as from time to time amended. 
(3)  The licensee, by application for and receipt of this license, agrees to an examination of his or her business records, for the purpose of verification of the percent of food sales, by the City Manager or his or her delegated representative at all reasonable times. 
(d)  Failure to maintain the required percent of food sales or failure to comply with any of the requirements for the Class B beer only license shall be grounds for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of the Class B beer only license. 
(e)  Exempt from the provisions of Subsections (c) and (d) of this section are beer only licenses issued for premises which are operated as part of and in conjunction with municipally owned golf courses. Such licenses issued to premises which are operated as part of and in conjunction with municipally owned golf courses are not transferable to any other premises. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.300)  
Sec. 6-61. - Class B license for clubs and lodges. 
The City may issue Class B fermented malt beverage licenses to clubs and lodges situated and incorporated or chartered in the state for at least six years. Such licenses shall be in addition to any other licenses granted pursuant to this chapter. Such license shall entitle the club or lodge to serve fermented malt beverages to club members, invited guests and the general public. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.310)  
Sec. 6-62. - Class B temporary special event license—Application. 
(a)  Any bona fide nonprofit club, state, county or local fair association, veterans' post, lodge or society that has been in existence for at least six months before the date of application may apply for a Class B temporary, special event fermented malt beverage license for a picnic, fair, group gathering, public event or other similar gathering. 
(b)  Such application shall be filed on forms provided by the state of Wisconsin Department of Revenue and shall include a description of the exact location of the event and a map showing such location. 
(c)  The fee for such special event license shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(d)  Special event licenses are exempt from the food license requirements pursuant to Article XIX of Chapter 12. 
(e)  Any special event license granted pursuant to this chapter shall not be counted in the number permitted under any other section of this Code. 
(f)  Every applicant who is granted a Class B temporary, special event fermented malt beverage license shall comply in all respects with all ordinances and statutes that apply to Class B fermented malt beverage licenses, unless such ordinances or statutes specifically exempt the special event licensee. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.320)  
Sec. 6-63. - Class B temporary special event license—Issuance. 
Regulations in these ordinances to the contrary are waived for such events when licensed. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.330)  
Sec. 6-64. - Class B temporary special event license—Review, grant and issue by Alcohol License Advisory Committee and Chief of Police. 
(a)  Pursuant to applicable Wisconsin Statutes, as from time to time amended, the City Council hereby authorizes and empowers the Alcohol License Advisory Committee or the Chief of Police to independently and separately review the applications, grant, issue, deny, restrict, modify, condition, revoke, suspend, and enforce temporary special event Class B alcohol licenses without the necessity for review or action by the City Council. 
(b)  The City Council, notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, reserves unto itself any and all rights and powers vested by state law and otherwise including, issue, deny, restrict, modify, condition, revoke, suspend, and modify, repeal and/or overrule decisions of the Alcohol License Advisory Committee or Chief of Police pertaining thereto. 
(c)  The specific procedure for such review and grant by the Alcohol License Advisory Committee or Chief of Police shall be established from time to time by practice or policy. 
(d)  Notice of all actions by the Alcohol License Advisory Committee or the Chief of Police under this section shall be provided to the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.340)  
Sec. 6-65. - Class B temporary special event license—Wristbands; posting required. 
(a)  A wristband that is tamper-resistant and nontransferable shall be applied by the licensee after ascertaining that a purchaser and/or anyone receiving alcoholic beverages are of legal age for all temporary special events occurring on public property, partially or entirely outdoors. The licensee shall make an even greater effort to prevent the sale, possession and consumption of alcohol by underage persons outdoors than he or she would indoors. 
(b)  If the temporary special event is occurring partially or entirely outdoors, the licensee shall post at least two signs with large letters in conspicuous places within the confines of the licensed premises directing all patrons to consume the fermented malt beverages only within the licensed premises or outdoor permitted area, and warning all patrons that to consume the fermented malt beverages outside such area is a violation of City ordinance. The alcohol licensed activities can only take place in the area specifically set forth in the special event application or license. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.350)  
Sec. 6-66. - Class B temporary special event licensed premises to be left in good condition. 
If the licensed premises are located on public property, such premises shall be cleaned of all litter at the conclusion of the licensed event. Any damage occurring during the period shall be repaired at the expense of the licensee. The premises shall be placed in the same or better physical condition after the licensed event than such premises were in prior to the event. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.360)  
Sec. 6-67. - Sale in public parks; license not required; receipt to public treasury; restrictions. 
Officers and employees of the City are authorized to sell fermented malt beverages in the public parks or the City properties listed in City ordinances without the necessity of obtaining a license therefore, provided that all receipts from such sale shall go into the public treasury. Requirements pertaining to licenses imposed by this chapter shall not apply to such sales, but all other applicable restrictions upon sale of fermented malt beverages imposed by this chapter shall apply except Section 6-18. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.370)  
Sec. 6-68. - Sale of fermented malt beverages, wines and wine coolers in public parks. 
Any fermented malt beverages, wines and wine coolers sold pursuant to this chapter may be possessed, sold and consumed only within the public parks, public properties, and municipal facilities specifically designated and authorized by the City Council in the applicable Code of General Ordinances of the City of Janesville, as from time to time amended. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.380)  
Secs. 6-69—6-94. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - INTOXICATING LIQUOR SALES 
 
Sec. 6-95. - License; when required; application of this chapter. 
No person may sell, manufacture, rectify, brew or engage in any other activity for which this chapter provides a license without holding the appropriate license issued under this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.390)  
Sec. 6-96. - License term; expiration. 
(a)  Licenses to sell intoxicating liquor shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year. Such licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(b)  Licenses may be issued after July 1 in any licensing year. Such license shall expire on the following June 30. The fee for such license shall be prorated on the basis of one-twelfth or the annual fee for each month or fraction of a month remaining until the next June 30. 
(c)  Six-month Class B licenses may be issued at any time in any licensing year, for which one-half of the license fee shall be paid. Such licenses are not renewable during the calendar year in which issued. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.400; Ord. No. 82-320, § 4(part), 1982)  
Sec. 6-97. - Class A licenses; issuance based on population; exceptions; exceeding quota; location restrictions. 
(a)  The City may issue Class A licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor for premises within the municipality. A Class A license authorizes retail sales of intoxicating liquor for consumption off the premises where sold and in original packages and containers. 
(b)  Not more than one Class A intoxicating liquor license may be issued for each 3,500 or fraction thereof of the population of the City according to the most recent official annual population estimate of the Wisconsin Department of Administration, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Licenses issued to hotels having more than 30 rooms which are equipped and in use for rental to guests as sleeping quarters shall not be counted in the number permitted under the limitation in this section. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the City Council may, by at least a majority vote of all the members of the City Council, grant a new retail Class A intoxicating liquor license in excess of the quota set forth in Subsection (b) of this section. Such license is not intended to perpetually increase the quota, but rather to exceed the quota when issuance of a license would expand the trade impact of an existing business, or promote redevelopment of an underutilized commercial property or establishment of a new business within the community until such time as a Class A license is available as set forth in Subsection (b) of this section. The quota may be exceeded if the establishment meets all other provisions as set forth in this chapter and the following criteria shall be met: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit to the City Clerk a petition for exceeding quota. The petition shall include a business plan of operation and the relevant experience, background and signatures of the individual, partners or directors, officers and agent of a corporation or limited liability company, as well as the signature of the owner or owners of the building or land and any and all other information required in Section 6-6; 
(2)  The applicant shall supply proof of ownership, lease, or an option to purchase or lease land or a building that is properly zoned for the proposed venture; 
(3)  The Alcohol License Advisory Committee shall review the application, the reports of impacted departments, and all other information before it and make a recommendation to the City Council. 
(e)  A Class A intoxicating liquor license may be issued only to a person who is also applying for a retail Class A license to sell fermented malt beverages. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.410)  
Sec. 6-98. - Class B licenses; issuance based on population exceptions; effect of annexation on renewal. 
(a)  The City may issue Class B licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor for premises within the municipality. A Class B license authorizes retail sales of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises where sold by the glass and not in the original package or container. However, wine may be sold in the original package or container in any quantity to be consumed off the premises where sold. 
(b)  Not more than one Class B intoxicating liquor license may be issued for every 900 or fraction thereof of the population of the City according to the official population estimate of the Wisconsin Department of Administration which is the basis for determining the per capita state shared taxes for the November distribution, except as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  The following Class B intoxicating liquor licenses shall not be included in the limitation set forth above: 
(1)  Class B licenses for restaurants; 
(2)  Class B licenses issued to clubs and lodges; 
(3)  Class B licenses issued to hotels having more than 30 rooms which are equipped and in use for rental to guests as sleeping quarters. 
(d)  The annexation of territory containing Class B intoxicating liquor licensed premises shall increase the quota of Class B intoxicating liquor licenses, if necessary, to allow the relicensing of all existing Class B intoxicating liquor licensed premises in the municipality after such annexation. All licensees holding existing Class B intoxicating liquor licenses shall not lose such licenses except for cause, and the licenses may be renewed irrespective of the number limitation, if the licensees are otherwise satisfactory. 
(e)  Irrespective of the limitation as to number of licenses permitted by this chapter, the number issued shall never exceed the number permitted by state statute. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.420)  
Sec. 6-99. - Class B licenses for restaurants; issuance based on population; requirements. 
(a)  The City may issue Class B intoxicating liquor licenses for restaurants in addition to any other Class B intoxicating liquor licenses granted pursuant to this chapter. There shall not be more than one Class B intoxicating liquor license for restaurants issued for every 3,300 or fraction thereof of the population of the City according to the last decennial federal census. 
(b)  All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to the licenses created by this section, unless in direct conflict therewith, in which case the express provisions of this section shall prevail. 
(c)  Additional requirements for the Class B intoxicating liquor license for restaurants shall be as follows: 
(1)  Such license shall be issued only to establishments which are bona fide restaurants. The following criteria shall be used in determining whether or not an establishment is a bona fide restaurant: 
a.  The principal business of the establishment must be to cater to and serve full course meals to the general public. 
b.  The business shall be advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are prepared and served, space being provided with adequate kitchen and dining room equipment and persons being employed to prepare, cook and serve meals for guests. 
c.  Tables shall be of adequate size to accommodate the service of full course meals in accordance with the number of chairs at each table. 
(2)  The licensed establishment must derive at least 65 percent of its gross revenue from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages. The 65 percent shall be determined by taking the average monthly gross revenue of the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages over the period of a calendar year. 
(3)  a.  After the first 90 days of operation following initial issuance of the license, the licensee shall file with the City Clerk an affidavit prepared by a certified public accountant. Such affidavit shall state the percent of gross revenue from the sale of food and non-alcohol beverages and the percent of gross revenue from the sale of fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquor for such initial 90-day period. 
b.  After the second 90 days of operation following initial issuance of the license, the licensee shall file with the City Clerk his or her notarized statement showing the percent of gross revenue from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages and the percent of gross revenue from the sale of fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquor for such second 90-day period. 
c.  Thereafter, such notarized statement of the licensee shall be filed with the renewal application and shall include sales for the entire previous calendar year. 
d.  The Liquor License Advisory Committee may, at any time it is deemed necessary, request the licensee to file an affidavit of a certified public accountant to verify the percent of gross revenue as shown on the licensee's notarized statement. 
(4)  The licensee, by application for and receipt of this license, agrees to an examination of his or her business records, for the purpose of verification of the percent of food sales, by the City Manager or his or her delegated representative at all reasonable times. 
(d)  Failure to file the required affidavit, failure to maintain the required percent of food sales, or failure to comply with any of the requirements for the Class B intoxicating liquor license for restaurants shall be grounds for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of the Class B intoxicating liquor license for restaurants. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.430)  
Sec. 6-100. - Class B licenses for clubs and lodges. 
The City may issue Class B intoxicating liquor licenses to clubs and lodges situated and incorporated or chartered in the state for at least six years. Such licenses shall be in addition to any other licenses granted pursuant to this chapter. Such license shall entitle the club or lodge to serve intoxicating liquor to club members, invited guests and the general public. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.440; Ord. No. 82-320, § 4(part), 1982)  
Sec. 6-101. - Class B license; fermented malt beverage license required. 
No retail Class B intoxicating liquor license may be issued to any person who does not have, or to whom is not issued, a Class B retail license to sell fermented malt beverages. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.450; Ord. No. 82-320, § 4(part), 1982)  
Sec. 6-102. - Class C licenses; wine only; fees; requirements; no quota. 
(a)  In this subsection, the term "barroom" means a room that is primarily used for the sale of consumption of alcohol beverages. 
(b)  A "Class C" license authorizes the retail sale of wine by the glass or in an opened original container for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(c)  A "Class C" license may be issued to a person qualified under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5) for: 
(1)  A restaurant in which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of gross annual receipts and which does not have a barroom; or 
(2)  A restaurant in which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of gross annual receipts and which does have a barroom in which wine is the only intoxicating liquor sold. 
(d)  A "Class C" license may not be issued to a foreign corporation, a foreign limited liability company or a person acting as agent for or in the employ of another. 
(e)  A "Class C" license and application shall particularly describe the premises for which it is issued. 
(f)  The annual fee for a "Class C" license shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. The fee shall be the same for all "Class C" licenses. There shall be no pro-rating the annual fee. 
(g)  There shall be no quota for the number of "Class C" license issued in the City. 
(h)  (1)  After the first 90 days of operation following initial issuance of the license, the licensee shall file with the City Clerk an affidavit prepared by a certified public accountant. Such affidavit shall state the percent of gross revenue from the sale of food and non-alcohol beverages and the percent of gross revenue from the sale of fermented malt beverages, if any, and separately for wine for such initial 90-day period. 
(2)  After the second 90 days of operation following initial issuance of the license, the licensee shall file with the City Clerk his or her notarized statement showing the percent of gross revenue from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages and the percent of gross revenue from the sale of fermented malt beverages, if any, and separately for wine for such second 90-day period. 
(3)  Thereafter, such notarized statement of the licensee shall be filed with the renewal application and shall include sales information for the entire previous calendar year. 
(4)  The Liquor License Advisory Committee may, at any time it is deemed necessary, request the licensee to file an affidavit of a certified public accountant to verify the percent of gross revenues for such categories set forth above, for any time period, and/or as shown on the licensee's notarized statement. 
(5)  The licensee, by application for and receipt of this license, agrees to an examination of his or her business records, for the purpose of verification of the percent of food, fermented malt beverage and wine sales by the City Manager or his or her delegated representative at all reasonable times. 
(6)  Failure to file the required affidavit, failure to maintain the required percent of food sales, or failure to comply with any of the requirements for the Class C wine license for restaurants shall be grounds for nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation of the Class C wine license for restaurants. 
(i)  All other applicable provisions of the City's alcohol ordinances and state alcohol statutes, including, but not limited to, alcohol beverage licenses, hours of operation, licensed bartender on duty, license posting, premises operating in orderly manner, no afterhours unauthorized persons on premises, fiscal license year, renewals, revocations/suspensions, and distancing requirements are hereby adopted, reiterated by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth verbatim. The fee for said license shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.451)  
Sec. 6-103. - Pharmacist's license. 
The City Council may, upon written application, grant to any registered pharmacist, as the City Council may deem proper, license authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor in quantities less than four liters for medicinal, mechanical or scientific purposes only. No liquor may be consumed on the premises where the sale occurs. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.460; Ord. No. 82-320, § 4(part), 1982)  
Sec. 6-104. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter for which a penalty is not otherwise provided shall upon conviction thereof pay a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 together with the costs and disbursements of the action. In default of payment, the violator shall be imprisoned for not less than three nor more than 60 days, or otherwise penalized by the court as provided by law. 
(b)  The City, in addition to the above penalties, may suspend, revoke or not renew any license granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Each day's continuance of any offense shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  In addition to, and not in lieu of any of the above penalties, the City may also seek, and the court may impose, injunctive relief to abate, remove or prevent violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 5.06.470)  
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Dogs, generally, see Wis. Stats. § 174.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Application of chapter. 
This chapter shall apply to all dogs and cats. 
(Code 1976, § 6.04.010; Ord. No. 84-380, § 1, 1984)  
Sec. 8-2. - Licenses; statute compliance; rabies vaccination. 
(a)  All dogs and cats must be licensed as follows: The owner or possessor of a dog or cat more than five months of age on January 1 of any year or five months of age within the license year, shall annually, or on or before the date the dog or cat becomes five months of age, pay the license tax and obtain a license. 
(b)  The license tax shall be established from time to time by the City Council by ordinance and set as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code, and shall reflect higher fees for dogs and cats which are not spayed or neutered. 
(c)  The rules, regulations and procedures as described by the Wisconsin Statutes shall govern as applicable. 
(d)  All dogs and cats must be vaccinated against rabies. No license shall be issued unless the dog or cat is vaccinated and sufficient proof of vaccination is presented with the license application. 
(e)  The Clerk-Treasurer may permit the Humane Society of Southern Wisconsin to be a collecting official on behalf of the City pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 174.065(1), as amended from time to time, and may issue licenses for dogs and cats newly adopted from the Humane Society of Southern Wisconsin in accord with Janesville ordinances and Wisconsin Statutes. All dog and cat licensing taxes and fees shall be paid to the City. 
(Code 1976, § 6.04.020; Ord. No. 84-380, § 2, 1984)  
Sec. 8-3. - Dog and cat—Running at large and principal place of residence; defined. 
(a)  For dogs and cats the term "running at large" includes all situations in which a dog or cat is: 
(1)  Not within the principal place of residence of the owner or possessor; and 
(2)  Not tied up, not securely penned, or not securely held by a chain, rope or leash. 
(b)  All chains, ropes and leashes shall be so placed or attached so that they cannot become entangled with another animal or object, and shall be of sufficient length and in proportion to the size of the animal to allow the animal proper exercise and convenient access to food, water and shelter. Such chain, rope or leash shall be located so as to prohibit such animal from trespassing on public property or private property belonging to others and from causing harm or danger to persons or other animals. This subsection shall apply when the dog or cat is secured upon the principal place of residence of its owner or possessor. 
(c)  When a dog or cat is outside the principal place of residence of its owner or possessor, it shall be within the control of its owner or possessor and shall be attached to a leash not more than six feet in length, which leash the owner or possessor shall hold or be attached to as well as the animal. This subsection shall not apply to dogs or cats which are being transported in or on any type of motor vehicle or to dogs or cats solely within specially and specifically designated and signed park pet exercise/training areas as defined and regulated by Section 26-22(c). 
(d)  The term "principal place of residence," for dogs and cats, means the entire property of the owner or possessor. 
(Code 1976, § 6.04.030; Ord. No. 84-384, § 1, 1984)  
Sec. 8-4. - Dog and cat—Keeping unlicensed dog or cat not allowed. 
No person shall own, possess, harbor, or permit to remain about one's premises any dog or cat that is not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 6.04.050; Ord. No. 83-328, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 8-5. - Dog and cat—Running at large prohibited. 
No owner or possessor of any dog or cat shall permit the same to run at large in the City at any time. The owner or possessor shall be deemed to have permitted the dog or cat to run at large contrary to this chapter when the owner's or possessor's dog or cat is found off the owner's or possessor's principal place of residence and not restrained as defined in this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 6.04.060; Ord. No. 84-380, § 3, 1984)  
Sec. 8-6. - Dog and cat—Identification tag required; running at large. 
It shall be an additional and further offense if the owner or possessor permits the dog or cat to run at large within the City without some identification attached. This identification may be the current license or license number. 
(Code 1976, § 6.04.070; Ord. No. 84-380, § 4, 1984)  
Sec. 8-7. - Dog and cat—Running at large; owner notification; impoundment procedure. 
(a)  If any dog or cat is running at large in violation of this chapter, and the identity of the owner or possessor of the dog or cat is known, that person shall be notified if possible by the appropriate agency, the City Police Department, or by the County Humane Officer. All appropriate action may be taken under this chapter. 
(b)  If any dog or cat is running at large in violation of this chapter, any law enforcement officer or the County Humane Officer may proceed to have the dog or cat impounded and disposed of if not reclaimed; in case of dogs, after giving the notice specified in and taking the steps provided for in the current applicable Wisconsin Statutes as amended from time to time; in the case of licensed or tagged cats, by following the same procedure applicable to dogs; in the case of unlicensed or untagged cats, impoundment and disposal. Disposal may take place only after the cat has been held unclaimed for a seven-day period. 
(Code 1976, § 6.04.080; Ord. No. 83-328, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 8-8. - Dog and cat—Impoundment; reclaiming procedure; fee. 
In order to reclaim a dog or cat that has been impounded, the owner or possessor must pay the cost of: 
(1)  Keeping the dog or cat, including, but not limited to, vaccination, food, shelter, medical care and licensing; 
(2)  Giving notice of its impoundment; and 
(3)  An impoundment fee, for the first impoundment the second impoundment, and the third and any subsequent impoundment in any one calendar year, as established by the City Council from time to time, and set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 6.04.090; Ord. No. 83-328, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 8-9. - Dog; barking and howling; creating a disturbance not permitted. 
All persons owning, possessing or harboring a dog shall prevent such dog from barking or howling in the City. Barking or howling does not mean barking or howling on infrequent occasions, but does mean barking or howling sufficiently often so as to be unreasonably disturbing to other persons in the neighborhood. 
(Code 1976, § 6.04.100; Ord. No. 83-328, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 8-10. - Pets prohibited in parks and public grounds when; additional regulations. 
(a)  No person being the owner or having possession, custody, or control of any dog, horse, cat, or other animal pet, shall permit the same to be in any playground or school ground at any time, or in any public park from May 15 to September 15. This regulation applies whether the pet is running at large or is on a leash, or otherwise under the control of any person. 
(b)  This regulation is in addition to all the regulations relating to dogs. 
(c)  Exempt from the prohibitions in Subsection (a) of this section are service animals that are required to be accommodated by the Americans with Disabilities Act and law enforcement dogs used in official police business. 
(Code 1976, § 6.04.110; Ord. No. 83-328, § 1(part), 1983; Ord. No. 2018-723, § I, 6-25-2018 )  
Sec. 8-11. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit and pay to the City, as and for a penalty, a forfeiture in the following dollar amounts, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned for not more than 60 days for each violation and unpaid forfeiture in addition to such other penalties, remedies, sanctions and relief as may be, from time to time, provided by law: 
(1)  For a first offense, a forfeiture of not less than $30.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(2)  For a second offense, a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(3)  For a third offense, a forfeiture of not less than $70.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(4)  For a fourth and subsequent offense, a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(5)  In addition to the imposition of forfeiture, the City may request and the court may grant injunctive relief, abatement, mandamus and such other equitable relief and orders as the court may deem appropriate to terminate the violation. 
(b)  Each occurrence shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Each day's continuance shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1976, § 6.04.120)  
Secs. 8-12—8-42. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS; VICIOUS DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Rabies control program, Wis. Stats. § 95.21; regulations covering animals distrained or doing damage, Wis. Stats. § 172.01 et seq.; restraining action against dogs, Wis. Stats. § 174.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-43. - Dog; dangerous to public; killed when; carcass removal; interference unlawful. 
Any dog found or being within the limits of the City, whether licensed as required by the ordinances of this City or not, which is known to be or which there is good reason to believe is mad, vicious or dangerous to the public, or which has bitten any person so as to cause a wound which bleeds, may be killed by the police authorities. All police authorities are given power and authority to enter on private premises for the purpose of finding, taking or killing any such dog, and when any such dog has been killed, the police authorities shall have the same removed and buried or otherwise disposed of, unless the owner thereof or other person in charge thereof agrees to see that the carcass of any such dog is buried. Any person owning or having in his or her possession or under his or her care or control any dog which is commonly called mad or vicious or dangerous or which has bitten any person as set forth in this section shall permit the police authorities to take and kill such dog and shall render all reasonable assistance to any such officer in doing so. Any person who interferes with an officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this section or who conceals any such dog shall pay a penalty as provided in Section 8-48. 
(Prior Code, § 19.04(1); Code 1976, § 6.08.010)  
Sec. 8-44. - Rabid animal quarantine procedure. 
The current Wisconsin Statutes describing, defining, and setting forth regulations and procedures with respect to the isolation and examination of rabid animals is adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by such statute (presently Wis. Stats. § 95.21) incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. This section adopts such other Wisconsin Statutes as may supersede, supplant, or in any way modify, change or add to Wis. Stats. § 95.21. 
(Code 1976, § 6.08.020; Ord. No. 81-275, § 1, 1982)  
Sec. 8-45. - Vicious dogs or dogs/cats in heat; running at large unlawful. 
No owner of or person harboring or keeping a fierce or vicious dog or dog in heat or cat in heat shall allow the same to run at large at any time within the City limits. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a forfeiture and penalties as provided in Section 8-48. 
(Code 1976, § 6.08.030)  
Sec. 8-46. - Dog; confinement during rabies quarantine. 
(a)  Whenever the City is quarantined for rabies or whenever the City council deems that the interest of the public health requires it and makes such a finding or order, all dogs shall be kept securely confined, or tied or held in leash or muzzled by the owner or keeper of such dog. 
(b)  When the Council makes such a finding or order, and publishes notice thereof, all dogs running at large after three days from the date of the first publication of the finding or order which are not securely confined, tied, held in leash or muzzled may be killed by any police officer. 
(c)  The requirements of this section when applicable shall not in any way be limited by the procedure provided in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 6.08.040)  
Sec. 8-47. - Wild, exotic or vicious animals as pet; not allowed. 
(a)  No person shall keep, or permit to be kept, any wild, exotic or vicious animal as a pet. 
(b)  The term "vicious animal" means any animal, reptile, and/or fish, that constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals. 
(c)  The terms "wild animals" and "exotic animals" mean any venomous snake, constricting snake, tarantula, live monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or other warm-blooded animal which can normally be found in the wild state, any member of the crocodilian family, including, but not limited to, alligators, crocodiles, caymans and gavials. 
(d)  Guard dogs, ferrets, nonvenomous snakes, non-constricting snakes, rabbits and laboratory rats which have been bred in captivity and which have never known the wild shall be excluded from this section. 
(Code 1976, § 6.08.050; Ord. No. 84-382, § 1, 1984)  
Sec. 8-48. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City, as and for a penalty, a forfeiture in the following dollars amounts, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned for not more than 60 days for each violation and unpaid forfeiture in addition to such other penalties, remedies, sanctions and relief as may be, from time to time, provided by law: 
(1)  For a first offense, a forfeiture of not less than $30.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(2)  For a second offense, a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(3)  For a third offense, a forfeiture of not less than $70.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(4)  For a fourth and subsequent offense a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(5)  In addition to the imposition of forfeiture, the City may request and the court may grant injunctive relief, abatement, mandamus and such other equitable relief and orders as the court may deem appropriate to terminate the violation. 
(b)  Each occurrence shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Each day's continuance shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1976, § 6.08.060)  
Secs. 8-49—8-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - KEEPING OF ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 8-70. - Livestock and poultry; areas not allowed; exceptions; nuisances prohibited; number limitations. 
(a)  No horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, pig, goat, sheep, or animal raised for fur-bearing purposes, and no dove cote, rabbit warren, or other yard or establishment where small animals or fowl such as ducks, geese, turkeys, pheasants, rabbits, or guinea pigs are kept shall be allowed within the City limits, except in outlying building areas where no house, building, tenement, apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, retail food store, building used for school, religious or hospital purposes, or residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such animals or fowl are kept is less than 150 feet from the outer edge of any barn, coop or enclosure in which said creatures are housed or permitted to run. All said creatures may be kept only when no nuisance is created thereby, and their numbers shall be kept within the limitations set out in Sections 8-71 through 8-75. However, chickens may be kept as permitted in Subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Excepted from the prohibitions set forth in this section are chickens and chicken coops, which meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Chickens allowed. 
a.  The term "chicken" means a domestic fowl of the subspecies Gallus domesticus. 
b.  Any person may keep up to four female chickens on any residential zoning lot in the City which contains one single-family residential dwelling unit. 
c.  No roosters shall be allowed to be kept under this section. 
d.  Chickens may only be kept in a chicken coop or the attached and contiguous run located in the rear yard area. The chicken coop or run shall not be located in the front, interior side, or corner side yard of the residential zoning lot. 
(2)  Slaughtering of chickens. No person shall slaughter any chicken within the City of Janesville other than at a licensed meat processing facility. 
(3)  Construction and maintenance of coop. 
a.  A chicken coop means a new or existing enclosed accessory structure designed or modified for the keeping of chickens and meeting the requirements of this section and any applicable provisions of Chapter 10 (Building Code). A coop shall be constructed from conventional building materials in a workmanlike fashion or be a premanufactured enclosed structure designed specifically for the keeping of chickens in an urban environment. Such coop must be secure and impermeable to rodents, wild birds and predators, including dogs and cats, and must be constructed or modified in a fashion to provide a humane environment for the chickens, include adequate ventilation, adequate sun, adequate shade and adequate protection from adverse weather. A newly-built or installed coop shall have a minimum of three square feet per chicken and cannot exceed 24 square feet in size. 
b.  A chicken coop may have a run attached and contiguous to the coop with the run constructed in a fashion to confine the chickens and in compliance with the provisions of this section. A chicken run is a fenced cage that may not exceed 40 square feet in area or one percent of the rear yard area, whichever is greater. However, in no instance, may the chicken run exceed 100 square feet in area. 
c.  Chicken coops and runs must be kept clean, dry, and odor free and kept in a sanitary condition at all times in such a manner as to not disturb the use or enjoyment of adjoining property due to noise, odor or any other adverse impact. 
(4)  Confinement of chickens. Chickens must be kept in a chicken coop or the attached and continuous run at all times. Between sunrise and sunset, chickens may be allowed outside of the coop in the run. Chickens must be secured within the coop between sunset and sunrise. 
(5)  Location of chicken coop and run. A chicken coop must be located no closer than ten feet to the rear wall of a residential dwelling unit located on the zoning lot and no portion of the coop or run shall be located within ten feet of any lot line of the zoning lot upon which the coop and run are located. No portion of the coop or chicken run shall be located within 18 feet of any principal structure located upon any adjacent property. 
(6)  Annual residential chicken premises permit required. No person shall keep any chickens nor construct any chicken coop or run without first obtaining an annual residential chicken premises permit hereunder. 
a.  Fee. An initial permit fee in an amount established by the City Council from time to time shall be paid to the City by the applicant when the initial application is filed. An annual renewal permit fee in an amount established by the City Council from time to time shall be paid to the City by the applicant each year thereafter. 
b.  Application. The application for the residential chicken premises permit shall be made using such forms required by the City's Building Official and City Clerk-Treasurer and must contain an accurately scaled drawing showing the location of the proposed coop and any chicken run, distances to lot lines and distances to the nearest adjoining principal structure, together with dimensions of the coop and chicken run. Chicken runs are not required to meet the construction standards for fences in Section 42-358. However, all chicken runs constructed shall be of wire normally used for the containment of chickens. If the applicant is not the owner of the parcel, the property owner must sign the application certifying approval for the use of the premises for this purpose. The property owner's signature must be notarized. 
c.  Registration. Any permit application shall be accompanied with satisfactory evidence that the applicant has registered the proposed location with the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade, and Consumer Protection pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 95.51, and Wis. Admin. Code ch. ATCP 17. 
d.  Permit year. The permit year shall be January 1 through December 31. 
(7)  Miscellaneous. 
a.  All food supplies maintained for the coop must be kept in a secure and rodent-proof container. 
b.  Should any person feed chickens kept under this section with food meant for human consumption or scraps of such food, it shall only be fed within the coop and shall be prohibited within the chicken run. 
c.  All waste generated by the operation of the coop and chicken run, including, but not limited to, chicken carcasses, manure, droppings and spoiled feed, shall be disposed of in a bag placed in a City-issued garbage cart or composted according to best practices. 
d.  The Neighborhood and Community Services Director, and/or the Property Maintenance Inspector or his or her designee, or a building official may enter the rear yard of a residential zoning lot at any reasonable time to determine if a property is in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
e.  A re-inspection fee in an amount established by the City Council from time to time shall be charged by the City against and paid by the property owner if the violation is not corrected by the re-inspection date. A fee in an amount established by the City Council from time to time will be charged for each subsequent re-inspection until full compliance is achieved. Re-inspection fees that are not timely paid shall be entered upon the tax roll as a special charge against the lot or parcel of land, pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Prior Code, § 7.12(1)(part); Code 1976, § 6.12.010)  
Sec. 8-71. - Poultry houses and yards; number of birds or fowl permitted. 
Where poultry houses and yards are located at least 150 feet from the structures set out in Section 8-70, the keeping of not to exceed 25 birds or fowl, but no crowing roosters, shall be permitted. 
(Prior Code, § 7.12(1)(a); Code 1976, § 6.12.020)  
Sec. 8-72. - Rabbit and guinea pig warrens or hutches; number of animals permitted. 
Where rabbit and guinea pig warrens or hutches are located at least 150 feet from the structures set out in Section 8-70, the keeping of not to exceed 25 animals shall be permitted. 
(Prior Code, § 7.12(1)(b); Code 1976, § 6.12.030)  
Sec. 8-73. - Pigeon or dove cotes and yards; number of birds permitted. 
Where pigeons or dove cotes and yards are located at least 150 feet from the structures set out in Section 8-70, the keeping of not to exceed 20 pairs of birds shall be permitted. 
(Prior Code, § 7.12(1)(c); Code 1976, § 6.12.040)  
Sec. 8-74. - Raising fowl or animals for business purposes. 
The raising of fowl and animals not to exceed 100 in number can be conducted as a business when the area devoted to the business is in the first instance and remains at least 500 feet from the closest structure as set out in Section 8-70. 
(Prior Code, § 7.12(1)(d); Code 1976, § 6.12.050)  
Sec. 8-75. - Poultry houses and yards; construction and sanitation regulations; health inspection. 
All persons raising poultry must have properly constructed poultry houses as outlined in this section. All structures, pens, coops, or yards wherein animals or fowl are kept or permitted shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, shall be dry and well ventilated, devoid of all rodents and vermin, and as walls, ceilings, floors, partitions and appurtenances of all such structures shall be whitewashed or painted annually or more often as the Health Officer shall direct. The Health Officer or his or her representative on his or her own initiative or upon the complaint of any individual shall inspect any such structure or premises and issue any such order as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 7.12(1)(e); Code 1976, § 6.12.060)  
Sec. 8-76. - Dogs and cats; limited number allowed; exceptions. 
Not more than a combined total of four dogs and cats may be maintained on any lot or residence. In no event may more than three dogs or three cats be maintained per lot or residence, regardless of the combination. The exceptions are business places such as feed mills, or in outlying districts such as farms where good reason can be shown for the necessity of maintaining such animals to destroy rats, mice or other rodents. 
(Code 1976, § 6.12.070)  
Sec. 8-77. - Conforming establishments. 
All establishments conforming to regulations in existence prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this article shall be allowed to continue subject to zoning regulations as to new conforming uses. This exception shall not permit the maintenance of a nuisance as determined by inspection of the premises by the sanitary inspector, or the expansion of the number of fowl or animals permitted to be kept. 
(Prior Code, § 7.12(3); Code 1976, § 6.12.080)  
Sec. 8-78. - Animal waste. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any owner, keeper or possessor, including the walker of any dog, cat or other animal, to permit the animal to discharge animal excreta upon any public or private property, other than the property of its owner, if such owner, keeper, possessor or walker does not immediately thereafter remove and clean up such animal excreta from the public or private property. 
(b)  The requirements of Subsection (a) of this section do not apply when the owner or possessor of the private property waives those requirements. 
(c)  The term "immediately thereafter" means within not more than five minutes. 
(Code 1976, § 6.12.100; Ord. No. 84-386, § 1, 1984)  
Sec. 8-79. - Transporting of animals. 
(a)  Whenever an animal is being transported in the unenclosed back of a pickup or flat-bed truck, or similar type of vehicle, the animal shall be in a cage or enclosed device of restraint secured to the vehicle, so as to protect the animal from the weather and transport the animal in a safe manner. 
(b)  Whenever an animal is being transported in any other type of vehicle, the owner or operator of the vehicle shall control the animal in such manner as to keep the animal totally within the vehicle, to prevent any interference by the animal of the operation of the vehicle, and to transport the animal in a safe manner. 
(Code 1976, § 6.12.120; Ord. No. 84-385, § 1, 1984)  
Sec. 8-80. - Residential beekeeping. 
(a)  Keeping of honey bees allowed when. 
(1)  The term "honey bee" is defined as any member of the genus Apis. 
(2)  Any person may keep up to two colonies of honey bees on any residential zoned lot in the City which contains a single-family or two-family residential dwelling. One additional colony per acre would be allowed for all properties one acre or larger in size. 
(3)  If bees are no longer kept at the property, any beehive structures shall be removed from the yard within 30 days. No hive may house a colony of insects other than honey bees. 
(4)  All beekeeping activities, structures and products existing on a residential lot shall be for personal use only and cannot be operated as part of a business. 
(5)  All beekeeping activities must be in compliance with Wis. Stats. § 94.76 and Wis. Admin. Code ATCP 21.13, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(6)  Any property keeping honey bees shall place a sign in the front yard of the property indicating the presence of a beehive. 
(b)  Location of beehive structures. 
(1)  The term "beehive" is defined as any manmade, enclosed structure created to house and accommodate honey bees. 
(2)  Beehives may only be located in the rear yard area. Beehives shall not be located in the front, interior side or corner side yard of the residential zoned lot. 
(3)  Beehives shall not be located within ten feet of any property line. Beehive entrances shall face away from the property line of any neighboring developed lot. 
(4)  Beehives shall not be located within 150 feet of any property designated as a sensitive site. The term "sensitive site" is defined as any property that requires beehives to be kept at a greater distance for medical, safety or sustained public nuisance reasons. These sites include, but are not limited to, schools, daycares, medical facilities, senior care facilities, playgrounds, pools and outdoor athletic facilities. Properties designated as a sensitive site reserve the right to waive their designation. Residential properties can also be designated as a sensitive site if the resident can demonstrate a prolonged need for the increased buffer distance from beekeeping activities due to a health or safety concern. Property owners who are interested in starting beekeeping activities at their residence shall alert all neighbors within 150 feet of the beehive beforehand on a form provided by the City Clerk-Treasurer. 
(c)  Required structures for residential beekeeping. 
(1)  Honey bees must be maintained in beehives with removable combs for inspection purposes. Both langstroth and top bar beehives are acceptable beehive structures. The beehive structures must be maintained in good repair. 
(2)  A flyway barrier measuring six feet in height must be constructed along any part of a property line within 20 feet of a beehive, as measured from the nearest point of any hive to the property line. A flyway barrier is defined as a solid or closely slatted fence (no more than three inches between slats), wall, dense line of vegetation, or combination thereof. Property owners shall be required to obtain a fence permit from the Building Division if their flyway barrier exceeds 16 feet in length. 
(3)  Beekeepers must maintain a constant supply of water (example birdbath, chicken waterer, etc.) on their property. 
(d)  License. 
(1)  Required. No person shall keep any honey bees nor construct any beekeeping structures without first obtaining a residential beekeeping license through the City Clerk-Treasurer. 
(2)  Fee. An initial application fee in an amount established by the City Council from time to time shall be paid to the City by the applicant when the initial application is filed. An annual license renewal fee in an amount established by the City Council from time to time shall be paid to the City by the applicant each year thereafter. The license year shall be January 1 through December 31. There shall be no proration for a license issued for less than a full year. 
(3)  Application. The application for the residential beekeeping license shall be made using such forms required by the City's Clerk-Treasurer. If the applicant is not the owner of the parcel, the property owner must sign the application certifying approval for the use of the premises for this purpose. The property owner's signature must be notarized. 
(e)  Inspections. 
(1)  City of Janesville inspectors may enter the rear yard of a residential zoned lot at any reasonable time to determine if a property is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  A re-inspection fee in an amount established by the City Council from time to time shall be charged by the City against and paid by the property owner if the violation is not corrected by the re-inspection date. A fee in an amount established by the City Council from time to time will be charged for each subsequent re-inspection until full compliance is achieved. Re-inspection fees that are not timely paid shall be entered upon the tax roll as a special charge against the lot or parcel of land, pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Code 1976, § 6.12.130; Ord. No. 2018-729, § I, 4-8-2019 )  
Sec. 8-81. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City, as and for a penalty, a forfeiture in the following dollar amounts, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned for not more than 60 days for each violation and unpaid forfeiture in addition to such other penalties, remedies, sanctions and relief as may be, from time to time, provided by law: 
(1)  For a first offense, a forfeiture of not less than $30.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(2)  For a second offense, a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(3)  For a third offense, a forfeiture of not less than $70.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(4)  For a fourth a subsequent offense, a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(5)  In addition to the imposition of forfeiture, the City may request and the court may grant injunctive relief, abatement, mandamus and such other equitable relief and orders as the court may deem appropriate to terminate the violation. 
(b)  Each occurrence shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Each day's continuance shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  Any property with two or more nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action within a 12-month period shall be ineligible to receive a renewal permit for a period of one year after the date of the last such conviction. In addition, no other person may apply for a permit hereunder on the zoning lot subject to such prior permit during said period of renewal ineligibility. 
(Code 1976, § 6.12.200)  
Secs. 8-82—8-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RUNNING AT LARGE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Certain animals prohibited from running at large, Wis. Stats. § 172.01. 
 
Sec. 8-106. - Not permitted when. 
No person having the possession or control of any cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, chickens, geese or other fowl shall allow any of the same to run at large. Any such animal or fowl found within any public street, alley or other public ground or on the premises of any person other than its owner and not being then under the actual control of any person shall be deemed to be running at large. 
(Prior Code, § 17.06; Code 1976, § 6.16.010)  
Sec. 8-107. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City, as and for a penalty, a forfeiture in the following dollar amounts, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned for not more than 60 days for each violation and unpaid forfeiture in addition to such other penalties, remedies, sanctions and relief as may be, from time to time, provided by law: 
(1)  For a first offense, a forfeiture of not less than $30.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(2)  For a second offense, a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(3)  For a third offense, a forfeiture of not less than $70.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(4)  For a fourth and subsequent offense, a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(5)  In addition to the imposition of forfeiture, the City may request and the court may grant injunctive relief, abatement, mandamus and such other equitable relief and orders as the court may deem appropriate to terminate the violation. 
(b)  Each occurrence shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Each day's continuance shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1976, § 6.16.020)  
Secs. 8-108—8-127. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TRAPPING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Trapping licenses generally, Wis. Stats. § 29.241. 
 
Sec. 8-128. - Trapping of wild animals. 
Trapping of wild animals is permitted, but not on publicly owned land, except as provided in Section 8-129. 
(Code 1976, § 6.20.010)  
Sec. 8-129. - Prohibition exemptions. 
Traps shall be allowed in certain publicly owned areas subject to approval by City administration. Such traps may be set only in the months of November and December and must be set in a minimum of three inches of water and will not be allowed on dry land. Permitted traps must be conibear traps of a size for a muskrat trapping only. Twenty-five traps are the maximum number allowed per trapper. The City is not responsible for any damages that arise from the use of any traps. 
(Prior Code, § 17.14(2); Code 1976, § 6.20.020)  
Sec. 8-130. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City, as and for a penalty, a forfeiture in the following dollars amounts, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned for not more than 60 days for each violation and unpaid forfeiture in addition to such other penalties, remedies, sanctions and relief as may be, from time to time, provided by law: 
(1)  For a first offense, a forfeiture of not less than $30.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(2)  For a second offense, a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(3)  For a third offense, a forfeiture of not less than $70.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(4)  For a fourth and subsequent offense, a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(5)  In addition to the imposition of forfeiture, the City may request and the court may grant injunctive relief, abatement, mandamus and such other equitable relief and orders as the court may deem appropriate to terminate the violation. 
(b)  Each occurrence shall constitute a separation violation. 
(c)  Each day's continuance shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1976, § 6.20.030)  
Secs. 8-131—8-158. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FEEDING GEESE AND DUCKS UPON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 8-159. - Feeding geese and ducks prohibited. 
No person may feed, provide or give any food or other edible item to any goose or duck, or any flock of geese or ducks, upon any public property or park in the City limits. 
(Code 1976, § 6.22.010)  
Sec. 8-160. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City, as and for a penalty, a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00, together with the costs, fees and assessments of prosecution for each offense, and upon default in payment, shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail for not more than 20 days, or otherwise treated by the court as provided by law. 
(b)  A verbal or written warning without a forfeiture penalty may be issued by the police officer for a first offense by a person. 
(c)  In addition to the imposition of a forfeiture, the City may seek injunctive relief. 
(d)  Each incident and each day's continuance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 6.22.020)  
Secs. 8-161—8-188. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BIRD SANCTUARIES 
 
Sec. 8-189. - Bird sanctuary guidelines. 
All property owners wishing to install, plant, maintain, or permit natural vegetation to create a bird sanctuary for the purposes of attracting and observing birds must adhere to the guidelines and regulations set forth in this article. 
(1)  Definition. A reserved area of a yard maintained to attract, feed, shelter and observe birds. 
(2)  Location. Bird sanctuaries shall be located in the rear yard portion of residentially zoned properties set back at least five feet from all lot lines. 
(3)  Size. Bird sanctuaries shall be limited in size to 100 square feet. 
(4)  Maintenance. Vegetation in bird sanctuaries shall be managed by the property owner and possessor such that it represents planned and designed control, direction, and maintenance by the property owner. Only plants not referred to on the noxious weeds list (Chapter 22) may be planted, maintained or permitted in bird sanctuaries. Notwithstanding Section 22-204 to the contrary, this article permits grass over 12 inches but only in bird sanctuaries. 
(Code 1976, § 6.58.010; Ord. No. 2019-749, § III(8.58.010), 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 8-190. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the City, upon conviction thereof, a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the cost of prosecution. In default of payment of such forfeiture and the costs of prosecution, the violator, in addition to any other remedies provided by law for such defaults, may be incarcerated in the Rock County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are satisfied. 
(b)  Each and every day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate the violations as expeditiously as possible. 
(d)  The City, in addition to the above penalties, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation. 
(e)  In addition to and not necessarily in lieu of the forfeiture, penalties and other relief set forth in this article, upon seven days written notice to the property owner and/or possessor, in the event that the subject property is not brought into and/or kept in conformity with the regulations and requirements set forth in this chapter, the City may enter upon the property to bring it into conformity, in which event the full cost of such remediation shall be charged by the City against the property as a special charge or assessment, and if not timely paid shall be collected as a delinquent tax. 
(Code 1976, § 6.58.020; Ord. No. 2019-749, § III(8.58.020), 5-28-2019)  
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Adoption. 
The Janesville Building Code on file in pamphlet form with the City Clerk is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. Every act, requirement, condition, obligation, regulation, standard, prohibition, rule, provision and mandate therein shall have the same force and effect as this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.010)  
Sec. 10-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this Code shall govern the design, construction, alteration, demolition, and moving of all buildings and structures. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.020)  
Sec. 10-3. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known and cited as "Municipal Building Code;" and shall be construed to secure their expressed intent and to ensure public safety, health and welfare insofar as they are dependent upon building construction. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.030)  
Sec. 10-4. - Adoption of Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
The Wisconsin Administrative Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, also known as the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, including, but not limited to, SPS 320-325 and for Commercial Buildings, including, but not limited to, SPS 360-366, as from time to time amended or renumbered, is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by such code incorporated hereby by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. This section adopts such other Wisconsin Administrative Codes as may supersede, supplant or in any way amend, modify, change or add to the Wisconsin Administrative Code as adopted above. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.040)  
Sec. 10-5. - Application of code. 
(a)  All buildings and structures hereafter erected, altered, repaired, moved or demolished that are used or designed to be used for the purpose herein defined shall comply in full with the requirements of this Code. 
(b)  Zoning laws. No provision of this Code shall be construed to repeal, modify, or constitute an alternative to any lawful zoning regulations. 
(c)  One- and two-family dwellings. The City's one- and two-family dwelling code and related City ordinances shall apply to new and existing one- and two-family dwellings, and to parts thereof, which are hereafter erected or altered. Residential detached garages and accessory buildings are subject to the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings and are included within the scope of this Code. 
(d)  All buildings and structures as specified in the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, SPS 320-325, shall conform to the applicable requirements of the Wisconsin Administrative Building Code and City of Janesville General Ordinances. 
(e)  Alterations and repairs. The following provisions shall apply to buildings altered or repaired: 
(1)  Alterations. When not in conflict with any regulations, alterations to any existing building or structure, accommodating a legal occupancy and use but of nonconforming type of construction, which involves either the structural members of floor or roofs, beams, girders, columns, bearings, or other walls, rooms, heating and air conditioning systems, arrangement, light and ventilation, changes in location of exit stairways or exits, or any or all of the above, then such altered construction shall be made to conform to the minimum requirements of this Code applicable to such occupancy and use and given type of construction. 
(2)  Repairs. Repairs for purpose of maintenance, or replacement in any existing building or structure which do not involve the structural portions of the building or structure, or which do not affect room arrangements, light and ventilation, access to or efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection, or exterior aesthetic appearance and which do not increase a given occupancy and use, shall be deemed minor repairs and not subject to this Code. 
(3)  Alterations when not permitted. When any existing building or structure, which for any reason whatsoever does not conform to the regulations of this Code, has deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to an extent greater than 50 percent of its equalized assessed value, no alterations, remodeling, reconstruction, improvement or moving of such building or structure shall be permitted unless a compliance agreement, the terms and provisions of which are acceptable to the City Building Inspector and/or his or her designee and/or other appropriate City Code Official (the Building Official), has been entered into by the property owner and approved and entered into by the Building Official in accordance with Section 10-241. The compliance agreement is subject to the public safety and danger to the public determination of the Building Official. The City reserves and retains the right to either proceed under the original raze or repair order, condemnation order, or otherwise condemn the building or structure, order it razed or removed, raze and remove and/or cause the razing and removal of the building or structure if the City has not already done so in the event that the property owner at any time breaches or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the compliance agreement. The provisions of Section 10-241 are in addition to and not in lieu of the remedies for condemnation and/or razing/removal of old, unfit, dilapidated, damaged or deteriorated buildings and structures provided by law. 
(4)  Incorporated by reference. Also incorporated into this section by reference is Section 10-241 as if fully set forth verbatim herein. 
(5)  Alterations and repairs required. When any of the structural members of any building or structure have deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to less than their required strength, the owner of such a building or structure shall cause such structural members to be restored to their required strength; failing in which the building or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and shall be vacated and thereafter no further occupancy or use of the same shall be permitted until the regulations of this Code are complied with. 
(6)  Extent of deterioration. The amount and extent of deterioration of any existing building or structure shall be determined by a registered professional engineer at the owner's expense if not in agreement with the Building Inspector's determination. 
(f)  Razing of buildings. The Building Director is hereby authorized to act for the municipality under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0413, relating to the razing of buildings and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. The Municipal Treasurer is authorized to place the assessment and collect the special tax as therein provided. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.050)  
Sec. 10-6. - Administration. 
The Building Inspector, as certified by the Department of Safety and Professional Services, is authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, including, but not limited to, Chapters SPS 320-325 and SPS 360-366. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.060)  
Sec. 10-7. - Conflicting ordinances. 
Wisconsin Administrative regulations supersede any conflicting local ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.070; Ord. No. 80-195, § 1(part), 1980)  
Sec. 10-8. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter or Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.080; Ord. No. 80-195, § 1 (part), 1980)  
Sec. 10-9. - Department of Public Works Building Division. 
(a)  There is hereby established a department of the City Government to be known as the Building Division and shall include a Director, a Building Inspector, a Plumbing Inspector, a Heating Inspector, and Electrical Inspector and such other inspectors, clerks, and employees as the City Manager may from time to time appoint. Any and all such officers may be combined and held by the same person. The Director may also be known and referred to as the Building Official, Building Inspector, or Building Supervisor. 
(b)  Director; creation of office; term; salary. There is hereby created the office of the Director. Such Director shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall hold office until removed by the City Manager or until his or her successor shall have been duly appointed and qualified; he or she shall receive such salary as prescribed by the City Manager subject to the approval of the Council. 
(c)  Qualifications; powers; duties. The Director shall have an office in City Hall and shall not be financially interested, either directly or indirectly, in the construction of buildings or in the preparation of plans and specifications thereof or permanent equipment. 
(d)  The Director shall have, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the ability to manage and control all matters pertaining to the Building Division and shall possess the necessary qualifications and inspector certifications required by the City of Janesville and the State of Wisconsin to supervise the general construction of buildings and enforce the provisions of this Code. Such Director or his or her authorized assistants, shall have the power and authority, at all reasonable times, for any proper purpose, to enter upon any public or private premises and make inspection thereof and to require the production of the permit for any building, electrical, heating, or plumbing work or the required license therefor. Any person interfering with the said Director or his or her authorized assistants while in the performance of the duties prescribed in this chapter, shall forfeit and pay to the City the penalty hereafter provided. 
(e)  The Director or his or her authorized assistants, may refuse to approve construction in any case in which the workmanship is not of workmanlike character. In the event that the defective work is satisfactorily corrected, he or she may then issue the required approval. 
(f)  Records and reports. The Director shall keep a record of all permits. He or she shall keep a record, showing the number, description and size of all buildings erected during the term of his or her office, indicating the kind of materials used and the cost of all buildings of the various classes. He or she shall keep a record of all the inspections made and of all fees collected by him or her showing the date of their receipt and delivery to the City Treasurer. He or she shall make monthly reports and an annual report to the City Manager of the above matters. 
(g)  Building Inspector; creation of office; term; salary. There is hereby created the office of Building Inspector. Such inspector shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall hold office until removed by the City Manager or until his or her successor shall have been duly appointed and qualified; he or she shall receive such salary as prescribed by the City Manager, subject to the approval of the Council. 
(h)  Qualifications; powers; duties. The Building Inspector shall possess the necessary qualifications and inspector certifications required by the City of Janesville and the State of Wisconsin to supervise the general construction of buildings and enforce the provisions of this Code. He or she shall not be financially interested, either directly or indirectly, in the construction of buildings or in the preparation of plans and specifications thereof. 
(i)  The Building Inspector shall enforce all state laws, City ordinances and other lawful orders and regulations relating to the construction, alterations, repair, removal and safety of buildings and structures. Such inspector shall have the power and authority, at all reasonable times, for any proper purpose, to enter upon any public or private premises and make inspections thereof and to require the production of the building permit. Any person interfering with the said inspector while in the performance of the duties prescribed in this chapter, shall forfeit and pay to the City the penalty hereafter provided. 
(j)  Inspections. No structural portion of any part of any building or structure shall be covered or concealed in any manner whatsoever without having the approval of the Building Inspector. Such approval shall be given only after an inspection has been made by the Building Inspector following notification by the permit holder or his or her agent. If any portion of the work is not approved by the Building Inspector, the permit holder or his or her agent shall be notified wherein the same fails to comply with the ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.090)  
Sec. 10-10. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall directly or indirectly erect or construct any building or structure nor add to, enlarge, improve, structurally alter, convert, extend, move, wreck, or demolish, any building or structure or cause the same to be done, without first having obtained a permit therefor from the Building Division as hereinafter provided. A permit from the Building Division shall also be required for the construction, reconstruction or expansion of an off-street parking lot, open storage lot or loading area as hereinafter provided. For purposes of this subsection, the term "reconstruction" shall be defined as removal of all the existing parking lot, open storage lot or loading area surface and base course to the subgrade. The term "open storage lot" means an unroofed area upon which are kept any goods, materials, merchandise, product, vehicles and other items. 
(b)  Historic Overlay District. In addition to the permits required for alterations and changes which affect buildings, any structure included in any Historic Overlay District shall be required to obtain a building permit for the installation of siding, windows and removal of original architectural details representative of an architecture style, a unique design element or material; however, there shall be no permit fee required. 
(c)  Application for permits. Applications for permits shall be made in writing upon a blank form to be furnished by the City and shall state the name and address of the owner of the building and the owner of the land on which the permit is issued, when necessary, the name and address of the designer, and shall set forth a legal description of the land on which the building is to be located, the location of said building on the lot, the house number thereof, and such other information as the Building Inspector may require. With such application, there shall be submitted to the Building Division two complete sets of plans, specifications and a copy of plot or survey. 
(d)  Plans and specification. All plans shall be drawn to a scale not less than one-fourth inch per foot, on paper or cloth in ink, or by some other process that will not fade or obliterate, and shall disclose the existing and proposed provisions for water supply, sanitary sewer connections and surface water drainage. All dimensions shall be accurately figured. Drawings that do not show all necessary detail shall be rejected. A complete set of plans for residential construction shall consist of: 
(1)  Foundation. 
(2)  All elevations. 
(3)  All floor plans. 
(4)  Complete construction details. 
(e)  Assurance. In no case shall the approval of plans and the issuance of a permit by the Building and Development Services Division be taken as assurance that the resulting construction has met or will meet the requirements of the Code. 
(f)  Waiver of some requirements. At the option of the Building Division, plans, data, specifications and survey need not be submitted with an application for permit to execute minor alterations and repairs to any building, structure or equipment, provided the proposed construction is sufficiently described in the application for permit. 
(g)  Seal of registered engineer or architect. All plans, data and specifications for the construction of any building or structure or for any construction in connection with existing buildings and structures, other than one- and two-family residences, containing more than 50,000 cubic feet, total volume, submitted with an application for permit, shall bear the seal of the registered architect or registered engineer. The plans shall also be stamped as approved as when required by the Department of Safety and Professional Services of the State of Wisconsin. Such building or structure shall be constructed under the supervision of an architect or engineer who shall be responsible for its erection in accordance with the approved plans. No permit shall be granted for such structure unless such construction will be under the supervision of an architect or engineer, as required by the Wisconsin Statutes. A written statement to this effect shall be filed by the architect or engineer, with the Building Division with the application for permit. 
(h)  Drainage. 
(1)  Grading of lots. The plans shall show the present and proposed grades of the lot on which it is proposed to erect the building for which a building permit is sought and of the immediately adjoining property in sufficient detail to indicate the surface water drainage before and after the completion of grading. No permit shall be issued if the erection of the building and the proposed grades shall unreasonably obstruct the natural flow of water from the surface of adjoining property or obstruct the flow of any existing ravine, ditch, drain or stormwater sewer draining neighboring property, unless suitable provision is made for such flow by means of an adequate ditch or pipe, which shall be shown on the plans and shall be constructed so as to provide continuous drainage at all times. 
(2)  Every lot, prior to initial occupancy, shall be so graded as to bring the site to sidewalk grade at the street right-of-way line. 
(3)  No water shall be discharged from any roof or conductor pipes upon any public walk, but shall be conducted underneath the walk in a manner approved by the Building Inspector. 
(i)  Moving damaged buildings. No building or other structure that is old, deteriorated, dilapidated, unfit for human habitation or has been damaged by any cause, (including such moving or separation from its foundation and service connections in case of moved buildings) shall be repaired, remodeled, reconstructed, improved, altered or moved within or into the municipality, where the estimated costs to repair the building or structure exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the building or structure without a building permit issued by the City. No building permit for such building or structure may be issued unless a compliance agreement, the terms and provisions of which are acceptable to the City Building Inspector, his or her designee and/or other applicable City Code Official (the Building Official), is entered into by the property owner and approved and entered into by the Building Official in accordance with Section 10-241. The compliance agreement is subject to the public safety and danger to the public determination of the Building Official. The City and/or the Building Official reserves and retains the right to not permit the movement of the building or structure within or into the City in the event that the property owner at any time breaches or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the compliance agreement. The provisions of Section 10-241 and the compliance agreement are in addition to and not in lieu of the remedies for condemnation and/or razing/removal of old, unfit, dilapidated, deteriorated and damaged buildings and structures provided by law. 
(j)  Unfit buildings or structures. Also incorporated into this section by reference is Section 10-241 as if fully set forth herein verbatim. 
(k)  Building Inspector to issue permit. 
(1)  If the Building Inspector finds that the proposed building will comply in every respect with this Code, other municipal ordinances, and all laws of the State of Wisconsin, and lawful orders issued pursuant thereto, he or she shall issue a building permit. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered in any respect which involves any of the above-mentioned ordinances, laws or orders, or which involves the safety of the buildings, except with the written consent of the Building Inspector filed with such application. 
(2)  In case adequate plans are presented, the Building Inspector, at his or her discretion, may issue a permit for a part of the building before receiving the plans and specifications of the entire building. It shall be unlawful to commence work on any building or alteration before the building permit has been issued. The issuance of a permit upon the plans and specifications shall not prevent the Building Inspector from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of any ordinance of the municipality or laws of the State of Wisconsin or lawful orders issued pursuant thereto. 
(3)  For the construction of buildings requiring approval of the Department of Safety and Professional Services no permit shall be issued until such approved plans are received by the Building Division. 
(4)  A card signed by the Building Inspector indicating the permit has been issued shall be protected from weather conditions and posted at the job site during construction. After issuance of a building permit, the approved plans shall not be altered unless any proposed change is first approved by the Building Inspector as conforming to the provisions of this Code. 
(5)  The building permit shall become void unless operations are commenced within four months from the date thereof, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended at any time after work is commenced, for a period of 60 days. 
(6)  Before any work is commenced or recommenced after the permit has lapsed, a new permit shall be issued at the regular fee rate. In any event, the work required to construct any building shall be completed within 24 months from the date of issuance of the permit. 
(l)  Inspector may revoke permits. 
(1)  The Building Inspector may revoke any permit, certificate of occupancy, or approval issued under the regulations of this Code and may stop construction or use of approved new materials, equipment, methods of construction devices, or appliances for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Whenever there is a violation of any regulation of this Code or of any other ordinance, law or lawful orders or Wisconsin Statutes relating to the same subject matter. 
b.  Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes dangerous to life or property. 
c.  Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provisions of the application for permit, or of the permit. 
d.  Whenever in the opinion of the Building Inspector there is inadequate supervision provided on the job site. 
e.  Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been made in the application for permit, plans, drawings, data specifications, or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance of the permit or approval was based. 
f.  Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an approval or occupancy given by the Building Inspector for the use of any new materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices, or appliances. 
(2)  The notice revoking a permit, certificate of occupancy, or approval shall be in writing and may be served upon the applicant for the permit, owner of the premises, and his or her agent, if any, and on the person having charge of construction. 
(3)  A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the building, structure, equipment, or premises in question by the Building Inspector. 
(4)  After the notice is served upon the persons as aforesaid and posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any construction operation whatsoever on the premises, and the permit which has been so revoked shall be null and void, and before any construction or operation is again resumed, a new permit, as required by this Code, shall be procured and fees paid therefor, and thereafter the resumption of any construction or operation shall be in compliance with the regulation of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.100)  
Sec. 10-11. - Materials and drainage. 
(a)  All buildings and premises shall be kept reasonably clean, and shall also be kept reasonably free from any accumulation of materials or other matter during construction. 
(b)  All rainwater shall be so drained and conveyed therefrom to prevent dampness in the walls and ceilings. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.110)  
Sec. 10-12. - Moving buildings. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful to move any building across or along any street or alley in the City of Janesville without first having secured a permit to do so from the Building Division. 
(b)  Compliance agreement required; term of one year. If the property owner chooses to repair a building or structure in a situation in which a raze or repair order has been issued, and if a compliance agreement, the terms and provisions of which are acceptable to the City Building Inspector or his or her designee and/or other appropriate City Code Official (the Building Official), has been entered into by the property owner and approved and entered into by the Building Official in accordance with Section 10-241, the maximum term for the compliance agreement is one year from the date that the property owner is first notified of the violation. This requirement shall supersede the regular building permit requirement set forth elsewhere in the City's ordinances requiring that all work should be completed within two years. The compliance agreement is subject to the public safety and danger to the public determination of the Building Official. The City reserves and retains the right to either proceed under the original raze or repair order, condemnation order, otherwise condemn the building or structure and/or order it razed and removed, raze and remove, and/or cause the razing and removal of the building or structure in the event that the property owner at any time breaches or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the compliance agreement. The provisions of Section 10-241 are in addition to and not in lieu of the remedies for condemnation and/or razing/removal of old, unfit, dilapidated, damaged or deteriorated buildings and structures provided by law. 
(c)  Included by reference. Also incorporated into this section by reference is Section 10-241 as if fully set forth verbatim herein. 
(d)  Restrictions. No building or structure shall be moved into or within the City limits and relocated in any district regardless of the present development of the area, which in the opinion of the Building Inspector due to architectural, structural or other characteristics, would tend to substantially depreciate other property in the immediate vicinity immediately or in its development in the future. Any such restrictive ruling of the Building Inspector may be appealed to the Building Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(e)  Bond required. Before a permit to move any building on the streets is granted by the Building Inspector, the party applying for a permit shall first secure and file with the City Clerk public liability insurance protecting the City of Janesville against any claim, suit, or judgment and cost and expenses and agreeing to save the City harmless against all such claims, suits or judgments and cost in the following amounts: 
(1)  Property damage .....$100,000.00 
(2)  Liability-for injury to one person .....$500,000.00 
(3)  Liability-arising out of one accident .....$1,000,000.00 
(f)  This article shall not be construed as assuming any liability on the part of the City for damages to any one injured or any property destroyed or damaged by any defect in any building or equipment or any electrical wiring or equipment. 
(g)  In addition to the above requirement relative to insurance, any party applying for a permit shall also file a surety bond in the amount of $10,000.00 conditioned on paying for any damage which may be done to any City street or City property of any kind which may be damaged in connection with preparing for or the moving of the building. 
(h)  A one-story building not over 12 feet in width and not to exceed 22 feet in length, which can be moved by placing it on a truck, may have a permit issued for such moving without filing the above required liability insurance or bond, provided the owner of the truck doing the moving has in force adequate liability insurance covering his or her vehicle and bearing an endorsement including the City of Janesville as co-insured. Before any building is moved on a truck, following the issuance of the permit, the Police Department shall be notified of the location, time of moving and the route to be taken. 
(i)  Route to be taken. Every application for a permit to move a building on the streets shall set forth in detail a description of the building proposed to be moved and of the route proposed to be followed in moving said building. 
(j)  Route to be approved. No permit shall be granted by the Building Inspector authorizing the moving of any building until the City Engineer has approved in writing the route to be followed in the moving of such building. In every instance the approved route must be followed. 
(k)  Reduction in the size of building. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to make his or her approval conditional upon the reduction in size of the building to be moved in every case where, in his or her judgment, such reduction of said building will aid in preserving the condition of the trees or other vegetation. And in every case, such building shall be reduced in size before being placed upon the street. 
(l)  General requirements. Every moving permit hereafter issued shall be construed as demanding the fulfillment of the following requirements whether stated in such permit or not. 
(1)  Every permit to move a building shall state the conditions to be complied with, designate the route to be taken and limit the time for removal. 
(2)  The moving of any building along any street or alley shall be carried on without interruption during working hours. 
(3)  In the moving of any building along busy or crowded streets or alleys, the Building Inspector may require the moving of such building to be carried on at night time as well as day time or at night time only in order to complete the moving process with the least possible obstruction of said streets or alleys. 
(4)  Every person to whom a permit is issued for moving any building shall notify the Building Inspector when actual work of moving is to be commenced. 
(5)  In every case where it shall be necessary to trim any trees along the route, such trimming or removal shall be done under the supervision of the Public Works Department. 
(6)  No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street crossing or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant. 
(7)  A red light shall be attached to every building being moved along a street during the period from sunset to sunrise. Said lights shall be attached to said building, one at each corner and in every case lights shall not be placed farther apart than 12 feet. 
(8)  Every person who has moved a building, as provided in this article, shall report within one day after said building has reached its destination. The Building Inspector shall thereupon inspect the streets and alleys over and along which said building has been moved. 
(9)  Said Building Inspector shall report to the person to whom the permit was issued the damages ascertained by such inspection. It shall be the duty of such permit holder to repair such damage forthwith. In every case where such permit holder shall fail to repair such damage to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector, said Building Inspector shall cause such damage to be repaired and charge the same against such permit holder. 
(10)  In any case where a building is moved, leaving an open basement, such basement shall be immediately filled in to grade level, except that it may be protected by being completely and adequately fenced in for a period of not to exceed 60 days, after which it shall be filled in by the owner, failing which, it shall be declared a public nuisance and shall be filled in by the City and cost thereof assessed against the property and added to the tax rolls. (Sections 34-124 and 34-125.) 
(11)  Sewer laterals. In any case where the use of a sewer lateral is discontinued due to moving or demolishing a building, such lateral shall be cut off and properly plugged at the curbline, by a licensed plumbing contractor, with proper permit. 
(12)  Water laterals. In any case where the use of a water lateral is discontinued, due to moving or demolishing a building, such lateral shall, if lead or copper, be cut off and plugged at the curbline; and if such lateral is iron, this shall be plugged at the main. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.120)  
Sec. 10-13. - Fees. 
(a)  Building permit fees. Building permit fees shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(1)  Re-inspection and after-hours inspection fee (per inspection). 
a.  At the inspectors discretion, a re-inspection fee shall be charged on residential, commercial or raze or repair building/remodeling projects if the work for which an inspection is requested is not complete so as to be ready for an inspection, or if the work is complete but not in conformance with the applicable Building Code requirements and the work is still not in conformance with the applicable code requirements upon re-inspection. The property owner or general contractor shall be notified of any re-inspection fee due at the time the occupancy inspection is requested. Such fees shall be paid prior to an occupancy inspection. The re-inspection and after-hours inspection fees shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time. 
b.  An after-hours inspection fee shall be charged on residential, commercial or raze or repair building/remodeling projects when the inspection is performed at a time outside of normal business hours of the Building Division. 
(2)  Exceptions. Accessory buildings, swimming pools, hot tubs/spas and fences. 
(3)  Failure to obtain a permit prior to commencement of work will result in a penalty of $100.00 or double the permit fee, whichever is greater, but in no event shall the penalty exceed $2,000.00. Such penalty shall be paid in addition to the customary permit fee. 
(b)  HVAC Permit Fees; definitions. 
Commercial group 1. This group shall include new and additions to: general offices, barber shops, beauty parlors, bowling alleys, dry cleaning establishments, clinics, natatoriums, shelters, hotels and motels, taverns, restaurants, cafeterias, retail establishments, where manufactured products are bought and sold, repair garages, service stations, churches, assembly halls, theaters, exhibition buildings, educational institutions, hospitals, nursing homes, places of detention, gymnasiums, arenas, laboratories, lodge halls, funeral homes, libraries, skating rinks, dance halls, armories, and vehicle storage garages. 
Commercial group 2. This group shall include new and additions to: warehouses, freight terminals, storage buildings, refrigeration storage, factories, machine shops, transformer vaults, sewage treatment plants, heating plants, steam and electric generating plants and other buildings not classified in groups 1 and 2. 
(1)  HVAC permit fees shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(2)  Re-inspection and after-hour inspection fee (per inspection). 
a.  At the inspectors discretion, a re-inspection fee shall be charged on residential, commercial or raze or repair building/remodeling projects if the work for which an inspection is requested is not complete so as to be ready for an inspection, or if the work is complete but not in conformance with the applicable Building Code requirements and the work is still not in conformance with the applicable code requirements upon re-inspection. The property owner or general contractor shall be notified of any re-inspection fee due at the time the occupancy inspection is requested. Such fees shall be paid prior to an occupancy inspection. The re-inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time. 
b.  An after-hour inspection fee shall be charged on residential, commercial or raze or repair building/remodeling projects when the inspection is performed at a time outside of normal business hours of the Building Division. 
(3)  Failure to obtain a permit prior to commencement of work will result in a penalty of $100.00 or double the permit fee, whichever is greater, but in no event shall the penalty exceed $2,000.00. Such penalty shall be paid in addition to the customary permit fee. 
(4)  Square footage definition. 
a.  New and additions. 
Square footage. Outside dimension of useable building area length × width (Useable means floor area with at least a four-foot ceiling height). 
b.  Interior alterations. 
Square footage. Inside dimensions of room length × width. 
(c)  Residential electrical permit fees. 
(1)  Residential electrical permit fees shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(2)  Re-inspection and after-hours inspection fee (per inspection). 
a.  A re-inspection fee shall be charged on residential, commercial or raze or repair building/remodeling projects if the work for which an inspection is requested is not complete so as to be ready for an inspection, or if the work is complete but not in conformance with the applicable Building Code requirements and the work is still not in conformance with the applicable code requirements upon re-inspection. The property owner or general contractor shall be notified of any re-inspection fee due at the time the occupancy inspection is requested. Such fees shall be paid prior to an occupancy inspection. The re-inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time. 
b.  An after-hour inspection fee shall be charged on residential, commercial or raze or repair building/remodeling projects when the inspection is performed at a time outside of normal business hours of the Building Division. 
(3)  Failure to obtain a permit prior to commencement of work will result in a penalty of $100.00 or double the permit fee, whichever is greater, but in no event shall the penalty exceed $2,000.00. Such penalty shall be paid in addition to the customary permit fee. 
(d)  Commercial electrical permit fees. 
(1)  Commercial electrical permit fees shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(2)  Re-inspection and after-hour inspection fee. 
a.  At the inspectors discretion, a re-inspection fee shall be charged on residential, commercial or raze or repair building/remodeling projects if the work for which an inspection is requested is not complete so as to be ready for an inspection, or if the work is complete but not in conformance with the applicable Building Code requirements and the work is still not in conformance with the applicable code requirements upon re-inspection. The property owner or general contractor shall be notified of any re-inspection fee due at the time the occupancy inspection is requested. Such fees shall be paid prior to an occupancy inspection. The re-inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time. 
b.  An after-hour inspection fee shall be charged on residential, commercial or raze or repair building/remodeling projects when the inspection is performed at a time outside of normal business hours of the Building Division. 
(3)  Failure to obtain a permit prior to commencement of work will result in a penalty of $100.00 or double the permit fee, whichever is greater, but in no event shall the penalty exceed $2,000.00. Such penalty shall be paid in addition to the customary permit fee. 
(e)  Plumbing permit fees. 
(1)  Residential plumbing permit fees shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(2)  Guidelines and criteria for plumbing permits. 
a.  Permit fees shall be submitted per Section 10-12. 
b.  The following are subject to permit fees: 
1.  All new fixtures and appliances, as indicated on the application form furnished the applicant, including water heaters, storm inlets, roof drains, and hose bibs; 
2.  All plugged or capped openings left for future installation of fixtures; 
3.  When any change is made in the water, soil, waste or vent piping which necessitates the resetting of any plumbing fixture or appliance, each fixture so affected; 
4.  All building sewers (sanitary), building sewers (storm) and water services; 
5.  Clear water, water only, water and wastewater, or wastewater only meters and related piping. 
(3)  Re-inspection and after-hour inspection fee. 
a.  At the inspectors discretion, a re-inspection fee shall be charged on residential, commercial or raze or repair building/remodeling projects if the work for which an inspection is requested is not complete so as to be ready for an inspection, or if the work is complete but not in conformance with the applicable Building Code requirements and the work is still not in conformance with the applicable code requirements upon re-inspection. The property owner or general contractor shall be notified of any re-inspection fee due at the time the occupancy inspection is requested. Such fees shall be paid prior to an occupancy inspection. The re-inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time. 
b.  An after-hour inspection fee shall be charged on residential, commercial or raze or repair building/remodeling projects when the inspection is performed at a time outside of normal business hours of the Building Division. 
(4)  Residential and commercial plumbing plan approval. 
a.  Plumbing plan approval required for the following installations: 
1.  New installations, addition and alteration involving six or more fixtures, to be installed in public buildings. 
2.  Grease interceptors to be installed for public buildings. 
3.  Garage catch basins and oil interceptors to be installed in public buildings. 
4.  Automatic car wash facilities. 
5.  Sanitary dump station. 
b.  Fees for plumbing plan shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(5)  Failure to obtain a permit prior to commencement of work will result in a penalty of $100.00 or double the permit fee, whichever is greater, but in no event shall the penalty exceed $2,000.00. Such penalty shall be paid in addition to the customary permit fee. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.140; Ord. No. 2017-708, § I, 11-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 2018-741, § I, 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 10-14. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Permit fees shall be submitted per Section 10-12. 
(b)  The following are subject to permit fees: 
(1)  All new fixtures and appliances, as indicated on the application form furnished by the applicant, including water heaters and softeners; 
(2)  All plugged or capped openings left for future installation of fixtures; 
(3)  When any change is made in the water, soil, waste or vent piping which necessitates the resetting of any plumbing fixture or appliance, each fixture so affected; 
(4)  All building sewers (sanitary), building sewers (storm) and water services; 
(5)  Clear water, water only, water and wastewater, or wastewater only meters and related piping; 
(6)  Plumbing plan approval and review per State of Wisconsin Plumbing Code for agent municipality. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.150)  
Sec. 10-15. - Unusual construction. 
When applications for unusual technical design or magnitude of construction are filed, the Building Inspector may refer such plans and specifications to the Department Safety and Professional Services, State of Wisconsin, Safety and Building Division for analysis and recommendations as to the safety of design in compliance with this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.160)  
Sec. 10-16. - Inspections and appeals. 
(a)  Inspections to be conducted as prescribed by Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 320 and 361. An occupancy inspection must be conducted prior to the building being occupied or used for business activity. 
(b)  Coordinated inspections. All provisions of the laws and regulations of the municipality, and of legally adopted rules of local fire and health officials in respect to the operation, equipment, housekeeping, fire protection, handling and storage of flammable materials, liquids and gases and the maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions of use in occupancy in all buildings shall be strictly enforced by the administrative officials to whom such authority is delegated. Whenever inspection by any authorized enforcement officer discloses any violation of the provisions of this Code, or of any other rules, regulations, or laws, he or she shall immediately notify the administrative officer having jurisdiction of the violation. 
(c)  Certified report. The Building Inspector may require a certified report of all required inspections as regulated by this Code from the registered architect or registered engineer supervising the construction of any building, structure, or equipment requiring their supervision. Such certified report shall state in detail that all construction work has been executed in accordance with all of the regulations of this Code, approved plans, specifications, terms of the permit, and data filed with the application for permit, and further that such construction work was executed in accordance with accepted architectural and engineering standard procedures. 
(d)  Any person feeling himself or herself aggrieved by any order or ruling of the Building Inspector may appeal from such ruling within 20 days after written notice of such ruling has been delivered to him or her. The appeal must be made to the appropriate body having power to grant a variance as follows: 
(1)  New one- and two-family dwellings shall be appealed to the State of Wisconsin, Department of Safety and Professional Services. 
(2)  Buildings and structures under jurisdiction of the Wisconsin Administrative Building Code shall be appealed to the State of Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services. 
(3)  City of Janesville Building Code section shall be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.170)  
Sec. 10-17. - Stop-work order. 
Whenever the provisions of this Code or of the plans approved thereunder are not complied with, a stop-work order shall be served on the owner or his or her representative and a copy thereof shall be posted at the site of the construction. Such stop-work order shall not be removed except by written notice of the Building Inspector after satisfactory evidence has been supplied that the violation has been corrected. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.180)  
Sec. 10-18. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Inspections. 
(1)  The Building Inspector shall make a final inspection of all new buildings, additions, and alterations. If no violations of this or any other ordinances are found, the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy, stating the purpose for which the building is to be used. 
(2)  No building, nor part thereof, shall be occupied until such certificate has been issued, nor shall any building be occupied in any manner which conflicts with the conditions set forth in the certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Use discontinued. 
(1)  Whenever any building or portion thereof is being used or occupied contrary to the provisions of this Code, the Building Inspector shall order such use or occupancy discontinued and the building or portion thereof vacated, by notice served on any person using or causing such use or occupancy to be continued and such person shall vacate such building or portion thereof within ten days after receipt of the notice or make the building or portion thereof comply with the requirements of this Code. 
(2)  Any building, structure, or premises, or any part thereof, hereafter vacated or damaged by any cause whatsoever, so as to jeopardize public safety or health, shall not hereafter be occupied or used under an existing certificate of occupancy or without the same, until an application has been filed and a new certificate of occupancy issued. Subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to buildings used entirely for dwelling purposes. 
(c)  Change of use or occupancy. It shall be unlawful to change the use or occupancy of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof without first obtaining from the Building Inspector an approval of such change in the use or occupancy, and a Certificate of Occupancy therefor. Change in ownership of business or building requires obtaining a new certificate of occupancy. However, the Building Inspector shall not issue a Certificate of Occupancy for a change of use to a community living arrangement without first receiving proof that the applicant has given written notice of the proposed establishment to neighbors within 200 feet of the proposed community living arrangement, measured from the property line. The written notice to neighbors shall include as a minimum all the following information: 
(1)  The type of classification of clientele to be served by the community living arrangement (CLA); 
(2)  The number of clients to be housed; 
(3)  The location by address; 
(4)  The name of the operator of the CLA; 
(5)  The name of the individual who can be contacted regarding the facility along with a telephone number; 
(6)  Information regarding the establishment of a community advisory committee; 
(7)  Information about the statutory review by the Council in 11 to 13 months after initial licensure, including information about how to make a request for such review; 
(8)  Information about the procedure used to license community living arrangements, explaining that the Department of Health and Social Services has responsibility for determining the qualifications of the applicant and the premises. 
(d)  Hardship. The Building Inspector shall have the authority and power to permit the occupancy of any building or structure in the municipality without there having first been obtained an occupancy permit, in all such cases of hardship as in his or her judgment and discretion warrant occupancy before the final stage of completion as set out in this Code, but in no event shall such permission be granted where the estimated cost of the completion exceeds $1,000.00. Before granting such permission, the Building Inspector shall first examine the premises and estimate the cost of completion of such building or structure; and shall determine the time within which such building or structure can be completed; and shall require its owner to post a cash bond in the amount of the estimated cost of completion of such building or structure or a surety bond in an amount double the estimated cost of completing the building or structure. The fixed period of time within which to complete the building or structure shall be set, but in no event shall it exceed 120 days. In the event of failure of the owner of such building or structure to comply with the terms of such obligations, the City shall be permitted to declare such bond forfeited. Thereupon, the Building Inspector shall arrange to have such building completed without delay with the funds available from the proceeds of the bond. 
(e)  Temporary certificate of occupancy. Due to weather conditions preventing completion of the site plan requirements, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a time period determined by the Building Inspector. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.190; Ord. No. 77-56, § 1, 1977; Ord. No. 84-398, 1984)  
Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building means a building that is less than or equal to 120 square feet, is incidental and subordinate to the principal building, serves the principal building exclusively, and is detached from but located on the same lot with such principal building. 
Addition means any new construction whereby an existing building or structure, or building or structure in course of construction, is increased in area, or cubical content. 
Adjoining lot line means the line between adjoining lots, plots of land, or parcels of land of different or same ownership. 
Alteration means any change, or modification in construction or occupancy. 
Established grade means the grade of the street as established by ordinance at the center line of the street. 
Existing means a building, structure, equipment, or premises completed or in course of construction, or used or occupied, and for which a legal permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Code. 
Garage means a building or portion thereof that is greater than 120 square feet in area and in which a motor vehicle or equipment containing gasoline, distillate, or other volatile flammable liquid in its tank may or may not be stored, prepared, or kept. A garage may also allow storage of other vehicles (including electric vehicles), tools, gardening equipment, or other vehicle or equipment that includes gasoline or other volatile flammable liquid in its tank. 
Occupancy or use means the purpose for which a building, structure, equipment, materials or premises or part thereof is used or intended to be used as regulated by this Code. 
Open storage lot means an unroofed area upon which are kept any goods, materials, merchandise, product, vehicles and other items. 
Principal building means a single main building or structure on a lot for specific use or occupancies. 
Repair means the reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance. The word "repair" shall not apply to any change of construction. 
Required means mandatory by the provisions of this Code. 
Shall. The term "shall," as used herein, is mandatory. The term "must" is also mandatory. 
Unusual construction means any construction methods or materials not covered in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.200)  
Sec. 10-20. - Receptacles for remote water meter registers. 
In every newly constructed dwelling having a 1½ inch or smaller water meter, there shall be installed a receptacle for a remote water meter register. The receptacle shall be located in the front of the dwelling along a walk or driveway as near to the meter as possible, and between 1½ feet and three feet above the foundation. The receptacle shall be a single gang switch box mounted horizontally. A thin wall or equivalent conduit one-half inches shall be extended from the receptacle inside the dwelling to a point below the basement ceiling line. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.210; Ord. No. 78-89, § 1, 1978)  
Sec. 10-21. - Soils. 
(a)  Loads. The permissible loads in tons per square foot on natural earth shall not exceed the bearing capacity shown in the following table. 
Type of Soil or Rock 	Bearing Capacity Tons/Square Feet 
Quick sand, alluvial and filled soils, determined by tests but not more than 	½ 
Soft clay, sandy loam, or silt 	1 
Ordinary clay 	2 
Clay or fine sand, firm and dry 	3 
Gravel and coarse sand, well packed 	5 
Hard pan or shale 	6 
Rock 	Not more than 20 percent of the ultimate crushing strength of such rock 
 
(b)  Borings and tests. 
(1)  When required. In the absence of satisfactory data from immediately adjacent areas, the owner or applicant shall make borings, test pits, or other soil investigations at such locations and to sufficient depths of the bearing materials to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector. 
(2)  Soil samples. Samples of the strata penetrated in test borings or test pits, representing the natural disposition and conditions at the site, shall be available for examination of the Building Inspector. 
(3)  Varying soil values. When test borings indicate non-uniformity of bearing materials, a sufficient number of additional borings shall be made to establish strata levels of equal bearing capacity. 
(4)  Costs of tests. When the safe sustaining power of the soil is in doubt, the Building Inspector shall direct that the necessary borings or tests be made by and at the expense of the applicant and under the supervision of the Building Inspector to determine the safe value. 
(c)  Soil test procedure. 
(1)  Soil test method. The test procedure and testing apparatus shall be approved by the Building Inspector before they are used; and a complete record of the test together with a record of the soil profile shall be filed by the licensed engineer or architect. 
(2)  Loaded area. If results of soil tests by boring are in doubt as to safe sustaining power, the Building Inspector may require tests by loaded area method. The loaded area shall be approximately four square feet for all bearing materials; except that when the footing overlies wet clay or other soft materials, the test load shall be applied to an area of not less than ten square feet. 
(3)  Recorded settlements. Loads shall be applied in continuous increments of not more than one-quarter of the proposed safe load. When the proposed load has been reached, it shall remain undisturbed and readings shall be recorded to determine the rate of settlement until the settlement in eight consecutive hours is less than 0.01 inches. A 50 percent excess load shall than be applied and allowed to remain in place until the rate of settlement is less than 0.01 inches in 24 hours. 
(4)  Accuracy of loading. Tests loads applied by mechanical devices shall be automatically controlled so as to ensure not more than five percent variation in applied load. Such devices shall be calibrated prior to the test. 
(5)  Test acceptance. The load settlement shall be represented diagrammatically, and no test shall be deemed satisfactory if the net settlement after removal of the test load exceeds 0.01 inches per ton of gross load applied. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.220)  
Sec. 10-22. - Footings and foundations. 
(a)  One- and two-family foundations and footings shall be designed and constructed to conform with the construction standards set forth in the Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
(b)  All public buildings foundations and footings shall be designed and constructed to conform with the construction standards set forth in the Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
(c)  Accessory buildings (in permitted zoning districts) less than or equal to 120 square feet are exempt from footing and foundation requirements. They may be constructed on a floating slab at the discretion of the property owner. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.240)  
Sec. 10-23. - Masonry precautions. 
All masonry shall be protected against freezing for not less than 48 hours after installation and shall not be constructed below 28 degrees Fahrenheit on rising temperatures or below 36 degrees Fahrenheit on falling temperatures without temporary heated enclosures or without heating materials or other approved precautions necessary to prevent freezing. No frozen materials shall be used or shall frozen materials be built upon. In warm weather, all clay or shale units of high absorption characteristics shall be thoroughly wet before laying in the wall. All other masonry units, except gypsum units, laid in other than lime mortar, shall be wetted before laying in the wall if the absorption resulting from partial immersion in one-eighth inch of water for one minute is less than one percent. All masonry construction shall be adequately braced and supported to ensure its stability during construction. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.245)  
Sec. 10-24. - Garages; general requirements. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Attached garage means a garage which meets or exceeds one or more of the following: 
(1)  Attached directly to the principal building; 
(2)  Attached to the principal building by means of an enclosed or open breezeway, porch, terrace, or vestibule, constructed so as to form an integral part of the principal building; 
(3)  Constructed in the basement of the principal building; 
(4)  Situated less than five feet from any point of the principal building and/or attached deck; 
(5)  Situated so that any portion of any garage wall lies on or in front of an imaginary line extending across the lot (said line being five feet in back of and parallel to the closest rear wall of the principal building or attached deck), and at least one garage wall is less than ten feet from any other wall of the principal structure. 
 
Detached garage means a garage entirely separated from the principal building and which meets or exceeds one or more of the following: 
(1)  Situated so that any portion of any garage wall lies on or to the rear of any imaginary line extending across the lot (said line being five feet in back of and parallel to the closest rear wall of the principal building or attached deck) and all other garage walls are ten feet (or five feet if a firewall is provided in accordance with the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code) or more from any other wall of the principal building. 
(2)  Situated so that any portion of any garage wall lies on or in front of an imaginary line extending across the lot (said line being five feet in back of and parallel to the closest rear wall of the principal building or attached deck) and all other garage walls are ten feet (or five feet if a firewall is provided in accordance with the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code) or more from any other wall of the principal building. 
 
Living area means the gross floor area of living space within the principal building, excluding porches, decks, breezeways, garages, and basements, regardless of whether or not these areas are finished. 
(b)  Size. 
(1)  Detached garages shall not be constructed larger than 750 square feet in area. 
(2)  Attached garages shall not be constructed larger than the gross living area of the principal building, excluding porches, decks, breezeways, and basements, regardless of whether or not these areas are finished. 
(c)  Foundations and footings. 
(1)  Attached private garages shall be provided with the same type footings and foundations as required herein for the principal building. 
(2)  Detached private garages may be built with a continuous floating slab of reinforced concrete not less than four inches in thickness. In place of footings, the perimeter edges of the slab shall be thickened to a minimum of eight inches by 12 inches. Reinforcement shall be a minimum of six inches by six inches No. ten by ten wire mesh. Bolts one-half inch in diameter with nuts and washers attached, six inches long, shall be embedded five inches in the concrete curb of detached garages at a maximum spacing of 72 inches apart or other methods approved by the Building Department. 
(d)  Floor surface. The floor in all private garages shall be of concrete construction. No openings or pits in the floor shall be permitted, except for drainage to the sanitary sewer system. 
(e)  Construction. Garages, whether attached or detached, shall be constructed in compliance with the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, SPS 320-325, Wisconsin Administrative Code. Residential detached garages and accessory buildings are included in the scope of this Code. Commercial detached garages are required to meet the standards of the Wisconsin Commercial Building Code. 
(f)  Heating equipment in attached and detached garages or accessory buildings shall comply with the standards as set forth in the Wis. Admin. Code, SPS 323. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.250)  
Sec. 10-25. - Mobile offices. 
(a)  Mobile offices may be used as construction offices during construction. 
(b)  Mobile offices are not to be permanent buildings and shall never be used or permitted for permanent use. The use of a mobile office is allowed for a period not to exceed 12 months in business and industrial zoning districts during the expansion of existing buildings on the same parcel. A building permit must be obtained for the project prior to the mobile office being occupied. Location must be approved by the Building Official. No other mobile offices are permitted for business purposes anywhere. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.260)  
Sec. 10-26. - New materials and methods. 
All new materials, methods of construction, devices and equipment shall be approved by the Department of Safety and Professional Services, State of Wisconsin, or such other committee as may be established by this article or other local ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.270)  
Sec. 10-27. - Swimming pools; general. 
(a)  Any outdoor swimming pool, hot tub or spa shall be constructed, equipped and maintained in such manner as to meet the requirements of the State Board of Health and the applicable Codes of the City of Janesville. 
(b)  Every outdoor swimming pool, hot tub and spa with a side wall height of, or capable of a height of greater than 30 inches shall be enclosed with a fence or wall, not less than four feet in height and of such design and construction that it cannot be climbed through or over or under. Fencing that is chainlink shall be constructed of not less than 13 gauge corrosion resistant wire or other equivalent material and the fence posts shall be decay and corrosion resistant, set in concrete bases. Entrance shall be by means of a suitable gate or door or the same construction and height as the enclosure, which gate or door shall be kept closed and securely locked at all times when adequate supervision is not inside or within the enclosure. These requirements shall apply to outdoor swimming pools whether permanent or temporary. 
(1)  Location. No portion of a pool or equipment, located outside a building shall be located less than eight feet from any side or rear property line, nor less than 30 feet from any property line having street frontage. 
(2)  Excepted from the requirement of a fence enclosure not less than four feet in height shall be those spas and hot tubs which have a locking cover constructed of sturdy material and in compliance with the ASTM F1346 standard, which cover shall be in place and locked when the hot tub or spa is not in use. 
(3)  Excepted from the requirement of a full fence enclosure are aboveground pools with side walls of greater than four feet in height which include a rail of at least 12 inches above the top of the pool and a secured entry into the pool. A lockable deck with gate or lockable ladder are secured entries. 
(4)  Excepted from the requirement of a full fence enclosure are non-pool structures, such as Koi ponds. 
(5)  Permit. A City pool permit is required for pools which are greater than 30 inches in height. 
(6)  Electrical connections serving pool pumps shall be installed in accordance with State of Wisconsin and National Electrical Code requirements. (The use of electrical extension cords is not allowed.) 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.280; Ord. No. 2018-727, §§ I, II, 7-23-2018 )  
Sec. 10-28. - Canopies and marquees and awnings. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Awning means a temporary shelter extending from part or all of the building wall and composed of non-rigid materials except for the supporting framework. 
Canopy or marquee means a permanent roof-like shelter extending from part or all of the building wall and constructed of some durable, rigid material such as metal, glass or plastic. 
(b)  Any canopy or marquee erected hereafter on any building shall conform to the following provisions: 
(1)  Any canopy or marquee shall have at least ten feet of clearance between the grade of the sidewalk at any point and the lowest point of any projection or appendage of any such canopy or marquee. No part of any canopy or marquee shall extend further over the sidewalk than a point within three feet of the vertical plane straight up from the curb. 
(2)  Any canopy or marquee shall be constructed entirely of incombustible materials throughout, shall be suspended from the building with no supports resting upon the sidewalk or public highway, shall slope and drain toward the building and shall be provided with conductors connected in such a manner that no water is discharged on any sidewalk. 
(3)  Any sign or other appendage of a temporary or permanent nature shall be rigidly attached to the canopy or marquee in a manner approved by the Building Inspector. 
(c)  Any awning erected hereafter on any building shall conform to the following provisions: 
(1)  Any awning shall have at least seven feet of clearance between the grade of the sidewalk at any point and the lowest point of any projection or appendage of any such awning. No part of any awning shall extend further over the sidewalk than a point within one foot of the vertical plane straight up from the curb. 
(2)  Any awning shall be securely supported from the building on rigid framework and may be hinged to swing back against the building or may be supported by poles securely fastened to the sidewalk. Any damage to such awning or support framework or poles that occurs during the course of street or sidewalk maintenance, repair, snowplowing or other municipal activity, except such damage as is caused by the City's negligence, shall be the responsibility of the person who owns the awning and the City shall not be held liable for any such damage. 
(d)  No person shall erect or allow to remain over any sidewalk any canopy, marquee, awning or other similar structure unless the same is constructed in a safe and secure manner and kept in good repair. 
(e)  Any person who owns, erects or allows to remain over any sidewalk any canopy, marquee, awning or other similar structure shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the City and its employees and officials from any and all claims, damages, losses, liabilities, actions, suits or judgments which may be presented, brought, secured or sustained against the City or any of its employees or officials on account of the position, construction, installation, erection, maintenance, alteration or removal of any canopy, marquee or awning or by reason of any accidents caused thereby or resulting therefrom. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.290)  
Sec. 10-29. - Identification of products. 
All materials shall be identified by the approval label, the grade mark, the trade mark, or by other approved manufacturer's identification. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.300)  
Sec. 10-30. - Invalidity in part. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or provision of this Code shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the provisions so adjudged, and the rest of this Code shall remain valid and effective. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.310)  
Sec. 10-31. - Failure to obtain permit. 
It shall be unlawful to commence work prior to obtaining a permit therefor. Double fees shall be charged if work is commenced prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.320)  
Sec. 10-32. - The Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc. 
(a)  International Property Maintenance Code, 1998 or current edition, as amended below, is hereby adopted in its entirety, as from time to time amended, as the Minimum Property Standards Code for all structures and properties in the City of Janesville, Wisconsin (amended as follows): 
(1)  Section H-210.0—Applied Meaning of Words and Terms is hereby amended with the addition of the following: 
(2)  "Housing" and "dwelling" means any improved property, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a home or residence, but does not include: 
a.  Any building or structure containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one family, and occupied by the owner as his or her residence. 
b.  It is the intent of this section to apply to housing and dwellings where the rental or lease of the housing constitutes a business. 
(3)  Exception: Sections H-310.0 and H-320.0 through H-323.1 shall pertain to all dwellings including owner occupied. 
(b)  Any act required to be performed or prohibited by such code incorporated hereby by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.330)  
Sec. 10-33. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter or Wisconsin Administrative Code is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provision shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.340; Ord. No. 80-195, § 1(part), 1980)  
Sec. 10-34. - Supplemental heating units and radiant heating units. 
(a)  Supplemental heating units; defined. The term "supplemental heating units" includes all devices described as energy converters, stoves or supplemental heating devices using wood, coal or other solids as fuel and attached to the existing warm air furnace and using the furnace ducts for distribution of heat. 
(b)  Radiant heating units; defined. The term "radiant heating unit" means a room heater, stove or freestanding fireplace not intended for duct connections and used to heat a room using the combustion of solid fuel such as wood or coal as a source of heat. 
(c)  Supplemental heating units and radiant heating units; application. SPS chs. 320, 321, 323 and 324, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and all amendments thereto (which are adopted and incorporated by reference in Section 32-97), shall apply to all supplemental heating units and radiant heating units installed in any commercial building or in any dwelling unit that is not covered by the One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code. No person may so install or cause to be installed a supplemental or radiant heating unit which fails to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Administration. The Building Inspector is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Permit and permit fee. No person may install or cause to be installed a supplemental heating unit or a radiant heating unit without first obtaining a permit from the Building Division. The Building Division shall give to each permit applicant the following information: It is recommended that: 
(1)  The wood burned in the units should be dry wood, preferably dry hard woods. 
(2)  The chimney flue should be checked periodically to be sure the flue is open. 
(3)  The chimney flue should be cleaned at least once a year. 
(Code 1976, § 15.01.350; Ord. No. 80-214, § 1(part), 1980)  
Secs. 10-35—10-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 10-53. - Adopted. 
(a)  The Janesville Plumbing Code on file in pamphlet form with the City Clerk is hereby adopted and by reference and otherwise made a part of this chapter and ordinance. Every act, requirement, condition, obligation, regulation, standard, prohibition, rule, provision and mandate set forth therein shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. Every act required or prohibited therein shall be required or prohibited by this chapter. This section adopts such modifications, changes and amendments thereto as may be made from time to time. 
(b)  The Wisconsin Plumbing Code, including, but not limited to, SPS 381-387 (Department of Safety and Professional Services, herein referred to as DSPS), as amended from time to time, is adopted by reference and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by such code incorporated hereby by reference is required or prohibited by this article. This section adopts such other Wisconsin Administrative Codes as may supersede, supplant or in any way amend, modify, change or add to the Wisconsin Administrative Code as adopted above. The provisions of this article apply uniformly to the design, construction, installation, supervision, maintenance and inspection of plumbing, including, but not limited to, sanitary and storm drainage, water supplies, wastewater treatment, and dispersal or discharge for buildings. 
(Code 1976, § 15.02.010)  
Sec. 10-54. - Plumbing Inspector; creation of office; term; salary. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of the Plumbing Inspector. Such inspector shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall hold office until removed by the City Manager or until his or her successor shall have been duly appointed and qualified and shall receive such salary as prescribed by the City Manager. 
(b)  Qualifications; powers; duties. The City of Janesville shall supervise the installation, alteration and repair of plumbing within its jurisdiction in accordance with one the following approaches: 
(1)  The City shall utilize at least one supervisor to oversee all plumbing inspections and all plumbing plan reviews who shall hold a certification as a Commercial Plumbing Inspector issued under this section and who shall hold a license as a Master Plumber or a license as a Journeyman Plumber. 
(2)  The City shall utilize at least one individual to conduct all plumbing inspections and all plumbing plan reviews who shall hold a certification as a Commercial Plumbing Inspector issued under this section and who shall hold a license as a Master Plumber or a license as a Journeyman Plumber. 
During his or her incumbency, the said Plumbing Inspector shall not engage in the business of plumbing within the City or be financially interested directly or indirectly in any firm or corporation. 
(c)  The Plumbing Inspector shall faithfully perform all the duties imposed upon such officer by the statutes of the State of Wisconsin, by the Wisconsin Plumbing Code (DSPS), and by local regulations adopted by the Council. It shall be his or her duty to see that all laws of the State of Wisconsin, all rules or regulations of the Wisconsin Plumbing Code (DSPS), and all of the ordinances and regulations of the City of Janesville which relate to the installation of plumbing and the laying of drains are enforced. He or she shall see that all construction, reconstruction or alterations of plumbing, water systems, storm sewers, sanitary sewer, drainage and plumbing ventilation hereafter installed in any building within the City shall conform to DSPS rules and regulations and local ordinances. 
(d)  The said Plumbing Inspector shall have the power and authority to enter at all reasonable times any public or private premises for the purpose of making necessary inspections, and also to require of any person or persons performing plumbing, the production of the license or permit therefor. Any person who shall willfully resist or interfere with the exercise of these powers shall be subject to the penalty hereinafter provided. 
(e)  Inspections. Where plumbing is installed in the City of Janesville, the testing of plumbing shall be done in the presence of a Plumbing Inspector. All plumbing work within a building and exterior plumbing installations on private property shall be inspected and shall conform to SPS 381-387. The plumber or his or her agent shall notify the Building Division when work is ready for inspection and shall specify the street address where the work is being done. Unless otherwise authorized by the Plumbing Inspector, all plumbing work, such as water supply piping, building sewers and drains shall be left uncovered until inspected and work is approved. The plumber in charge shall make such arrangements as will enable the Plumbing Inspector to reach all parts of the building, and shall provide the equipment and labor for making such tests under the supervision of the Plumbing Inspector. 
(f)  When plumbing work has been completed within a building, it shall be mandatory that the Plumbing Inspector be notified so that final inspection can be made. 
(Code 1976, § 15.02.030)  
Sec. 10-55. - Plan approval, permits, licenses and bond required. 
(a)  No plumbing work of any kind, except minor repairs within buildings shall hereafter be done without a permit being first issued therefor by the Plumbing Inspector. 
(b)  All permit applications shall be properly filled out and shall be signed by a person qualified as a licensed plumber under the Wisconsin Administrative Plumbing Code, except that an application may be approved for plumbing work to be done by the owner in a single family residence which he or she occupies. 
(c)  Licensed plumbers shall have executed and filed with the City Clerk a performance bond in the penal sum of $1,000.00 and an indemnity bond in the penal sum of $5,000.00 or in lieu of the indemnity bond, a certificate of insurance in the sum of $5,000.00. 
(1)  The bonds or such performance bond and certificate of insurance shall be in accordance with the specifications set forth in Subsections (c)(1), (2) and (3) of this section and to be approved by the Plumbing Inspector as to sufficiency of sureties and as to form and execution. 
(2)  The performance bond shall be conditioned that the applicant will perform and sufficiently complete all work for which a permit or permits are issued in accordance with the Plumbing Codes of the State of Wisconsin, the City of Janesville and all other ordinances of the City of Janesville, within a reasonable time, so as to fully protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(3)  In addition, such bond shall provide that the applicant will backfill within a reasonable time and maintain any street, alley or public grounds in which he or she makes any openings or excavations, as directed by and to the satisfaction of the Plumbing Inspector and/or Building Official for a period of one year after initially backfilling the same and shall pay the costs of restoring the temporary and permanent surface of the street, alley or public grounds by the City. That in the event that at any time the backfilling of any ditches or excavations between the curb and the lot line is found defective that future settling occurs within a period of one year after the date of completion of the work, shall make or cause to be made, necessary resultant repairs to curbs, sidewalks or driveways, etc., subject to the provisions of this Code; that the applicant shall reimburse the City for all damages to any City utilities resulting from his or her work operations, regardless of whether such damage is done by himself or herself, his or her agents, employees or subcontractors. 
(4)  The indemnity bond or certificate of insurance shall be conditioned that the applicant will indemnify and save harmless the City of Janesville, its officers and agents, against any and all claims, suits or actions of any kind because of injuries and/or property damages resulting or arising from any negligence or the performance of any work on the part of the applicant or his or her agents, employees or subcontractors; that said applicant or his or her insurer shall notify the City of Janesville in writing at least ten days prior to the cancellation of any certificate of insurance afforded hereunder. 
(5)  Plumbers' bonds and certificates of insurance shall be dated July 1 and shall be for the term of one year but shall remain in force and effect as to any work commenced during the term of the bond or certificate of insurance. 
(Code 1976, § 15.02.050)  
Sec. 10-56. - Plumbing fees. 
(a)  Permit fees shall be submitted per Section 10-12. 
(b)  The following are subject to permit fees: 
(1)  All new fixtures and appliances as indicated on the application form furnished the applicant, including water heaters; 
(2)  All plugged or capped openings left for future installation of fixtures; 
(3)  When any change is made in the water, drain, waste or vent piping which necessitates the resetting of any plumbing fixture or appliance, each fixture so affected; 
(4)  All sanitary building sewers, storm building sewers and water services; 
(5)  Clear water, water only, water and wastewater, or wastewater only meters and related piping; 
(6)  Plumbing plan approval and review per State of Wisconsin Plumbing Code for the agent municipality. 
(Code 1976, § 15.02.060)  
Sec. 10-57. - Plumbers license required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform any plumbing in the City without holding a qualified license with the State of Wisconsin, except that repairs and stoppages as defined in the Wisconsin Plumbing Code do not require license status. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall allow the use of his or her or its name directly or indirectly for the purpose of making application to perform plumbing in the City. 
(c)  A permit application submitted by the applicant will not be approved unless such individual is qualified as required by the Wisconsin Administrative Plumbing Code, except that an application may be approved for plumbing work to be done by the owner in a single-family residence which he or she occupies. 
(Code 1976, § 15.02.070)  
Sec. 10-58. - Excavations in streets. 
All excavations in the streets for sewer and/or water connection or for any other purpose by person other than an authorized utility or contractor working for the City or utility shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Permit. Before the excavation is started, the person doing the work shall obtain the necessary permit and shall obtain full information on all existing underground structures, pipes, conduits, etc. 
(2)  Damage. No excavation shall be carried on with a mechanical digger closer than two feet from such piping or underground structure. The actual work of exposing the piping or structures shall be done by hand and extreme care shall be exercised by the person doing the work so as not to injure such piping or structures, it will be repaired at the expense of the person or firm holding a permit to excavate in the public streets. 
(3)  Width of trench. The width of the trench shall be kept as narrow as possible for safe working conditions and all excavated material shall be hauled away from the site and disposed of, unless excavated material is suitable for reuse in the opinion of the Plumbing Inspector. 
(4)  No tunneling. No tunneling will be permitted under any portion of the roadway, except State and Federal Highways. 
(5)  Filling trenches. When pipe laying has been completed in any street and has been approved by the Plumbing Inspector, all trenches shall be refilled with sand and gravel, to a height of not less than the present grade of said street at the time of excavation and extending full length into the property line. Sand and gravel shall be used as refill for all trenches and the last 12 inches of fill for said trenches shall be limestone rock or chips, and said trenches shall be properly mechanically compacted at six inch lifts. 
(6)  Barricades. The street shall be kept barricaded and protected with flares until the City has repaired the trench upon notice to do so from the contractor or firm doing the work, and/or the Plumbing Inspector. 
(7)  Final repairs by City. The City will make the final repairs of the excavation and restore the street surface. The expense of this work shall be borne by the person or firm holding the permit to excavate in the street. 
(8)  Police Department, Fire Department and Bus Department to be notified. The Fire Department and Bus Department must be notified before any street is entirely blocked, and when it is opened. 
(9)  Blocking highways. According to statute, no U.S. or State Highway can be blocked to the extent of more than 50 percent of the roadway at any time. 
(Code 1976, § 15.02.080)  
Sec. 10-59. - Piping for appliances. 
(a)  Any piping for supplying water to or carrying waste from any appliance being installed by an appliance dealer such as automatic washers, air conditioners, water heaters, etc., shall be installed by a licensed plumber, and water shall terminate in a valve at the appliance. 
(b)  In no case shall any saddle be installed on any water service for use on any appliance or for any other purpose. 
(Code 1976, § 15.02.110)  
Sec. 10-60. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Invalidity of part. If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or provision of this Code shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the provisions so adjudged, and the rest of this Code shall remain valid and effective. No part of this Code shall be interpreted to prevent the enforcement of other ordinances or local regulations which prescribe standards equal to or better than are provided herein. 
(b)  Purpose. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 145.02, the purpose of this chapter is to provide that all plumbing in connection with buildings and facilities in the state, including buildings owned by the state or political subdivision thereof, shall be safe, sanitary and such to safeguard the public health and the waters of the state. 
(c)  Maintenance. All plumbing systems, both existing and new, and any and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices and/or safeguards which are required by this Code shall be maintained in good working order at all times. The owner and his or her designated agent shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of plumbing systems. 
(d)  Privies and waterless toilets. 
(1)  No privy, chemical or dry closet system or any waterless closet shall be installed or maintained within the boundaries of the City of Janesville, except temporarily during periods of construction where no toilet facilities are available and only upon the prior permission of the Building Official. The Building Official may approve such temporary systems for special events for up to a 14-day period. Any temporary privy or other waterless toilet shall be removed as soon as connection is possible to the public sewer. Any such temporary system shall be ratproof, flyproof and so located so as to prevent any nuisance to adjoining property. 
(2)  No septic or other sewerage tank shall be constructed on property to which the public sewer system is accessible. Where public facilities are not available, a private sewage system complying with the provisions of SPS 383, Wisconsin Administrative Code (Wis. Admin. Code SPS 383), as from time to time amended, and the Rock County Health Department. 
(e)  The ends of all sewer pipes shall be plugged with watertight test plugs, or capped so as to prevent water, soil or any foreign matter from entering the City sanitary sewer system until such time as the occupancy permit for the premises is issued. 
(Code 1976, § 15.02.120)  
Sec. 10-61. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any provision of the Building Code or any order issued under the provisions of the Building Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25.00, nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof shall be committed to the Rock County Jail for a term of not less than five days nor more than 60 days. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate the violations as expeditiously as possible. 
(c)  Each and every day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  The City, in addition to the above penalties, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation, and/or the City Council may revoke any license or permit. 
(e)  If, in any action, a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense, or shall any error, oversight, or dereliction of duty on the part of the Plumbing Inspector constitute a defense. 
(Code 1976, § 15.02.130)  
Secs. 10-62—10-86. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 10-87. - Janesville Electrical Code. 
The Janesville Electrical Code, on file in pamphlet form with the City Clerk, is hereby adopted and by reference and otherwise made a part of this article. Every act, requirement, condition, obligation, regulation, standard, prohibition, rule, provision, and mandate set forth therein shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. Every act required or prohibited therein shall be required or prohibited by this article. This section adopts such modifications, changes and amendments thereto as may be made from time to time. 
(Code 1976, § 15.03.010)  
Sec. 10-88. - Electrical Inspector; creation of office; term; salary. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of Electrical Inspector. Such inspector shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall hold office until removed by the City Manager or until his or her successor shall have been duly appointed and qualified. He or she shall receive such salary as prescribed by the City Manager, subject to the approval of the City Council. 
(b)  Qualifications; powers; duties. The person appointed to fill the office of the Electrical Inspector shall be a State of Wisconsin Licensed Master Electrician. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the Electrical Inspector to engage in the business of the installation or maintenance of electrical wiring and appliances, either directly or indirectly, and he or she shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the City of Janesville at any time while holding office of Electrical Inspector. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to see that all electrical light, power and all other electrical apparatus connected with the same, are in strict conformity with provisions of this article, the National Electric Code, and the Wisconsin State Electrical Code, issued by the Department of Safety and Professional Services, under authority of the state statutes. 
(e)  Said Electrical Inspector shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any public or private buildings in the discharge of his or her official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspections or test of the electrical wires and appliances contained therein, and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical currents and to cut or disconnect, in cases of emergency, any wire where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department. 
(Code 1976, § 15.03.020)  
Sec. 10-89. - Inspections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to connect up the equipment of any building, to any electrical supply lines or to turn on the current, unless a certificate of inspection has been issued by the Electrical Inspector, and it shall be the duty of the electrical utility supplying electrical service to any building to secure a copy of the certificate of inspection from the Electrical Inspector, before supplying service to such building. 
(b)  Upon the completion of the construction and installation of the electrical wiring and equipment of any building, including fire alarm systems, area of refuge systems, and other such emergency and life safety systems, it shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation doing the same, to notify the Electrical Inspector, who shall inspect the installation. If the installation is found to be in compliance with the provisions of this article, the Inspector shall issue a certificate of inspection authorizing connection to the electrical service and the turning on of the current. If the Electrical Inspector, at the time of the inspection, finds any fault with the electrical wiring or equipment, the Inspector shall notify the person, firm or corporation of such fault. All electrical wiring and equipment which is to be concealed, shall be inspected before concealment and no other craft shall cover up or conceal such wires unless the installation has been inspected and approved by the Electrical Inspector. The licensed electrician shall provide any necessary equipment to perform the inspection. 
(c)  Persons, firms or corporations associated with crafts other than electrical and functioning in their trades shall in no way alter the approved installation of any electrical equipment by the placement of materials or equipment in too close proximity, by concealment, by making inaccessible, or in any way affecting the approved installation so as to make it in violation of this Code. 
(d)  Before a certificate of occupancy will be issued by the Building Inspector, it shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation doing the installation of the electrical system to call the Electrical Inspector for a final inspection and to have all work conform to this Code. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the State of Wisconsin Licensed Electrical Contractor who has obtained the electrical permit to contact the Electrical Inspector for all inspections, including the final inspection. The Wisconsin Licensed Electrical Contractor and/or the Wisconsin Licensed Master Electrician on record for the Contractor shall meet the Electrical Inspector for inspections when requested. 
(f)  When electrical wiring and equipment is removed from a building for demolition purposes, the Wisconsin Licensed Electrician shall call for inspection when such wiring has been removed and all remaining wiring is installed in a safe condition. 
(g)  Procedures when unsafe or illegal electrical equipment is discovered: 
(1)  Notice to owner; failure to comply. When the Electrical Inspector finds any electrical equipment to be unsafe or dangerous to persons or property, the person owning or using such electrical equipment shall be notified in writing by the Electrical Inspector to remove or cause to be removed or to make any changes or repairs as determined by the Electrical Inspector so as to restore such electrical equipment to a safe condition. Failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such notice shall be sufficient cause for the Electrical Inspector to disconnect or order the discontinuance of electrical service to said electrical equipment or to cause the arrest and/or cause issuance of a citation to such person owning or using such electrical equipment. 
(2)  In emergency situations, the Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to immediately disconnect or cause the removal or disconnection of any such electrical equipment in any of the following instances: 
a.  In any case of emergency, affecting the safety of persons or property, or where electrical equipment interferes with the work of the Fire Department. 
b.  Where electrical equipment is not installed in conformity with the regulations of this article and, in the professional opinion of the Electrical Inspector, poses an immediate safety or fire risk. 
(3)  Inspector to attach official notice to disconnect equipment. When the Electrical Inspector disconnects or causes to be disconnected electric current from electrical equipment, the Inspector shall attach an official notice, tag, lock or seal to such electrical equipment to prevent the use of electricity. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to detach such official notice, tag, lock, seal or to break open, change, remove, destroy, tear, alter, mutilate, cover, or otherwise deface any such official notice, tag, lock or seal. 
(h)  Electrical inspections required to be complete after normal business hours, such as, but not limited to, emergencies, electrical service changes, and emergency lighting inspections will be assessed a special inspection fee determined by the adopted fee schedule. This fee shall be paid in full before the final electrical inspection will be approved and occupancy may occur. 
(Code 1976, § 15.03.030)  
Sec. 10-90. - Permits. 
(a)  Before any electrical wires or electrical apparatus shall be installed for lighting or power purposes, including fire alarm, area of refuge, and other such emergency and life safety systems, or any electrical construction work done, except minor electrical work, an electrical permit shall be obtained from the Electrical Inspector by a State of Wisconsin licensed Electrical Contractor as defined in SPS 316 (Wis. Admin. Code SPS 316). The licensed Electrical Contractor shall be or shall employ a State of Wisconsin Licensed Master Electrician or a Residential Licensed Master Electrician as defined in SPS 316 (Wis. Admin. Code SPS 316). Permits obtained by industrial facilities exempted by the State of Wisconsin are required to obtain permits as outlined within this Code section, the permit is allowed to be obtained by the facility owner and signed by the employee responsible for the wiring. 
(1)  The electrical permit application shall describe in detail the proposed installation or work and give the location of the premises where same is to be placed. No permit shall be issued unless satisfactory proof is furnished to the Electrical Inspector upon his or her request, that the applicant has been employed to perform the work or installation and will be responsible for the performance thereof in the manner required by the City ordinance or by the State laws; nor unless proof be submitted that the applicant has paid to the Electrical Inspector the fees herein required. 
(2)  Any electrical wiring qualifying as minor electrical work, as defined in Section 10-92(b) shall not require an electrical permit. 
(b)  A permit shall also be required for the installation of any outlet and any electrical wiring for use on any circuit including wiring for low voltage wiring (50 volts and below) for control of heating, ventilating, cooling, lighting, signal and communication equipment, excepting signal systems, operated by, and/or in conjunction with communications systems installed and maintained by a public utility. A state electrical license is not required to obtain these low voltage permits. 
(c)  Demolition or removal of electrical wiring and equipment, such as panelboards, transformers, luminaries, conduits, wires and similar electrical equipment within buildings shall require an electrical permit. Wiring shall always be left in a safe condition, with all wiring enclosed in proper enclosures. 
(d)  In cases of emergency, work may be started before the permit has been issued, provided the Electrical Inspector is notified the same day such work is started. If the emergency occurs on a day the Building Division is closed, the Division shall be notified the next business day. 
(e)  Electrical permits shall expire 24 months after the date of issuance of the permit. If such permit expires, a new permit shall be issued at the regular fee rate. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person with a State of Wisconsin Electrical Contractor license and/or a licensed Master Electrician to allow the use of his or her license, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining local permits for others not directly employed as an employee by the licensed individual or company. 
(g)  City of Janesville Electrical permits shall be signed by the State of Wisconsin Licensed Electrical Contractor and by the licensed Master Electrician of record for the contractor if different. 
(Code 1976, § 15.03.040)  
Sec. 10-91. - Licenses and permit application requirements. 
(a)  State of Wisconsin Licensed Electrical Contractors shall submit the following information to the City annually, at a date determined by the City, or with the electrical permit application. Electrical permits shall not be issued unless such information is submitted to the City Building Division. The information shall be submitted by the applicant of the electrical permit. 
(1)  Copy of State of Wisconsin Electrical Contractor license. 
(2)  Mailing and street address of the State of Wisconsin Licensed Electrical Contractor. 
(3)  Telephone number, fax number and e-mail address of the State of Wisconsin Licensed Electrical Contractor. 
(4)  Name of the State of Wisconsin Master Electrician employed by the Licensed Electrical Contractor. 
(5)  Copy of the State of Wisconsin Master Electrician license. 
(6)  Mailing and street address of the State of Wisconsin Master Electrician. 
(7)  Telephone number, fax number and e-mail address of the State of Wisconsin Master Electrician. 
(8)  No person shall be listed as the State of Wisconsin Master Electrician for an electrical permit who is not physically supervising any person or company found to violate said requirement shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Section 10-96. 
(b)  Unlicensed persons performing electrical wiring, whether or not for compensation, shall be in violation of this article and subject to the penalties set forth in this Code. 
(c)  Homeowners test. 
(1)  The homeowner's test shall be given to persons who occupies their personal, single-family residence who wish to do their own electrical work. Identification shall be provided at the time of testing, in the form of a driver's license or other government issued picture identification to ensure the homeowner is the person taking the test. The address on the picture identification address shall correspond to the property address indicated by City of Janesville land records for which the person is applying to take the homeowners test. The passing score for the test shall be 70 percent or above in order for the homeowner to receive an electrical permit. If the homeowner does not pass the test, they will be allowed to retake the test 30 days from the date of the previous test. This test is to ensure that the homeowner is qualified and competent to do electrical wiring in a safe and code-complying manner. 
(2)  The homeowners test shall be valid up to one year after such test is taken. The electrical permit shall be obtained for the same type of work for which the test was taken. 
(3)  Homeowners who have installed wiring without first properly obtaining an electrical permit will only be allowed to take the homeowners test once, if the homeowner does not pass the test the first time, then the homeowner must hire a licensed Electrical Contractor to obtain an electrical permit and complete the electrical wiring. 
(Code 1976, § 15.03.050)  
Sec. 10-92. - Electrical construction requirements. 
(a)  The current National Electrical Code (NEC), adopted by State Electrical Code, Department of Safety and Professional Services, ch. SPS 316 and SPS 305 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, which changes and alterations are hereby adopted, is hereby adopted by reference. A copy of the current NEC and a copy of the Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 316 and 305 are kept on file in the office of Public Works, Building Division. 
(b)  The term "minor electrical work" shall be defined as, repairing for the purpose of maintaining the existing electrical system only, such as replacing an existing light fixture, a receptacle, a motor, a lighting ballast and similar such item which are broken or not functioning properly. Minor electrical work does not include such items as replacing existing conduits, replacing multiple lights, receptacles or switches, relocating of electrical devices and similar type electrical wiring. 
(c)  All temporary wiring used in the construction of the building shall be taken out before buildings are given final inspection. 
(d)  Raceways installed for the purpose of communication systems, fiber optic systems or similar systems located in Chapters 7 and 8 in the NEC, shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 3 of the NEC. 
(e)  Mobile home parks. Wiring from the utility company to the mobile home panel board shall be the responsibility of the mobile home park owner. All wiring, except inside the mobile home, shall be done by a licensed electrician and shall be the responsibility of the park owner. 
(f)  Remodeling of existing dwelling units, electrical outlets (receptacles, switches, lighting outlets, smoke and carbon monoxide detectors, and similar type devices) shall be installed in accordance with present Code requirements when walls, ceiling and floor coverings are removed. Wall coverings include, but are not limited to, drywall, plaster, plywood, paneling and similar covering materials. 
(g)  All occupancies where remodeling and/or renovations are taking place, the existing electrical wiring in such areas shall be in compliance with all applicable Electrical Codes. Existing wiring may remain as installed, if such electrical wiring was installed in accordance with applicable Codes at the time of the initial installation. 
(h)  All electrical wiring and equipment shall be in compliance with this Code when installed, whether such electrical wiring and equipment is energized or de-energized. 
(Code 1976, § 15.03.060)  
Sec. 10-93. - Street lighting and traffic lights. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided by ordinance or resolution of the Council, all electrical work performed on City projects, whether street lighting or traffic signals, or otherwise, shall be constructed and all work done directly by the City without submitting the same for bids. 
(b)  All work done except repair work on City owned traffic signals and street lights are required to have permits as defined in Section 10-90. 
(Code 1976, § 15.03.070)  
Sec. 10-94. - Invalidity of part. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or provisions of this Code shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the provisions so adjudged, and the rest of this Code shall remain valid and effective. 
(Code 1976, § 15.03.080)  
Sec. 10-95. - Liability of City. 
This article shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical equipment for damages to anyone injured or any property destroyed by any defect herein nor shall the City be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein or certificate of inspection herein provided. 
(Code 1976, § 15.03.090)  
Sec. 10-96. - Appeals. 
All appeals for variance of the Wis. Admin. Code NEC and SPS ch. 316 shall be made to the state. Any variance to this article shall be made to the City of Janesville Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 15.03.100)  
Sec. 10-97. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any provision of the Building Code or any order issued under the provisions of the Building Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25.00, nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof shall be committed to the Rock County Jail for a term of not less than five days nor more than 60 days. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate the violations as expeditiously as possible. 
(c)  Each and every day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  The City, in addition to the above penalties, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation, and/or the City Council may revoke any license or permit. 
(e)  If, in any action, a permit was issued, it shall not constitutes a defense, nor shall any error, oversight, or dereliction of duty on the part of the Electrical Inspector constitute a defense. 
(Code 1976, § 15.03.110)  
Secs. 10-98—10-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HEATING 
 
Sec. 10-121. - Heat producing apparatus for heating, incineration and allied appurtenances. 
(a)  Permit required. Before proceeding with the construction, installation, erection, alteration or remodeling of any boiler, furnace, incinerator or other heat producing apparatus, a permit shall first be obtained from the Building Inspector by the heating contractor. A permit shall also be required for repairs and maintenance exceeding $100.00 in cost. 
(b)  An application shall be filed by said contractor specifying in detail the work to be done and be accompanied by the fee as set forth in Section 10-12. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.010)  
Sec. 10-122. - Accessibility. 
The installation of heat producing appliances shall in all cases be such as to make them accessible for cleaning, operation and maintenance. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.020)  
Sec. 10-123. - Installation. 
Wisconsin Administrative Code shall, as from time to time amended, govern Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 320—325 Uniform Dwelling Code and International Mechanical Code, issued by the Department of Safety and Professional Services, under authority of state statutes are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein. Every requirement and prohibition set forth therein shall be required or prohibited, respectively herein. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.030)  
Sec. 10-124. - Unsafe heating appliances. 
The Building Inspector shall have the authority to seal any heating appliance regulated herein which has been installed in violation of the regulations of this Code, or which is found, upon inspection, to be in an unsafe condition and to be a life, health, or fire hazard. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to break such seal or use such heating appliance. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.040)  
Sec. 10-125. - Gas appliances. 
(a)  Wisconsin Administrative Code shall govern. State Codes adopts by reference the National Fuel Gas Code ANSI 223.1 also known as NFPA 54. 
(b)  Scope. The regulations of this section shall apply to all gas appliances used for space heating purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.050)  
Sec. 10-126. - Gas conversion burners. 
(a)  Before any gas conversion burner is installed, the combustion chamber flue passages, smokepipe, and the chimney shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rust, soot and dirt. All rust and scale shall be scraped from the edges of the firing clinker or cleanout doors, and the door jambs to obtain a tight fit. Leaky joints on cast iron furnaces shall be recemented. A smoke or other test shall be used to determine the effectiveness of the repairs. All doors on the boiler or furnace, except the firing door, shall be tightly sealed. The slots in the firing door shall be sealed. The fire brick in steel warm air furnaces shall be removed except where it is the only material that forms the sides of the fire pot. 
(b)  The firing door on the furnace or boiler shall be arranged to open easily to relieve pressure by filing or removing the door catch and providing a spring device to hold the door closed. 
(c)  Where a horizontal (in-shot) type gas conversion burner is installed in the ash pit of a dry base boiler or gravity warm air furnace, the ash pit shall be lined on the bottom and the sides up to the grate level with two inches of insulating firebrick or other approved insulation. 
(d)  Movable smoke pipe dampers shall be removed. Other dampers which are an integral part of the boiler or furnace shall be removed or permanently locked in a position which does not interfere with the operation of the burner. 
(e)  In down draft or revertible flue-type furnaces or boilers in which the flue passage turns downward after leaving the combustion chamber, the top of the combustion chamber, of flue passage shall be vented to the smoke pipe by a one-inch diameter or larger pipe. The relief opening of a vertical or horizontal draft diverter should be at least one foot higher than the highest flue passage. 
(f)  Where a bypass to the smoke pipe is provided in the construction of the furnace of the boiler at the point where the flue turns downward, the damper in the bypass may be partially opened and locked in place in lieu of the required one-inch pipe. 
(g)  The cross sectional area of the flue or vent connector shall be not less than one square inch per 7,500 BTU per hour input of the gas conversion burner, but in no case shall the diameter of the flue or vent connector be less than that of the appliance flue collar. 
(h)  The draft diverter shall be located in the same room as the appliance. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.060)  
Sec. 10-127. - Oil burners. 
(a)  Scope. The regulations of this section shall apply to all oil-burning equipment and shall include all equipment connected thereto including tanks, piping, pumps, controls devices, and all accessories. 
(b)  Fuel oil. Fuel oil used in connection with such burners to which these regulations apply shall have a flash point of not less than 100 degrees Fahrenheit as determined by the tag close cup tester, and shall be a hydrocarbon oil free from acid, grit, fibrous, or other foreign matter likely to clog or injure the burners or valves. 
(c)  Installation of oil burners. 
(1)  All oil burners shall be installed in an approved and workmanlike manner. Combustion chambers, etc., shall be cleaned in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(2)  Where oil burners are installed in boilers of furnaces originally designed for other fuels, the ash door of the boiler or furnace shall be removed, or bottom ventilation otherwise provided to prevent an accumulation of vapors in the ash pit, unless the burner is of a type which mechanically purges the ash pit. 
(3)  Manually operated dampers shall be such that they cannot close off more than 80 percent of the internal cross sectional area of the smoke pipe. 
(4)  Rooms in which oil burners are located shall be provided with adequate ventilation to assure continuous complete combustion of the oil. Where the oil burner is located in a room which does not have windows or doors to the outside air, such room shall be provided with an opening or duct to the outside air, or to a room which has windows or doors to the outside air. 
(5)  Operating instruction. The installer of any oil-fired furnace or boiler or oil conversion burner shall post in a conspicuous place near the appliance, complete operating instructions for such appliances, including the installer's name and business address. 
(d)  Oil burner construction and control. 
(1)  All oil burners shall be of an approved type. 
(2)  All oil burners shall be arranged to prevent abnormal discharge of oil in the event of ignition failure or premature flame extinguishment by automatic means specifically approved for the burner with which used. 
(3)  Oil burning space heaters shall be provided with such controls only if they are connected to an oil storage tank which is not an integral part of the space heater. 
(4)  All oil burners shall be provided with an approved method for manually stopping the flow of oil to the burner from a point at a safe distance from the burner. 
(5)  Automatically controlled oil burners used in connection with hot water, steam or warm air heating systems shall be equipped with approved automatic devices to stop the burner or reduce the fuel supply in the event of excessively high pressure or low water in the steam boiler or overheating in the hot water boiler or warm air furnace. 
(6)  Oil burners which are supplied by gravity feed shall be equipped with an approved constant level valve. Such constant level valves if not a part of the burner or the oil tank shall be installed in the oil feed line at the tank, or as close thereto as possible. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.070)  
Sec. 10-128. - Steam and hot water pipes. 
(a)  Clearance. 
(1)  Steam and hot water pipes shall be installed with a clearance of at least one inch to all combustible material except as specified in Subsections (a)(2) and (3) of this section. 
(2)  At points where pipes carrying steam or hot water at not over 15 pounds per square inch gauge pressure, or hot water at not over 250 degrees Fahrenheit, emerge from a floor, wall or ceiling, the clearance at the opening through the finish floorboards or wall or ceiling boards may be less than one inch, but shall not be less than one-half inch. Each opening shall be covered with a plate of non-combustible material. 
(3)  Hot water pipes on a system with automatic firing and with limit controls such that water temperature at the boiler or furnace cannot rise above 180 degrees Fahrenheit may be installed without clearance to combustible material. 
(b)  Protection. 
(1)  Coverings or insulation used on steam or hot water pipes shall be of noncombustible material. 
(2)  Where steam pipes and hot water pipes pass through a floor, wall or ceiling of fire-resistive construction, the openings around them shall be filled with non-combustible material to prevent the passage of fire. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.080)  
Sec. 10-129. - Air conditioning and refrigeration systems. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as hereinafter provided, before proceeding with the construction, erection, or installation of any air-cooled, water-cooled, or mechanically-cooled air conditioning or refrigeration system or unit in or to serve any building, a permit shall first be obtained from the Building Inspector. See Section 10-8. 
(b)  Application for a permit shall be made by the installing contractor upon a form provided by the Building Inspector, shall be filled out completely and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of contractor. 
(2)  Location of premises where installation is proposed. 
(3)  Name and address of owner. 
(4)  Location of unit on premises including distance to lot lines for exterior apparatus. 
(5)  Manufacturer's identification, classification and size of unit. 
(6)  Nature of coolant. 
(7)  If water-cooled, source of water and method of discharging waste water shall be installed per Wisconsin Plumbing Code. 
(8)  Where water conservation devices are required, manufacturer's name, identification, classification, and size of equipment. 
(9)  Such additional information as shall be required by the Building Inspector. 
(c)  Exterior structures. Where any unit of air conditioning or refrigeration system is located outside of the structure, said unit shall comply with setback requirements as set forth in the zoning ordinance and said location shall be subject to approval of the Building Inspector. Said location shall not, by noise or sight, be detrimental to adjoining property. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.090)  
Sec. 10-130. - Heating permits—Application; information required. 
At the time of application for the permit required by this chapter, the following information shall be provided by the person making the application: 
(1)  Maximum hour BTU input rating of equipment; 
(2)  Type of equipment: room heater, furnace, oil unit heater, and similar equipment; 
(3)  Heating medium: air steam, water or other type; 
(4)  Type of circulation: gravity, forced or other type; and 
(5)  Name of manufacturer of equipment. 
(Code 1976, § 5.04.130)  
Sec. 10-131. - Heating permits—Use of gas; temporary; term; test. 
When temporary use of gas is desired, the department having jurisdiction may grant a permit for such use for a period of not to exceed 90 days, provided that the gas piping which is desired to be used is given a test equal to that required as a final inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 5.04.140)  
Sec. 10-132. - Heating permits—Single-family dwelling construction; issuance when. 
The permit required by this chapter may be issued to any person to do any construction or work regulated by this Code in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings, in the event that such person is a bona fide owner of such dwelling and accessory building and quarters and that the same are occupied by or designed to be occupied by said owner; provided, that said owner shall personally purchase all material and shall personally perform all labor in connection therewith. 
(Code 1976, § 5.04.150)  
Sec. 10-133. - Identification of products. 
All materials shall be identified by the approved label, the grade mark, the trade mark, or by other approved manufacturer's identification. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.100)  
Sec. 10-134. - Invalidity of part. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or provision of this Code shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the provisions so adjudged, and the rest of this Code shall remain valid and effective. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.110)  
Sec. 10-135. - Failure to obtain permit. 
It shall be unlawful to commence work prior to obtaining a permit therefor. Double fees shall be charged if work is commenced prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.120)  
Sec. 10-136. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any provision of the Building Code or any order issued under the provisions of the Building Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25.00, nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof shall be committed to the Rock County Jail for a term of not less than five days nor more than 60 days. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate the violations as expeditiously as possible. 
(c)  Each and every day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  The City, in addition to the above penalties, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation, and/or the City Council may revoke any license or permit. 
(e)  If, in any action, a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense, or shall any error, oversight, or dereliction of duty on the part of the Heating Inspector constitute a defense. 
(Code 1976, § 15.04.130)  
Secs. 10-137—10-162. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
 
Sec. 10-163. - Authority. 
(a)  This article is adopted by the City Council under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 62.234. This chapter supersedes all provisions of any chapter or ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23, that relate to construction site erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stats. § 62.234, Wis. Stats. § 62.23 applies to this chapter and to any amendments to this chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body. 
(c)  The City Council hereby designates the Director of Public Works, hereafter referred to as the Director, and each and every of his or her designees to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The requirements of this article do not pre-empt more stringent erosion and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any of the following: 
(1)  Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals, including those authorized under Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16 and 283.33. 
(2)  Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under § NR 151.004, Wis. Admin. Code. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.010)  
Sec. 10-164. - Findings of fact; purpose. 
The City Council acknowledges that runoff from land disturbing construction activity carries a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the waters of the state in the City. It is the purpose of this article to maintain safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; prevent and control soil erosion and sediment discharge; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth by minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from land disturbing construction activity to waters of the state in the City. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.020)  
Sec. 10-165. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Except as provided under Subsection (b) of this section, this article applies to any construction site as defined under Section 10-166. 
(2)  This article does not apply to the following: 
a.  Transportation facilities, except transportation facility construction projects that are part of a larger common plan of development such as local roads within a residential or industrial development. 
b.  A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or regulations from the requirement to have a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued under chapter 40, Code of Federal Regulations, part 122, (40 CFR pt. 122) for land disturbing construction activity. 
c.  Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices. 
d.  Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities. 
e.  Routine maintenance for project sites that have less than five acres of land disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection (a) of this section, this article applies to construction sites of any size that, as determined by the Director, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, or that increases water pollution by scouring or transporting of particulate. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. This article applies to land disturbing construction activity on lands within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the City of Janesville. 
(c)  Exclusions. This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 227.01(1). 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.030)  
Sec. 10-166. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administering authority means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under Wis. Stats. § 62.234, that is designated by the City Council to administer this chapter. 
Agricultural facility means a structure associated with an agricultural practice. 
Agricultural practice means beekeeping; commercial feedlots; dairying; egg production; floriculture; fish or fur farming; grazing; livestock raising; orchards; poultry raising; raising of grain, grass, mint and seed crops; raising of fruits, nuts and berries; sod farming; placing land in federal programs in return for payments in kind; owning land, at least 35 acres of which is enrolled in the conservation reserve program under 16 USC 3831 to 3836; and vegetable raising. 
Best management practice or BMP means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state. 
Business day means a day the office of the Director of Public Works is routinely and customarily open for business. 
Cease and desist order means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit or in violation of a permit issued by the Director of Public Works. 
Construction site means an area upon which one or more land disturbing construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules but under one plan. A long-range planning document that describes separate construction projects, such as a 20-year transportation improvement plan, is not a common plan of development. 
Design storm means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency and total depth of rainfall. 
Erosion means the process by which the land's surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sediment control plan means a comprehensive plan developed to address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil particles or rock fragments during construction. 
Final stabilization means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures. 
Governing body means City Council of the City of Janesville. 
Land disturbing construction activity means any manmade alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities. 
Landowner means any person holding fee title, an easement or other interest in property, which allows the person to undertake cropping, livestock management, land disturbing construction activity or maintenance of stormwater BMPs on the property. 
Maximum extent practicable means the highest level of performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a performance standard identified in this chapter as determined in accordance with Section 10-167. 
Performance standard means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice. 
Permit means a written authorization made by the Director of Public Works to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state. 
Pollutant has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 283.01(13). 
Pollution has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.01(10). 
Responsible party means the landowner or any other entity performing services to meet the requirements of this article through a contract or other agreement. 
Runoff means stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow. 
Sediment means settleable solid material that is transported by runoff, suspended within runoff or deposited by runoff away from its original location. 
Silviculture activity means activities including tree nursery operations, tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burning, and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction site is not a silviculture activity. 
Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing construction activity is proposed in the permit application. 
Stop-work order means an order issued by the Director of Public Works which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped. 
Technical standard means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method. 
Transportation facility means a highway, a railroad, a public mass transit facility, a public-use airport, a public trail or any other public work for transportation purposes such as harbor improvements under Wis. Stats. § 85.095(1)(b). The term "transportation facility" does not include building sites for the construction of public buildings and buildings that are places of employment that are regulated by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.33. 
Waters of the state includes those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within the boundaries of the state, and all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within the state or its jurisdiction. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.040)  
Sec. 10-167. - Applicability of maximum extent practicable. 
Maximum extent practicable applies when a person who is subject to a performance standard of this article demonstrates to the Director's satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable and that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the assertion that a performance standard is not achievable and that a level of performance different from the performance standard is the maximum extent practicable, the responsible party shall take into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing interests such as protection of public safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic properties. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.050)  
Sec. 10-168. - Technical standards. 
All BMPs required for compliance with this chapter shall meet design criteria, standards and specifications based on any of the following: 
(1)  Design guidance and technical standards identified or developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under subchapter V of chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code (Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 151, subch. V). 
(2)  Soil loss prediction tools (such as the Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE)) when using an appropriate rainfall or runoff factor (also referred to as the R factor) or an appropriate design storm and precipitation distribution, and when considering the geographic location of the site and the period of disturbance. 
(3)  Technical standards and methods approved by the Director. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.060)  
Sec. 10-169. - Performance standards for construction sites under one acre. 
(a)  Responsible party. The responsible party shall comply with this section. 
(b)  Erosion and sediment control practices. Erosion and sediment control practices at each site where land disturbing construction activity is to occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following: 
(1)  The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles. 
(2)  The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site stormwater inlets. 
(3)  The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the state. 
(4)  The discharge of sediment from drainage ways that flow off the site. 
(5)  The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities. 
(6)  The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than seven days. 
(7)  The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals, cement, and other building compounds and materials on the construction site during the construction period; however, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this subdivision. 
(c)  Location. The BMPs shall be located so that treatment occurs before runoff enters waters of the state. 
(d)  Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be implemented as follows: 
(1)  Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or installed before land disturbing construction activities begin. 
(2)  Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until final stabilization. 
(3)  Final stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities cease and final grade has been reached on any portion of the site. 
(4)  Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities have temporarily ceased and will not resume for a period exceeding 14 calendar days. 
(5)  BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment control shall be removed by the responsible party. 
(e)  Inspection and maintenance records. The responsible party shall inspect and maintain records as follows: 
(1)  Inspect the BMPs within 24 hours after each rainfall of 0.5 inches or more which results in runoff during active construction periods, and at least once each week and document these inspections in a log that also includes the date of inspection, the name of the person conducting the inspection, and a description of the present phase of the construction at the site. 
(2)  Provide written notification to the Director of any failures in existing BMPs allowing sediment transport off site, make needed repairs, and install additional BMPs as necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.070)  
Sec. 10-170. - Performance standards for construction sites of one acre or more. 
(a)  Responsible party. The responsible party shall comply with this section and implement the erosion and sediment control plan developed in accordance with Section 10-172. 
(b)  Erosion and sediment control plan. A written site-specific erosion and sediment control plan shall be developed in accordance with Section 10-172 and implemented for each construction site. 
(c)  Erosion and other pollutant control requirements. The erosion and sediment control plan required under Subsection (b) of this section shall include the following: 
(1)  Erosion and sediment control practices. Erosion and sediment control practices at each site where land disturbing construction activity is to occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following: 
a.  The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles. 
b.  The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site stormwater inlets. 
c.  The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the state. 
d.  The discharge of sediment from drainageways that flow off the site. 
e.  The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities. 
f.  The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than seven days. 
g.  The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in downstream channels. 
h.  The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals, cement, and other building compounds and materials on the construction site during the construction period. However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this subsection. 
i.  The transport by runoff into waters of the state of untreated wash water from vehicle and wheel washing. 
(2)  Sediment performance standards. In addition to the erosion and sediment control practices under Subsection (c)(1) of this section, the following erosion and sediment control practices shall be employed: 
a.  BMPs that, by design, discharge no more than five tons per acre per year, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the sediment load carried in runoff from initial grading to final stabilization. 
b.  No person shall be required to employ more BMPs than are needed to meet a performance standard in order to comply with maximum extent practicable. Erosion and sediment control BMPs may be combined to meet the requirements of this subsection. Credit may be given toward meeting the sediment performance standard of this section for limiting the duration or area, or both, of land disturbing construction activity, or for other appropriate mechanisms. 
c.  Notwithstanding Subsection (c)(2)a of this section, if BMPs cannot be designed and implemented to meet the sediment performance standard, the erosion and sediment control plan shall include a written, site-specific explanation of why the sediment performance standard cannot be met and how the sediment load will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
(3)  Preventive measures. The erosion and sediment control plan shall incorporate all of the following: 
a.  Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to surface waters whenever possible. 
b.  Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of topsoil. 
c.  Minimization of land disturbing construction activity on slopes of 20 percent or more. 
d.  Development of spill prevention and response procedures. 
(4)  Location. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located so that treatment occurs before runoff enters waters of the state. 
(d)  Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be implemented as follows: 
(1)  Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or installed before land disturbing construction activities begin in accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan developed in Subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until final stabilization. 
(3)  Final stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities cease and final grade has been reached on any portion of the site. 
(4)  Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities have temporarily ceased and will not resume for a period exceeding 14 calendar days. 
(5)  BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment control shall be removed by the responsible party. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.080)  
Sec. 10-171. - Permitting requirements, procedures and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No responsible party may commence a land disturbing construction activity subject to this chapter without receiving prior approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for the site and a permit from the Director. 
(b)  Permit application and fees. The responsible party that will undertake a land disturbing construction activity subject to this chapter shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion and sediment control plan that meets the requirements of Section 10-172, and shall pay an application fee to the Director in accordance with the adopted erosion control and stormwater management fee schedule. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the Director to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(c)  Permit application review and approval. The Director shall review any permit application that is submitted with an erosion and sediment control plan, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used: 
(1)  Within 15 business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, as required by Subsection (b) of this section, the Director shall inform the applicant whether the application and erosion and sediment control plan are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  If the permit application and erosion and sediment control plan are approved, the Director shall issue the permit. 
(3)  If the permit application or erosion and sediment control plan is disapproved, the Director shall state in writing the reasons for disapproval. 
(4)  The Director may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the Director shall have 15 business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the erosion and sediment control plan is either approved or disapproved. 
(5)  Failure by the Director to inform the permit applicant of a decision within 15 business days of a required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued. 
(d)  Surety bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the Director may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any permit conditions. 
(e)  Permit requirements. All permits shall require the responsible party to: 
(1)  Notify the within 48 hours of commencing any land disturbing construction activity. 
(2)  Notify the Director of completion of any BMPs within five days after their installation. 
(3)  Obtain permission in writing from the Director prior to any modification pursuant to Section 10-172 of the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(4)  Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment control plan. 
(5)  Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, BMPs and other facilities identified in the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(6)  Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainageways resulting from land disturbing construction activities and document repairs in a site inspection log. 
(7)  Inspect the BMPs within 24 hours after each rain of 0.5 inches or more which results in runoff during active construction periods, and at least once each week. Make needed repairs and install additional BMPs as necessary, and document these activities in an inspection log that also includes the date of inspection, the name of the person conducting the inspection, and a description of the present phase of the construction at the site. 
(8)  Allow the Director to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan. Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment control plan at the construction site. 
(f)  Permit conditions. Permits issued under this section may include conditions established by the Director in addition to the requirements set forth in Subsection (e) of this section, where needed to ensure compliance with the performance standards in Section 10-169 or 10-170. 
(g)  Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for a period of one year, or the length of the building permit or other construction authorizations, whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The Director may grant one or more extensions not to exceed 180 days cumulatively. The Director may require additional BMPs as a condition of an extension if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(h)  Maintenance. The responsible party throughout the duration of the construction activities shall maintain all BMPs necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter until the site has undergone final stabilization. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.090)  
Sec. 10-172. - Erosion and sediment control plan, statement and amendments. 
(a)  Erosion and sediment control plan statement. For each construction site identified under this article, an erosion and sediment control plan statement shall be prepared. The statement shall be submitted to the Director. The erosion and sediment control plan statement shall briefly describe the site, the development schedule, and the BMPs that will be used to meet the requirements of this chapter. A site map shall also accompany the erosion and sediment control plan statement. 
(b)  Erosion and sediment control plan requirements. 
(1)  An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and submitted to the Director. 
(2)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to meet the performance standards in Sections 10-169 and 10-170 and other requirements of this article. 
(3)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall address pollution caused by soil erosion and sedimentation during construction and up to final stabilization of the site. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include, at a minimum, the following items: 
a.  Name and address of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm. The application shall also include start and end dates for construction. 
b.  Description of the construction site and the nature of the land disturbing construction activity, including representation of the limits of land disturbance on a United States Geological Service 7.5-minute series topographic map. 
c.  Description of the intended sequence of major land disturbing construction activities for major portions of the construction site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
d.  Estimates of the total area of the construction site and the total area of the construction site that is expected to be disturbed by land disturbing construction activities. 
e.  Calculations to show the compliance with the performance standard in this article. 
f.  Existing data describing the surface soil as well as subsoils. 
g.  Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources Conservation Service soil information where available. 
h.  Name of the immediate named receiving water from the United States Geological Service 7.5-minute series topographic maps. 
(4)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall include a site map. The site map shall include the following items and shall be at a scale not greater than 100 feet per inch and at a contour interval not to exceed two feet: 
a.  Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and engineered drainage systems, roads and surface waters. Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site shall be shown. Any identified 100-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways shall also be shown. 
b.  Boundaries of the construction site. 
c.  Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major grading activities. 
d.  Areas of soil disturbance. 
e.  Location of major structural and non-structural controls identified in the erosion and sediment control plan. 
f.  Location of areas where stabilization BMPs will be employed. 
g.  Areas which will be vegetated following land disturbing construction activities. 
h.  Area and location of wetland on the construction site, and locations where stormwater is discharged to a surface water or wetland within one-quarter mile downstream of the construction site. 
i.  Areas used for infiltration of post-construction stormwater runoff. 
j.  An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire construction site map. 
(5)  Each erosion and sediment control plan shall include a description of appropriate control BMPs that will be installed and maintained at the construction site to prevent pollutants from reaching waters of the state. The erosion and sediment control plan shall clearly describe the appropriate erosion and sediment control BMPs for each major land disturbing construction activity and the timing during the period of land disturbing construction activity that the erosion and sediment control BMPs will be implemented. The description of erosion and sediment control BMPs shall include, when appropriate, the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Description of interim and permanent stabilization practices, including a BMP implementation schedule. The erosion and sediment control plan shall ensure that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized. 
b.  Description of structural practices to divert flow away from exposed soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site. Unless otherwise specifically approved in writing by the Director, structural measures shall be installed on upland soils. 
c.  Management of overland flow at all areas of the construction site, unless otherwise controlled by outfall controls. 
d.  Trapping of sediment in channelized flow. 
e.  Staging land disturbing construction activities to limit exposed soil areas subject to erosion. 
f.  Protection of downslope drainage inlets where they occur. 
g.  Minimization of tracking at all vehicle and equipment entry and exit locations of the construction site. 
h.  Clean up of off-site sediment deposits. 
i.  Proper disposal of building and waste material. 
j.  Stabilization of drainage ways. 
k.  Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as possible after final grading. 
l.  Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practicable. 
(6)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall require that velocity dissipation devices be placed at discharge locations and along the length of any outfall channel as necessary to provide a non-erosive flow from the structure to a water course so that the natural physical and biological characteristics and functions are maintained and protected. 
(c)  Erosion and sediment control plan amendments. The applicant shall amend the erosion and sediment control plan if any of the following occur: 
(1)  There is a change in design, construction, operation or maintenance at the site which has the reasonable potential for the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and which has not otherwise been addressed in the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(2)  The actions required by the erosion and sediment control plan fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants carried by construction site runoff. 
(3)  The Director notifies the applicant of changes needed in the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.100)  
Sec. 10-173. - Fee schedule. 
The fees referred to in other sections of this chapter shall be established by the City Manager and may from time to time be modified at any time, and the City Council shall be advised of these rates. A schedule of the fees established by the City Manager shall be available for review in the Director's Office. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.110)  
Sec. 10-174. - Inspection. 
If land disturbing construction activities are occurring without a permit required by this article, the Director may enter the land pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0119(1), (2), and (3). 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.120)  
Sec. 10-175. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Director may post a stop-work order if any of the following occurs: 
(1)  Land disturbing construction activity regulated under this chapter is occurring without a permit. 
(2)  The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in good faith. 
(3)  The conditions of the permit are not being met. 
(b)  If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a stop-work order posted under this section or fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan or permit conditions, the Director may revoke the permit. 
(c)  If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued or the permit has been revoked, does not cease the activity after being notified by the Director, or if a responsible party violates a stop-work order posted under Subsection (a) of this section, the Director may request the City Attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction. 
(d)  The Director, or Board of Appeals, may retract the stop-work order issued under Subsection (a) of this section or the permit revocation under Subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  After posting a stop-work order under Subsection (a) of this section, the Director may issue a notice of intent to the responsible party of its intent to perform work necessary to comply with this chapter. The Director may go on the land and commence the work after issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work performed under this subsection under the direction of the Director, plus interest at the rate authorized by City Clerk-Treasurer shall be billed to the responsible party. In the event a responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. subchapter VII of Ch. 66. 
(f)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the relief, enforcement, and penalties set forth in Article VII of this Chapter, as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Also incorporated herein as if fully set forth verbatim as additional relief are the provisions set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(8), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
(g)  Compliance with the provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.130)  
Sec. 10-176. - Appeals. 
(a)  Board of Appeals. The City Plan Commission shall serve as the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals: 
(1)  Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the Director in administering this chapter except for cease and desist orders obtained under Section 10-175(c); 
(2)  May authorize, upon appeal, variances from the provisions of this article which are not contrary to the public interest and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship; and 
(3)  Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances. 
(b)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by any Office, Department, or Board of the City of Janesville affected by any decision of the Director. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.140)  
Sec. 10-177. - Severability. 
If a court of competent jurisdiction judges any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the chapter shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment. 
(Code 1976, § 15.05.150)  
Secs. 10-178—10-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NON-STRUCTURAL DEMOLITION AND SALVAGEABLE MATERIALS 
 
Sec. 10-206. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official means the Building Director or his or her designee. 
Salvage means to remove salvageable material from a vacated building or structure for other than personal re-use by the owner of the real estate from which it was removed, without immediate functional replacement thereof. The term "immediate functional replacement thereof" includes, without limitation, functional replacement that occurs as a part of a remodeling process over time pursuant to a valid and subsisting building permit. 
Salvageable material. Real or tangible personal property that: 
(1)  Was manmade; 
(2)  Was affixed with respect to real property; 
(3)  Is detachable from real property; and 
(4)  Has a resale value, either for re-use or as scrap. 
Vacated building means a building or structure having occupiable space of over 20,000 square feet commercial and 50,000 square feet industrial that had a principal commercial/industrial use as its most recent use allowed by law, which principal use has ceased. 
(Code 1976, § 15.07.010)  
Sec. 10-207. - Permit. 
(a)  Permit. No person may salvage from a vacated building unless pursuant to a permit therefor granted by the Plan Commission and issued to the applicant. 
(b)  Permit application. 
(1)  The applicant may be the owner of the real estate, or the contractor hired by the owner. Under all circumstances, the applicant, if other than the owner, and the owner, shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(2)  Application for a permit, whether initial or renewal, shall be filed with the Building Division on forms created by the Building Official and provided by the City. The application for a permit shall, at a minimum, comply with Article I of this Chapter. The Building Official, Plan Commission, and/or City Council may require, and the applicant shall provide, additional information of a specific applicant prior to consideration and action on the permit. 
(3)  A permit fee must accompany the application. An application fee shall be paid to the City by the applicant when the one-time permit application is filed in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule as appears in this Code. 
(4)  An asbestos-containing material (ACM) inspection must be completed by a certified asbestos inspector separate from and prior to work under salvage permit. All asbestos-containing materials which require removal prior to salvaging will be removed from the building by a certified asbestos abatement contractor separate from and prior to the start of the work under a salvage permit. A Notice of Demolition DNR form #4500-113 must be completed for all commercial buildings or residential buildings of five or more dwelling units if asbestos is being removed prior to salvage. Proof of DNR approval must be submitted prior to issuance of a salvage permit. 
(c)  Permit grant. The Plan Commission shall consider the permit application but only after receiving the recommendation of the Building Official, which recommendation may not be unreasonably withheld. Prior to making its recommendation to grant or deny the application, the Plan Commission shall consider the application; the report, if any, of the Building Official; the expertise of the applicant; the effect of the proposed operation on the surrounding neighborhood; the effect on the City of having a stripped structure remain if the structure is not proposed to be immediately razed or immediately renovated; the presentation, if any, of the applicant; the comments of the public; and such other matters germane to the decision. In making a recommendation to grant, the Plan Commission shall address the following matters: the amount of the irrevocable letter of credit to be required by the permittee as a condition of issuance of the permit and as a requirement of operation; other state or local permits as required by law, rule, or regulation that must be obtained as a condition of issuance of the permit or as a condition of operation; reasonable special operating requirements to be required of the permittee in addition to those listed in Subsection (d) of this section, herein; and such other matters or limitations as the Plan Commission determines is necessary to protect the public interest. After grant and after all conditions of issuance have been satisfied, the Building Official shall issue the permit to the applicant, who may then be referred to herein as permittee or permit holder. 
(d)  Irrevocable letter of credit. As an additional condition of issuance by the Building Official of the permit, the applicant/permittee shall post with the City Clerk-Treasurer a sight-draft irrevocable letter of credit, payable immediately upon presentment, in an amount required by the Plan Commission and in a form approved by the City Attorney. The irrevocable letter of credit shall name the City as the beneficiary thereof and shall guarantee the timely and full lawful performance by the applicant/permittee of the salvage work and all other actions required by this chapter. The irrevocable letter of credit must be issued by a financial institution certified by the state to conduct such business within the State of Wisconsin, allowing for direct draw by the City upon demand without the necessity for any prior court action or approval by permittee, to complete the work or to repair damage that was the obligation of the permittee. The irrevocable letter of credit must contain, as a part of its provisions, that it remains as an obligation in favor of the City for not less than one year after completion of the last act of salvage by the permittee or after the expiration of a permit issued under this section to the permittee, whichever is later. In considering the amount of the irrevocable letter of credit, the Plan Commission shall consider: the recommendation, if any, of the Building Official; the expertise of the applicant; the longevity of the applicant; the capitalization of the applicant; the scope of the proposed project; the possible environmental hazards that could be created; the effect of the proposed operation on the surrounding neighborhood; the cost of remediation on the City should the City need to address any matter due to the unwillingness, failure, or inability of the permittee to complete its salvage and/or related obligations. Under extraordinary circumstances under which the Plan Commission determines that the requirement to obtain a letter of credit is unreasonable, the Plan Commission may, in the exercise of its discretion, authorize alternate security. 
(e)  Permit term. 
(1)  Initial term. The initial term for permits issued under this section shall be valid for a period of 365 days from the date of issue. 
(2)  Renewal term. A permit issued to the applicant is personal to the applicant/permittee and limited to the term granted. The permittee may not have an expectation in the renewal of the permit. The permits may be renewed at the discretion of the Building Official upon application, by a permittee, filed prior to expiration of the initial term or any renewal thereof. Each renewal may be granted for up to 90 additional days; no more than two renewals will be granted. Renewal is discretionary, not a matter of right, and sets no precedent for other cases for the same or any other person. 
(Code 1976, § 15.07.020)  
Sec. 10-208. - Operating requirements. 
The following general operating requirements shall apply to all permittees or those working for a permittee subject to terms of the permit in accordance with the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The permit issued pursuant to this article, at all times, shall be conspicuously displayed upon the premises upon which the building or structure is located. 
(2)  The building and premises shall, at all times, be maintained in as clean, neat, and sanitary of a condition as such premises will reasonably permit, in the sole opinion of the Building Official and/or his or her designee. 
(3)  No garbage, refuse, or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises, except for domestic garbage which shall be kept in containers which are, in the opinion of the Building Official or the Health Administrator, rodent-proof, and removed from the premises as often as is necessary to provide a sanitary environment. 
(4)  Work done under this permit is subject to inspection by the Building Official and/or his or her designee. 
(5)  The permittee shall have the responsibility, at all times, to obtain, pay for, and maintain policies of insurance in the following minimum amounts, naming the City of Janesville as an additional and/or co-insured for all entities or natural persons doing work upon the property, building, and/or structure, or associated with the work under the permit, and shall maintain on file with the City Clerk-Treasurer current certificate of insurance for same: 
a.  Commercial general liability. 
1.  General aggregate: $1,000,000.00. 
2.  Each occurrence: $1,000,000.00. 
b.  Automobile liability (owned, non-owned, leased). 
1.  Bodily injury: $1,000,000.00 each occurrence. 
2.  Property damage: $1,000,000.00 each occurrence. 
c.  Pollution legal liability. $5,000,000.00 each loss where asbestos removal, environmental process, abatement, remediation, or dumping/disposal in a federal or state regulated facility is required; the Plan Commission may require a greater or lesser minimum amount down to and including zero of Pollution Legal Liability insurance policy, depending on the circumstances of the project that is the subject of the permit. 
d.  Workers' compensation. Statutory limits. 
e.  Umbrella liability. $2,000,000.00 over the primary Commercial General Liability and Automobile Liability insurance coverages listed above. 
(6)  No scrap salvage or debris which is temporarily stored on the premises shall be allowed to rest or protrude over any public street, walkway, terrace, other public property, or curb, or become scattered about or blown off the premises, or become a nuisance or hazard of any kind. 
(7)  No mechanized process whatsoever shall be utilized on the premises to reduce salvageable material or debris in volume after such salvageable material has been detached from the real property, unless a special exception is provided therefor by the Plan Commission. Such prohibited mechanized processes include, but are not limited to, crushers or shredders. 
(8)  No premises, structure, or building subject to a permit shall be allowed to become a public nuisance or be operated in such a manner as to adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(9)  There shall be full compliance with City Building, Fire and Health Codes and with all other City, county, state and federal laws, rules or regulations which may be applicable. 
(10)  The permit holder shall, during the salvage process and term of the permit and any and all renewals and extensions thereof, maintain the work site in a safe and secure condition. 
(11)  The permit holder shall dispose of building and structure debris in a licensed landfill, except for salvaged materials. At any time, the permit holder shall produce to the Code Official receipts and/or an itemized list of debris disposed of by dumping or salvage. 
(12)  The permit holder must meet standards, pursuant to provisions of Chapter 30 (Solid Waste and Recycling) as from time to time amended and/or renumbered. 
(13)  The permit holder shall be responsible for disconnections of utilities, including, but not limited to, plumbing and electrical, necessary for the salvaging process, and shall provide evidence satisfactory to the Building Official and/or his or her designee that the necessary disconnections have been accomplished. 
(14)  The irrevocable letter of credit imposed as a condition of issuance of the permit shall be maintained operative and in effect at all times in the manner set forth in this article. 
(15)  Permittee shall comply with all orders of the Plan Commission imposed at the granting of the permit or at any other time. 
(16)  Permittee must provide to the City, and must maintain current, a list of contractors and subcontractors doing work that is subject to a permit issued pursuant to this section, which list of contractors shall include proof of valid and subsisting policies of insurance in satisfaction of the general operating requirements specified herein. As used herein, the term "maintain current" means that the list filed with the City is updated by the permittee prior to the contractor and subcontractor commencing work pursuant to the permit. 
(Code 1976, § 15.07.030)  
Sec. 10-209. - Inspections. 
Permit holders and property owners shall permit authorized representatives of any department of the City having enforcement powers to inspect, from time to time and at any time, the premises permitted and those proposed to be permitted, with or without advance notice, as often as may be required to permit said departments, the Building Official and/or his or her designee to perform his or her, and/or their duties to facilitate compliance with the permittee's requirements under this chapter, without first obtaining a special inspection warrant. Inspections shall be made. The unreasonable or unexcused failure and/or refusal by any person to permit such inspection shall be grounds for permit denial, suspension, revocation, enforcement, the imposition of fee penalties, the imposition of other penalties, the issuance and execution of a special inspection warrant, and/or such other relief as provided in law and equity, all such remedies being cumulative and not exclusive in favor of the City, its Building Official, and/or his or her designee. 
(Code 1976, § 15.07.040)  
Sec. 10-210. - Summary suspension. 
If in the sole opinion of the Building Official and/or his or her designee, any member of the public is or might be subject to imminent danger due to the action, failure, refusal, default, and/or violation by the permittee of any one or combination of more than one of the general operating requirements and/or any other provision and/or requirements set forth in this article and/or elsewhere, the Building Official and/or his or her designee, shall issue an order to the permittee requiring immediate cessation of those operations implicating the imminent danger to person or property. Pursuant to such order, the permittee shall forthwith cause such operation, action, failure, refusal, default, and/or violation to cease in the manner as directed in the order. Failure to maintain insurance, as required, failure to maintain the irrevocable letter of credit, as required, or to permit inspection as required are each separate and distinct per se violations implicating imminent danger to the public necessitating an order to cease all operations and/or for the permittee to take one or more other corrective action. In the event that an order to the permittee requiring immediate cessation and/or other action is issued by the Building Official, et al., such order shall be considered by the Plan Commission no later than at its next regular meeting. The Plan Commission, after hearing from the Building Official, the permittee, other person, and the public, shall affirm the order, reverse the order, or modify the order. The decision of the Plan Commission may be appealed to the City Council by either the Building Official or the permittee. 
(Code 1976, § 15.07.050)  
Sec. 10-211. - Non-renewal or revocation disciplinary hearings. 
Disciplinary hearings, including nonrenewal, suspension, revocation, modification, and/or other relief/remedy hearings, shall be held before the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall determine whether the arguments shall be presented orally or in writing, or both. If the Plan Commission, after considering the Building Official's report and any arguments presented by the Building Official and permittee, find the complaint to be true, or if there is no objection to a report recommending a suspension, revocation, nonrenewal, modification, and/or other relief/remedy, the permit shall be suspended, revoked, not renewed, modified, and/or other relief and/or remedy as provided by the Plan Commission. If the Plan Commission finds the complaint untrue, the proceedings shall be dismissed without cost to the accused or City. The decision of the Plan Commission may be appealed to the City Council by either the Building Official or the permittee. The Building Official shall give notice of each suspension, revocation, nonrenewal, modification, and/or other relief/remedy to the party whose permit is affected. 
(Code 1976, § 15.07.060)  
Sec. 10-212. - Non-transferability of permit. 
Permits issued hereunder are personal to the applicant and are not transferable from person to person. Permits issued hereunder are issued to a particular site and are not transferable from place to place. 
(Code 1976, § 15.07.070)  
Sec. 10-213. - Enforcement. 
The Building Director or his or her designee shall have the primary responsibility to enforce this article. Enforcement authority is as set forth in Article VII of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 15.07.080)  
Sec. 10-214. - Penalty. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit prior to commencement of work will result in a penalty of $100.00 or double the permit fee, whichever is greater, but in no event shall the penalty exceed $2,000.00. Such penalty shall be paid in addition to the customary permit fee. 
(b)  A $100.00 re-inspection fee shall be charged by the City against and paid by the property owner if the violation is not corrected by the re-inspection date. One hundred dollars will be charged for each subsequent re-inspection until full compliance is achieved. Re-inspection fees that are not timely paid shall be entered upon the tax roll as a special charge against the lot or parcel of land, pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0627, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(c)  Additional penalties, remedies, and relief for violations hereof are as set forth in Article VII of this chapter, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(d)  All double and other permit fees, re-inspection fees, relief, remedies, penalties, and enforcement set forth in this article and/or at law or equity are cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Code 1976, § 15.07.090)  
Secs. 10-215—10-236. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CODE ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 10-237. - Enforcement; authority; duties, generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Building Official to enforce the provision of this chapter. The term "Building Official," used in this article, shall have the same meaning as the term "Building Director" in Section 10-8. When used in this article, the term "Building Code" shall include all provisions adopted under this chapter. 
(b)  When the Building Official determines that there may be a violation of any provision of this chapter or a situation which affects the health or safety of the general public or the occupants of the building, the Building Official shall proceed to take necessary action as provided for in Sections 10-237 through 10-246. 
(Code 1976, § 15.80.010; Ord. No. 82-302, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 10-238. - Enforcement; authority; inspection duties. 
(a)  Inspection of buildings or structures and the issuing of orders in connection therewith, under the provisions of the Building Code, shall be the responsibility of the Building Official or his or her designee. Whenever, in the opinion of the Building Official, it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any conditions by any other department, he or she shall arrange for this to be done in such manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders. No order for corrections of any violation under the Building Code shall be issued without the approval of the Building Official. It shall be the responsibility of the Building Official, before issuing any such order, to determine that it has the concurrence of other departments or officials of the government concerned with any matter involved in the case in question. 
(b)  When the Building Official determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of any provision of this chapter may exist or that conditions exist when adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the occupants or the public, he or she may make or cause to be made inspections to determine the conditions of buildings or structures in order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public under the provisions of the Building Code. The Building Official is authorized to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his or her duties under the Building Code. The owner, operator or occupant of every building or structure, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Building Official free access thereto, and to all parts thereof, and to the premises on which it is located at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection. All the enforcement provisions of the Building Code are subject to the constitutional laws of the United States and the state, and all rights of individuals as defined therein. 
(Code 1976, § 15.80.020; Ord. No. 82-302, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 10-239. - Access by dwelling owner or operator. 
Every occupant of a building or structure shall give the owner or operator thereof, or his or her agent or employee, access to any part of such building or structure at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspections, maintenance, repairs, or alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of the Building Code. 
(Code 1976, § 15.80.030; Ord. No. 82-302, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 10-240. - Enforcement; methods. 
In enforcing the Building Code, the Building Official or any other person authorized to enforce it may do so by condemnation, vacation of building, order to correct violation, citation procedure, forfeiture action, injunctive relief, or any combination of those remedies. 
(Code 1976, § 15.80.040; Ord. No. 82-302, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 10-241. - Old, condemned, dangerous, deteriorated, damaged, dilapidated and/or unfit buildings and structures. 
(a)  Raze or repair order for dangerous structures. If all or part of any building or structure (including, among others, a fence, billboard or sign), or the equipment for the operation thereof (including, among others, the heating plants, plumbing, electric wiring, moving stairways, elevators and fire extinguishing apparatus) is found, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, his or her designee and/or other appropriate City Code Official (hereinafter in this section the "Building Official"), to be so old, dilapidated, damaged, deteriorated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, or where there has been a cessation of normal construction for a period of more than two years, he or she may proceed to issue a raze or repair order, or, if he or she determines based upon the particular facts and circumstances that it would be unreasonable to repair the same and/or constitute a safety hazard or a danger to the public, (the public safety and danger to the public determination) shall issue a condemnation order against that building and/or structure. If a raze or repair order is issued, and if the property owner desires to repair said building or structure, he or she must provide to City official the following documents: 
(1)  A compliance agreement. 
a.  The compliance agreement shall be signed by, dated, and binding upon the property owner and shall set forth and itemize all the repairs to be performed by the property owner in order to make the building or structure fit for human habitation, compliant and in full conformity with all applicable ordinances and other laws and regulations. The agreement shall provide a detailed schedule of the work to be done and the timeframe in which each item will be completed. The maximum term for a compliance agreement shall be one year from the date the property owner is first notified of the violation. If all repairs are not fully and satisfactorily completed within the scheduled timeframe, the raze or repair order shall also serve as a condemnation order and agreement. In the event that the property owner at any time breaches or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the compliance agreement, the City may, without any further notice, raze and remove and/or cause the razing and removal of the building or structure solely at the cost and expense of the property owner and/or otherwise condemn and/or remove the building or structure as allowed by law. 
b.  Written bids from legitimate contractors or other sources approved by the Building Inspector and/or his or her designee for repairs and an estimated pricing schedule outlining the costs associated with bringing the building or structure to full compliance. 
c.  The property owner must show proof to the City that he or she has the financial resources to repair the building or structure in the form of savings, loans or other form of financial assurance as requested or required by the Building Inspector and/or his or her designee. 
d.  The Building Official may add additional provisions, requirements, conditions and timeframes to the compliance agreement as he or she may determine appropriate, necessary and/or desirable based upon the particular facts and circumstances pertaining to the applicable building or structure. 
e.  The property owner must provide a fully completed, acceptable and executed written compliance agreement to the Building Official within 30 days of the happening of the event that caused the damage to the building or structure or issuance of the raze or repair order. Failure to do so shall result in a waiver by the property owner of the opportunity to repair the building or structure or avail himself or herself of the repair opportunities set forth in this and related ordinances, and the City shall either proceed under the original raze or repair order or otherwise condemn, raze, remove and/or cause the razing and/or removal of that particular building or structure. The Building Official upon his or her finding of good cause, may extend the 30-day time period, but in no event shall any compliance agreement be approved or accepted by the City if not provided by the property owner in fully completed, acceptable and executed form to the Building Official within 90 days of the happening of the event that damaged the building or structure. 
f.  The one-year time period within which all repairs must be fully and satisfactorily performed by the property owner shall not be extended by the City for any reason whatsoever. 
g.  In the event that any of the requirements set forth in this article and related ordinances are not fully, timely and satisfactorily complied with by the property owner, then the Building Official shall either proceed under the original raze or repair order, otherwise condemn the building or structure in accord with the applicable condemnation and/or provisions of law, raze and remove, and/or cause the razing and removal of the building or structure. 
h.  The compliance agreement is subject to the public safety and danger to the public determination of the Building Official, notwithstanding any provision of this article or any other ordinance to the contrary. 
(2)  If the property owner elects to raze the building or structure, such work shall be solely at the property owner's expense, completed within three months of the date the building or structure was damaged, and the site returned to a dust-free, erosion-free condition by the owner and otherwise according to law. 
(b)  Condemnation orders may be issued in the manner set forth above or as otherwise provided by law in the event that a building or structure has been, because of fire, storms, other natural disasters or other official causes, damaged and/or has become so old, dilapidated, deteriorated, uninhabitable, dangerous, damaged, unsafe or defective as to render the estimated cost of repairs to exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the building or structure, and, in the opinion of the Building Official, presents a safety hazard and/or danger to the public. Such orders shall be issued in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0413, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 15.80.050)  
Sec. 10-242. - Vacation of unfit buildings; procedure. 
(a)  Whenever the Building Official finds that any building or structure constitutes a hazard to the safety, health or welfare of the occupants or to the public because it lacks maintenance; or is in disrepair, unsanitary, vermin-infested or rodent-infested; or lacks sanitary facilities or equipment; or otherwise fails to comply with the minimum provisions of the Building Code, but has not yet reached such a state of complete disrepair as to be condemned as a dangerous structure as provided in Section 10-241, he or she may declare such building as unfit for human habitation, and order it to be vacated. 
(b)  The order to vacate shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the premises sufficient for identification. 
(2)  An order that the building be vacated by a specified time, and that the building, when vacated, must remain vacant until the provisions of the order are complied with and the order to vacate is withdrawn. 
(3)  Specification of the condition requiring vacation and the City ordinance, regulation or state law which is being violated, an order that the same be corrected, and the chapter and section of the Code under which such order is issued. 
(4)  A statement of the penalty for defacing or removal of the copy of the order. 
(5)  The name of the Building Official ordering vacation and the name of the department issuing the order. 
(6)  The date of service and posting of the order. 
(c)  A copy of the order shall be posted on the premises, and shall be served on the owner and occupants as provided in Section 10-244. 
(d)  When the Building Official is satisfied that the order to correct the hazard or condition has been complied with, he or she shall withdraw the order to vacate, notify the owner in writing, and remove the posted copy. 
(e)  The Building Official shall furnish a copy of all orders to vacate, and notices of withdrawal thereof, to any other official concerned therewith. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the owner of a building to notify the occupants of the withdrawal of any order to vacate issued pursuant to this section. Any damage, loss or injury to either the owner or occupants of a building, structure or premises ordered to be vacated shall not be the responsibility of the City of Janesville, unless directly caused by the City's negligence. Any damage, loss or injury to either the owner or occupants of a building, structure or premises ordered to be vacated shall be the responsibility of the person who caused the problem to exist. 
(Code 1976, § 15.80.060; Ord. No. 82-302, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 10-243. - Order to correct violations; requirements. 
(a)  Where a violation of the Building Code exists which, in the opinion of the Building Official, does not require condemnation or vacation, he or she may order the owner or occupant to correct the violation. 
(b)  The order to correct shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the premises sufficient for identification. 
(2)  An order to correct the violation. 
(3)  Specification of the condition requiring repair or correction, the City ordinance, regulation or state law which is being violated, and the chapter and section of the Code under which such order is issued. 
(4)  A reasonable time period in which the condition is to be corrected, normally at least 30 days, but correction of emergency conditions and repairs or sewer and water services may be required to be performed immediately. 
(5)  The name of the Building Official ordering correction and the name of the department issuing the order. 
(6)  The date of service of the order. 
(c)  A copy of the order shall be served as provided in Section 10-244 on the owner or occupant being ordered to correct the violation. For informational purposes, a copy of the order shall be sent by regular mail to any owner not being ordered to correct and not being served. 
(Code 1976, § 15.80.070; Ord. No. 82-302, § 2(part), 1982; Ord. No. 82-329, § 3(part), 1983)  
Sec. 10-244. - Order to correct violations—Posting and serving procedures. 
(a)  Orders to correct violations shall be served upon the owner of record by first class mail at the address listed on the most recent property tax bill or by delivering the order to the owner personally. When the owner or record does not have an address listed with the Building Division office, the order may be served: 
(1)  By delivering the order to the owner personally; 
(2)  By first class mail addressed to the owner at the last-known address as shown on the most recent property tax bill for the property affected by the order; or 
(3)  By posting the order in a conspicuous place on the exterior of the structure affected by the order. 
(b)  An owner shall notify a purchaser, in writing, that an order has been issued concerning a violation of this Code, whenever the condition of the property giving rise to the order has not been corrected. Any owner who fails to give written notice to a purchaser, prior to acceptance of a written offer to purchase, of an order concerning the property shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in Section 10-247. No owner may accept an offer to purchase which was made prior to the disclosure required by this subsection, unless the purchaser acknowledges receipt of a notice of outstanding orders and a willingness to proceed despite such knowledge. 
(Code 1976, § 15.80.080; Ord. No. 82-302, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 10-245. - Order to correct violations—Removal of posted copy. 
No person shall deface or remove a posted copy of an order from any building upon which it has been placed under this article except by authority in writing from the Building Official. 
(Code 1976, § 15.80.090; Ord. No. 82-302, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 10-246. - Order to correct violations—Failure to do so. 
In case any order is not promptly complied with, the Building Official may follow any, several, or all of the following procedures: Request the City Attorney to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity against the owner, operator or other person responsible for violation, ordering him or her to: 
(1)  Restrain, correct or remove the violation, or refrain from any further execution of work; 
(2)  Restrain or correct the erection, installation, or alteration of such building in violation of the Building Code; 
(3)  Remove work in violation; 
(4)  Prevent the occupancy or use of the building, structure, or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of or not in compliance with the provisions of the Building Code or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was issued; or 
(5)  Pay a forfeiture pursuant to the penalty provisions of the Building Code. 
(Code 1976, § 15.80.100; Ord. No. 82-302, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 10-247. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any provision of the Building Code or any order issued under the provisions of the Building Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25.00, nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof shall be committed to the Rock County Jail for a term of not less than five days nor more than 60 days. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate the violations as expeditiously as possible. 
(c)  Each and every day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  The City, in addition to the above penalties, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation, and/or the City Council may revoke any license or permit. 
(e)  If, in any action, a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight, or dereliction of duty on the part of the Building Inspector constitute a defense. 
(Code 1976, § 15.80.110)  
Chapter 12 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power of City Council to license businesses, see Wis. Stats. § 62.11(5). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Intent. 
The health, welfare and financial well-being of the City of Janesville is adversely affected by delinquent accounts receivable and shall be enhanced by the recovery of said monies. This chapter directly facilitates recovery of past monies owed to the City and, thus, helps reduce the tax burden of all residents and businesses in the City. This chapter shall be construed and applied liberally. 
(Code 1976, § 5.02.010)  
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Delinquent, delinquency, anddelinquencies mean owing an amount, account, claim, judgment or payment to the City of Janesville which is more than 30 days past due at the time of the application for a new or renewed license or permit and for which a repayment agreement has not been approved by the City Clerk-Treasurer, in one or more of the following categories: personal property tax; hotel/motel room tax; accounts receivable (including, but not limited to, ambulance bills and damage to property); utility accounts; delinquent real estate taxes as defined by Wis. Stats. §§ 74.11(7) and 74.11(8); and each and every other receivable, account or amount due or owing to the City of Janesville for whatever reason. 
Issuance and issue mean the physical delivery to an applicant of the license or permit document by a duly authorized representative of the Janesville City Clerk-Treasurer's Office. 
Licenses and permits mean those licenses and permits specifically set forth in this chapter. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, joint venture or any other business entity or unit of whatsoever kind or nature. The term "person" also means the applicant; a person on whose behalf the applicant files a license or permit application; a person having ownership interest in the real property upon which, or in the business for which, the license or permit will be utilized. The term "person" means the principal shareholder or beneficial owner of any business entity seeking the license or permit. The prohibition and mandate of this article shall apply to any business entity in which such person is a principal shareholder or beneficial owner. 
(Code 1976, § 5.02.020)  
Sec. 12-3. - Prohibition; non-issuance of new or renewed license or permits to delinquent persons. 
No new or renewed license or permit shall be issued to any person who is delinquent. 
(Code 1976, § 5.02.030)  
Sec. 12-4. - Exemptions. 
The issuance of dog and cat licenses is exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 5.02.040)  
Sec. 12-5. - Appeals. 
(a)  A determination to not issue a license or permit made under this chapter may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council. The appeal shall be in writing signed by the applicant and filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer's Office. The written appeal shall contain the appellant's legible, complete and accurate full first and last names with middle initial, home address, telephone number, the license and/or permits applied for and not issued, and a full statement of the reasons the appellant believes that he, she or it is/are not delinquent. 
(b)  The full amount of the alleged delinquency, together with applicable interest accruing thereon as of the date the appeal is filed, shall be paid in full by the appellant to the Janesville City Clerk-Treasurer's Office. Such payment is a required condition precedent before the City Council may consider or act upon such appeal. 
(c)  Unless each and every of the requirements of this section concerning the appeal are fully and accurately satisfied by the applicant, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall withhold forwarding the appeal for placement upon an upcoming agenda of the City Council. 
(d)  Upon filing, and only if in full accord with all of the requirements of this section, the appeal shall be forwarded by the City Clerk-Treasurer to the City Manager who shall place said appeal upon an upcoming agenda of the City Council for hearing and determination. 
(e)  Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be provided by the City Clerk-Treasurer's Office to the appellant by regular mail to the appellant's home address set forth upon the written appeal. 
(f)  The City Council shall conduct a hearing of the appeal and make their determination in open session by roll call vote. At the hearing, information and argument by the appellant, the City Clerk-Treasurer, and/or their respective representatives to the City Council shall be permitted. Each party shall be provided an opportunity to be heard and to present testimony, evidence, witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. A decision of the City Clerk-Treasurer's Office to not issue a new or renewed license or permit under this chapter shall be overturned by the City Council only upon a not less than majority vote of four members of the entire City Council. In the event that the determination of the City Clerk-Treasurer is overturned by the City Council, the Clerk-Treasurer shall promptly refund to the appellant by check and U.S. Mail to the appellant's home address set forth on the written appeal the full amount of the principal and interest paid by the appellant to the City at the time of filing the written appeal. 
(Code 1976, § 5.02.050)  
Secs. 12-6—12-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES, PERMITS AND FEES 
 
Sec. 12-29. - Schedule. 
The fee for each license or permit provided anywhere in this Code shall be an amount as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1976, § 5.04.010; Ord. No. 2017-704, § I, 11-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 2017-705, § I, 11-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 2017-706, § I, 11-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 2018-742, § I, 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 12-30. - Application; fees; recommendations; Council approval; issuance. 
Application for building permits, for permits for the installation of plumbing fixtures and the making of plumbing connections, and for permits for the installation of electrical work shall be made to the Building Inspector, the Plumbing Inspector and the Electrical Inspector, as the case may be. The fees to be paid for such permits shall be paid to the officer to whom application is made. All such required fees must be paid in full before any permit shall be issued, except as otherwise provided in this article, and also, except as otherwise provided, in the case of licenses provided by state law. Applications for licenses or permits in all other matters shall be made to the City Clerk and the required fee thereon shall be paid in full at the time of making such application. Upon the filing of such application and the payment of such fee, the City Clerk shall transmit such application to the City Manager for recommendation and thereafter the application shall be transmitted to the Council at its next meeting. If a majority of those present at any such meeting of the Council votes in favor of granting such application, then the City Clerk shall issue to such applicant the required license or permit bearing the signature of the City Clerk and the corporate seal of the City. No such license or permit shall be issued by the Clerk without the sanction of the Council. 
(Code 1976, § 5.04.020)  
Sec. 12-31. - Term. 
Every annual license or permit, except as otherwise provided by state law, as in the case of dog licenses, shall expire on June 30 next following its issue. The full license year shall commence on July 1 and end on June 30 of the following year. In the case of licenses or permits on other than the annual basis, such license or permit shall cover only the period stated therein, and the period for which the required fee has been paid. Whenever any amount is specified to cover the license for the period of one day, one week or one year, or any other period, the same fee shall be required for any portion of the period so named. 
(Prior Code, § 9.03; Code 1976, § 5.04.030)  
Sec. 12-32. - Nontransferable; exception when. 
No license or permit shall be transferable without the consent of the Council. 
(Code 1976, § 5.04.040)  
Sec. 12-33. - Licensed premises subject to search. 
As a condition of the granting of any license provided in Sections 12-101—12-103, 12-106, 12-220—12-224, 12-458—12-469, 12-244, and 12-269—12-278, or any one or more of said sections, the licensee shall agree in writing that during the period of such license, the licensed premises, or the premises in which such licensed business shall be transacted, shall be subject to search by any police officer at any time and all reasonable times, either with or without a search warrant for the illegal possession on said premises of fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors in violation of this Code, or gambling device in violation of Chapter 24, Article II, Division 5. In case such intoxicating liquor or gambling devices are found on said premises, the same may be seized, and the fact of such possession on said premises shall be admissible in evidence on any proceeding for the violation of Chapter 24, Article II, Division 5. 
(Code 1976, § 5.04.050; Ord. No. 83-525, § 2(part), 1983)  
Sec. 12-34. - Revocation; nonrenewal; hearing; applicant notification. 
Any permit or license may be revoked, or its renewal may be denied, by a majority vote of the members of the Council present at a regular or special meeting. Before such revocation or nonrenewal, the Council must hold a hearing on such revocation or nonrenewal. The holder or applicant shall be given notice, if possible, of the time and place of such hearing and of the reasons for the proposed revocation or nonrenewal. The holder or applicant shall be given an opportunity to be heard and present evidence at such hearing. Licenses and permits may be revoked, or their renewal refused, for violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation governing or applying thereto, by the licensee or permit holder or any employee or agent of the licensee or permit holder or any employee or agent of the establishment covered by such license or permit, or because the premises or object to which such license or permit applies are not maintained in a clean and orderly manner. In case of revocation, no portion of the fee paid for such license or permit shall be returned. 
(Code 1976, § 5.04.060)  
Sec. 12-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Repealed on January 1, 2002.  
Sec. 12-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Repealed on January 1, 2002.  
Sec. 12-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Repealed on January 1, 2002.  
Sec. 12-38. - Water main connection; fee. 
No person shall make any connection in the street with any water service without the payment to the City of a fee for each such connection for which fee the City shall make such connection. 
(Code 1976, § 5.04.160)  
Sec. 12-39. - Accident Research; fee. 
For researching signalization patterns, traffic configuration, and other special requests requiring effort above and beyond the law related to vehicle accidents within any public road right-of-way, the City of Janesville will charge a minimum fee in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5.04.170)  
Sec. 12-40. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person, retailer, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization or other entity who violated any provision of this article for which a different penalty is not herein specified shall, upon conviction, forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution for each offense. 
(b)  Upon default of payment of any forfeiture specified in this article, the violator shall be imprisoned for not more than 60 days. 
(c)  Each day's continuance of any violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other forfeitures or penalties set forth in this article, the court and/or the City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this article. 
(e)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other forfeitures or penalties set forth in this article, the City may seek and/or the court may impose injunctive relief in favor of the City and against any violation, including, but not limited to, abatement, removal, and confiscation. 
(Code 1976, § 5.04.180)  
Secs. 12-41—12-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AMUSEMENT CENTERS 
 
Sec. 12-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement center means any premises upon or in which five or more amusement devices are located. 
Attendant means a person required to be on the premises of an amusement center at all times such center is open for business and who shall be responsible for the control and conduct of persons on the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 5.08.010; Ord. No. 82-299, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 12-67. - Amusement center license; required; fee; application; nontransferable; expiration. 
(a)  Every person, partnership, association or corporation who operates an amusement center shall obtain an amusement center license. Such license may be granted by the City Council. 
(b)  The fee for an amusement center license shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. Such fee shall not be apportioned, regardless of the date on which such license may be issued. 
(c)  Application for an amusement center licensee shall be made in writing to the City Clerk on such form as the City Clerk prescribes. The application shall include the name and address of the applicant, the location of the business premises, the number of amusement devices to be in operation, the hours during which the center will be open for business, a list of those persons who will be attendants at the amusement center, a description of any other business to be conducted on the premises, and any other information deemed necessary by the City Clerk. Whenever anything occurs to change any fact set out in the application of any licensee, such licensee shall file with the City Clerk a notice in writing of such change within ten days after the occurrence thereof. 
(d)  An amusement center license shall not be transferable. 
(e)  An amusement center license shall expire June 30 of each year. 
(f)  No distributor or possessor shall allow five or more amusement devices to remain on the same premises without an amusement center license for such premises. 
(Code 1976, § 5.08.020; Ord. No. 82-299, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 12-68. - Attendant on duty. 
At all times an amusement center is open for business, there shall be on the premises an attendant who shall be able to control the conduct of persons on the premises. Such attendant shall maintain order and prevent patrons and persons located on the premises from interfering with others. Such attendant shall be responsible for all activities that occur on the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 5.08.030; Ord. No. 82-299, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 12-69. - Hours; limited. 
An amusement center shall not be open for business and shall not permit operation of any amusement device on the premises except during those times specifically listed on the application for the amusement center license. In granting, or renewing the license, or upon the request of any two Councilmembers, or the City Manager, the City Council may amend the hours the amusement center is allowed to be open for business. 
(Code 1976, § 5.08.040; Ord. No. 82-299, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 12-70. - Restrictions; licensee responsible. 
(a)  All restrictions and requirements in Article IV of this chapter regarding amusement devices apply with equal force and effect to an amusement center. Each licensed amusement center shall be operated pursuant to the restrictions and requirements of this article and Article IV of this chapter. 
(b)  The amusement center licensee shall be responsible for full compliance with such restrictions and requirements and shall be held responsible for the violation of any provision of this article or Article IV of this chapter which occurs on his or her licensed premises, whether he or she personally participated in such violation or not. 
(Code 1976, § 5.08.050; Ord. No. 82-299, § 2(part), 1982)  
Sec. 12-71. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, partnership, association or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day during which any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In default of payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 90 days. In addition to the above penalty, and independent and exclusive of such penalty, the City Council may, upon violation of ay provision of this article by any person, partnership, association or corporation, revoke any license granted pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.08.060; Ord. No. 82-299, § 2(part), 1982)  
Secs. 12-72—12-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
 
Sec. 12-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement device means a machine which, upon the insertion of a coin or slug, operates or may be operated or used as a game, contest, or amusement of any description, which contains no automatic payoff device for the return of slugs, money, coins, or checks, which might, but need not, provide redemption coupons or tickets, and which is not readily convertible into a gambling device. The term "amusement device" also includes any machine which operates or may be operated or used as a game, contest, or amusement of any description for which a fee is charged, whether the fee is inserted in the machine or given to an attendant who then allows the use of such machine. Coin-operated musical instruments, jukeboxes, vending machines, pool and billiard tables, bowling alleys and coin-operated telephones shall not be considered amusement devices under this article. Included in the term "amusement device" are redemption games of skill. 
Distributor means any person, partnership, association or corporation who owns, leases, installs, maintains or places one or more amusement services for use in the City. 
Possessor means any person, partnership, association or corporation in or upon whose premises an amusement device is set up for operation in the City. 
(Code 1976, § 5.12.010; Ord. No. 82-299, § 3(part))  
Sec. 12-102. - Amusement devices; licensing. 
Every amusement device in the City, when used commercially, requires a separate annual amusement device license. Every owner and possessor of an amusement device shall pay a per device annual license fee for the first 20 amusement devices per premises. The amount of the fee and any maximum annual aggregate per device license fee per premises shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. The per device annual license fee shall be paid by all owners and possessors of amusement devices whether or not the premises constitutes an amusement center, and shall be paid in addition to the amusement center license fee, as applicable. 
(Code 1976, § 5.12.012)  
Sec. 12-103. - Wagering, prizes, gambling not allowed. 
No possessor shall permit the wagering of money, goods or merchandise upon the result of any game of chance connected with the use or operation of any amusement device. Award of minor value novelty items and toys by a possessor solely to a user as the direct result of such user's successful participation in a redemption game of skill or redemption device of skill shall not be considered in violation of this section or article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.12.020)  
Sec. 12-104. - Obscene, lewd, lascivious or indecent exhibit prohibited. 
No amusement device shall show or exhibit or in any manner allow the public to observe, by payment of coin or otherwise, any picture, exhibit, or other representation that is obscene, lewd, lascivious or indecent. 
(Code 1976, § 5.12.030; Ord. No. 82-299, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 12-105. - Registration deemed consent to police entry. 
Any police officer may, in the discharge of his or her duties, enter, at any time, any premises in which an amusement device is located. The operation of one or more amusement devices for such premises is deemed to be consent to such entry. 
(Code 1976, § 5.12.040; Ord. No. 82-299, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 12-106. - Operating restrictions near schools. 
Use of amusement devices by persons under 18 years of age shall not be permitted within any premises located within 600 feet of any elementary or high school building during the hours when such schools are in session. Such restriction shall not apply on weekends, during recognized school holidays or during summer vacation. 
(Code 1976, § 5.12.050; Ord. No. 82-299, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 12-107. - Possessor's responsibilities; compliance. 
The possessor of any amusement device shall be responsible for full compliance with the requirements of this article and shall be held responsible for the violation of any provision of this article which occurs on his or her premises, whether he or she personally participated in such violation or not. 
(Code 1976, § 5.12.060; Ord. No. 82-299, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 12-108. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, partnership, association, or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day during which any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In default of payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 90 days. 
(Code 1976, § 5.12.070; Ord. No. 82-299, § 3(part), 1982) 
State Law reference— Licensing of amusement places, Wis. Stats. § 175.20.  
Secs. 12-109—12-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - YOUTH ENTERTAINMENT CENTERS 
 
Sec. 12-130. - Findings. 
(a)  The City Council hereby finds that youth entertainment centers and related entertainment and amusement activities may, significantly and substantially, impact upon surrounding properties, residences, traffic, young people, orderly and peaceful conduct of City streets, sidewalks and neighborhoods, the peace, tranquility and related police powers of the community, and constitute intensive land use wherever located in the City necessitating close prior review and scrutiny of the proposed sites, activities, impact, and applicant for licensing. 
(b)  The City Council hereby further finds that such centers and activities may generate adverse impacts upon the community and its peace, tranquility and safety, including, but not limited to, unnecessary, disturbing and/or annoying noise, disorderly conduct, damage to abutting and/or surrounding properties, traffic congestion, pedestrian safety littering, unlawful public and/or underage alcohol possession and/or consumption, truancy and juvenile delinquency, such that appropriate placement and regulation of such centers and activities, and the effective and lawful management and control of such facilities and activities by the licensee, are jointly and severally essential. 
(c)  The City Council hereby further finds that maintaining the health, welfare, safety, peace, tranquility and order of each neighborhood, street, sidewalk, residential and commercial property pertaining, but not limited, to the areas of community concern, described more fully above, within which the City is not only a legitimate exercise of the Council's police powers but its non-delegable responsibility, as well. 
(d)  To those legitimate ends, the City Council hereby finds it appropriate and necessary to effectively, and in on-going manner, review, license and regulate the operation of youth entertainment centers and related activities with the City. 
(Code 1976, § 5.14.010)  
Sec. 12-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means and includes, but is not limited to, individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, venture, cooperatives, and other business entities of whatsoever kind or nature. 
Youth entertainment center means any public or private business or premises which permits, serves or caters to, as part or all of its patrons, persons under the age of 21 years and which provides or conducts one or more of the following: dances; entertainment; amusement; pool tables; live or recorded music; social activities; or other amusement or entertainment activities. Excepted from this definition are the following, only if such businesses are primarily used for such enumerated purposes: movie theatres; miniature golf courses; bowling alleys; archery lanes; roller skating or ice skating halls or rinks; tennis, handball or racquet ball courts; restaurants; gymnasiums; licensed amusement centers; alcohol licensed establishments; and not-for-profit benevolent and/or charitable organizations. 
(Code 1976, § 5.14.020)  
Sec. 12-132. - License—Required. 
Every person who operates or conducts a youth entertainment center or directly or indirectly engages for himself or herself or another in the activities defined above within the City shall first apply for and, if granted, obtain and hold a youth entertainment license. 
(Code 1976, § 5.14.030)  
Sec. 12-133. - License—Application; contents; term. 
(a)  Application for a youth entertainment center license shall be made in writing on such form as the Chief of Police and the City Clerk, from time to time, prescribe. 
(b)  The application shall include the name and address of the applicant, the location of the business premises, the days and hours the center will be open for business, a description of any other business to be conducted on the premises, and any other information deemed necessary by the City Clerk and/or Chief of Police. 
(c)  A youth entertainment center license shall not be transferable as to ownership or location. 
(d)  A youth entertainment center license shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(e)  Applications shall be filed with the City Clerk's Office together with the required youth entertainment license application fee. 
(f)  The City Council shall review such application and may grant or deny the applicant a youth entertainment center license based upon location, zoning, projected number of patrons, primary age of patrons, actual lawful occupancy capacity of structure, nature of proposed activities, proposed hours of operation, traffic, parking, noise, crowds, surrounding character of area and neighborhood, and such other health, welfare, safety, peace and tranquility factors and considerations as the City Council may, from time to time, specifically address based upon the particular facts and circumstances pertaining to an application. 
(g)  In the event the youth entertainment center license is granted by the City Council, it shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment of the required fee. 
(h)  Each person issued and holding a valid and lawful youth entertainment center license shall post and at all times conspicuously display his or her youth entertainment center license upon the property so licensed. 
(i)  The City Council, upon a majority vote of the members present, may, for any reason it deems in the public interest, health, safety, welfare, peace, or tranquility, upon the initial issuance, and/or from time to time thereafter, set or amend the hours or other conditions under which that a particular youth entertainment center is allowed to be lawfully open for business or in operation, and/or otherwise condition, regulate, restrict or modify any youth entertainment center license. 
(Code 1976, § 5.14.040)  
Sec. 12-134. - License—Fee required. 
(a)  The fee for a youth entertainment center license shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(b)  Such fee shall not be apportioned nor otherwise adjusted nor prorated regardless of the date of issuance or termination. 
(c)  No fee shall be refunded. 
(Code 1976, § 5.14.050; Ord. No. 2017-705, § III, 11-2-2017 )  
Sec. 12-135. - Applicant; investigation. 
(a)  A police investigation into the character and fitness of each applicant shall be conducted before a license may be granted. 
(b)  After such investigation, upon the face of the application form, and before such application is forwarded to the City Council for its consideration, the Chief of Police shall recommend either City Council approval or denial. 
(c)  In the event the Chief of Police recommends Council denial, the Chief of Police shall cause to be attached to such application form and forwarded to the City Council and the applicant his or her reason therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 5.14.060)  
Sec. 12-136. - Premises; orderly and peaceful operation. 
(a)  Each and every youth entertainment center shall, at all times, be operated in an orderly, peaceful, and lawful manner. 
(b)  Every licensee and every attendant on duty shall be responsible for the orderly, peaceful, and lawful operation of the youth entertainment center. 
(Code 1976, § 5.14.070)  
Sec. 12-137. - Attendant on duty. 
(a)  At all times during which the youth entertainment center is open for business, there shall be on the premises either the licensee or a mature and responsible attendant 18 years or older who shall be able to effectively control the conduct of persons and the activities upon the licensed premises. 
(b)  Such attendant shall, at all times, maintain order upon the premises and prevent patrons and persons located on the premises from interfering or injuring with others. 
(c)  Such attendant shall be responsible and liable for all activities that occur on the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 5.14.080)  
Sec. 12-138. - Hours; limited; presence regulated. 
(a)  No premises licensed under this article shall be open for business before 4:00 p.m. on days public schools are in session or 12:00 noon on other days; not be open for business after 1:00 a.m. on any day. 
(b)  No person under the age of 18 shall be present upon or within 300 feet of any youth entertainment center licensed premises before 4:00 p.m. nor after 11:00 p.m. on any day during which school is in session, or before 12:00 noon nor after 1:00 a.m. on any other day. 
(c)  No employee shall remain upon the licensed premises after 1:30 a.m. on any day. 
(d)  In granting, renewing, or otherwise conditioning the youth entertainment center license, or upon the request of any two Councilmembers or the City Manager, and for any reason in the public interest, health, safety, welfare, peace, or tranquility, the City Council may set or amend the hours during, or other conditions under which, a particular youth entertainment center is allowed to be lawfully open for business. 
(Code 1976, § 5.14.090)  
Sec. 12-139. - Location. 
A youth entertainment center shall not be located within 300 feet from any property or premises licensed for the retail sale of alcohol beverages or within 300 feet of any other licensed youth entertainment center. 
(Code 1976, § 5.14.100)  
Sec. 12-140. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction therefor, pay a forfeiture in an amount not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 together with the costs of prosecution. 
(b)  Upon default in payment of the forfeiture, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid in full, but not to exceed 90 days. 
(c)  Each day's continuance constitutes a separate violation. 
(d)  In addition and/or exclusive to the imposition of the above-described forfeiture and costs, the court and/or the City Council, upon majority vote, may revoke, suspend, modify, or not renew any license issued under this article. 
(e)  In addition and/or exclusive to the imposition of the above-described forfeiture and costs and action upon the license, the court may grant such injunctive and other relief as the City may, from time to time, request. 
(Code 1976, § 5.14.110)  
Secs. 12-141—12-163. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BUSINESSES ON THE STREETS 
 
Sec. 12-164. - No businesses on streets. 
No person shall conduct any business on the streets of the City, unless specifically permitted by some other provision of this Code. Business operations presently being conducted outside the paved portion of the City's right-of-way may continue. 
(Code 1976, § 5.20.010; Ord. No. 77-38, § 1, 1977)  
Sec. 12-165. - Outdoor dining and food service on public terrace. 
(a)  Any person who engages in, causes or permits, or attempts to engage in, cause or permit any dining, food service, food sales, encroachment, or other financial gain activity upon any public right-of-way, public sidewalk, public walk-way, public sidewalk easement, public terrace or other public area, may do so only in the manner expressly provided in this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any prohibition set forth in this article or other City ordinance, a person may engage in, cause, permit, and/or provide dining and food/beverage sales and service on the public terrace area, public sidewalk, public right-of-way, public walk-way, sidewalk easement, or other public area, but only in strict conformity and compliance with each and every one of the following requirements and restrictions: 
(1)  A sidewalk cafe shall only be permitted in the public sidewalk and terrace properties located in B5 (Central Business) and B6 (Central Service) zoning districts in the City. 
(2)  A sidewalk cafe shall only be permitted to persons who own and/or lawfully possess a building immediately abutting that portion of the public sidewalk and terrace property which is sought to be a sidewalk cafe. The primary purpose of the building shall be coffee shop, delicatessen, bakery, restaurant, or dining activities. 
(3)  A sidewalk cafe shall only permit limited outdoor dining and related food and beverage service (permitted activities) in the sidewalk cafe area. Such permitted activities shall only occur in strict conformity and compliance with each and every of the requirements and restrictions set forth in this article. 
(4)  Each and every person operating a sidewalk cafe under this article, at all times during which the sidewalk cafe area is open to the public, shall provide toilet rooms and access to such toilet rooms to patrons and the public. Such access and toilet rooms shall otherwise be in the manner required by law and shall be located in the building which immediately abuts the sidewalk cafe. 
(5)  The sidewalk cafe has a valid permit from the Rock County Health Department. Verification of such permit shall be filed with the City Clerk's Office prior to use of the sidewalk cafe area. 
(6)  No alcohol or alcohol related activities, including, but not limited to, sale, consumption, storage, dispensing, or use, even if the sidewalk cafe area is located next to and/or part of an alcohol licensed premises, is permitted unless such outdoor alcohol use is approved by the City Council through amendment of the licensed premises description in the applicable license. 
(7)  No person or sidewalk cafe shall obstruct or impede, or permit the obstruction or impeding, of the use of the pedestrian right-of-way of any public sidewalk. A pedestrian right-of-way, for purposes of this article, shall mean an unobstructed area of a minimum of five contiguous feet in width measured in a straight line at right angles from the building and running the length of the property line. 
(8)  Any and all tables, chairs, equipment and other appurtenances must be located entirely within the sidewalk cafe area, may not be placed or in any manner encroach upon the pedestrian right-of-way or other public area or upon any other property, and shall be placed within the extended property lines which run at straight line, right angles to the vehicular portion of the street or sidewalk edge adjoining the applicable business establishment associated with the sidewalk cafe. Any and all tables, chairs, equipment and other appurtenances in the sidewalk cafe area shall be removed each day from the close of business until the normal opening of business the next day, but in no event later than 11:00 p.m. or before 6:00 a.m., respectively, each day. 
(9)  No littering or accumulation of debris, trash, clutter, unhealthy or similar items may occur and/or be deposited or permitted in or near any sidewalk cafe area at any time. All such litter, debris and related items shall be immediately (within 20 minutes) removed, and the area cleaned and made sightly upon any verbal or written order by any police officer, Building Inspector, Code Administration Official, and/or any or their joint or several authorized designees or representatives. 
(10)  No food beverages or other items shall be stored or located in the sidewalk cafe area prior to service to or consumption by patrons. 
(Code 1976, § 5.20.020)  
Sec. 12-166. - Mobile food vendors; licensing; regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to permit, regulate and license mobile food vendors. Vendors may sell pre-packaged frozen confectionaries such as pre-packaged ice creams, frozen popsicles, soda, bottled water, shaved ice and similar items or hot/prepared food within the City of Janesville. Such licensed mobile food vendors operated in strict conformity with each and every provision of this article are exempt from the prohibition set forth in Section 12-164. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Janesville. 
Licensee means the owner or applicant who is issued and holds a license under this article. 
Mobile food vending season means all year. 
Mobile food vending vehicle means a commercially manufactured, self-contained, motorized movable vehicle or trailer in which food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed, or portioned for services, sale or distribution, including ice cream, custard and other prepackaged frozen treats. Each motorized food vending vehicle shall be a licensed motor vehicle permitted to function as an operable motor vehicle within the State of Wisconsin. Mobile food vehicles do not include vehicles that are used solely to transport or deliver food or a common carrier regulated by the state or federal government. 
Mobile food vendor means operator or mobile food vending vehicle or cart, hereinafter referred to as vendor. 
Non-motorized food vending cart means a pushcart or other non-motorized device which is on wheels and of sufficiently lightweight construction that it can be moved from place to place and from which only food, including ice cream, custard and other prepackaged frozen treats, is sold, hereinafter referred to as cart. 
Operator means the person who engages in or conducts any activities involving a mobile food vehicle/cart. 
Owner means the person who owns the mobile food vehicle/cart. 
Person means each and every natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture, cooperative, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, sole proprietorship and other individual, person and legal entity if whatever kind or nature. 
(c)  General regulations. 
(1)  Every person, mobile food vending vehicle and cart engaged in activities regulated by this article, whether or not licensed, shall at all times comply with each and every provision and regulation set forth in this article. 
(2)  Every mobile food vending vehicle and cart shall at all times be operated in strict accord with each and every provision and regulation set forth in this article, state law and county law. 
(3)  No person may engage in any activity for which a license is required under this article without first applying for, paying the fee for, and holding a valid license for each mobile food vending unit/cart. 
Mobile food vending vehicles shall be exempt from licensing provisions of Subsections (d), (e) and (j) of this section if the vendor is selling goods exclusively at a special event approved by the Recreation Division and this event permit holder/event organizer, such as a farmer's market or youth sports facility, on premises under the control of the event organizer, as long as said mobile food vendor is licensed to sell products by the Rock County Health Department and/or the State of Wisconsin. 
(d)  License required. Every mobile food vending vehicle and non-motorized food vending cart in the City shall be licensed. No person shall operate, sell, vend from, use a mobile food vending vehicle or cart, or otherwise engage in any activities regulated by this article unless the mobile vending vehicle or cart holds the appropriate and valid license from the City. Each owner in his, her or its name shall apply for, pay the fee for, and hold a mobile vending unit or cart license for each unit in the City prior to the use of such unit in the City. 
(e)  Vendor license application. 
(1)  Initial application. Each owner desiring to conduct or engage in activities regulated by this article shall file a written initial application with the City Clerk or designee on form provided by the City Clerk for a mobile food vending vehicle or non-motorized food vending cart license for each mobile food vending vehicle and cart. No person may operate, conduct or engage in activities regulated by this article without filing an application, paying the fee for such license or without holding an appropriate license under this article. The City Clerk, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, City Council, and/or their appropriate designee may amend and require such information on the initial application as he or she may, from time to time, consider desirable, proper, and/or necessary. 
(2)  Renewal application. Each licensed mobile food vending vehicle or cart owner desiring to conduct activities regulated by this article after initial licensing shall file a written renewal application with the City Clerk or designee on a form provided by the City for each proposed mobile vending unit or cart. The City Clerk, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, City Council, and/or appropriate designee may amend and require such information on the renewal application as he or she may, from time to time, consider desirable, proper and/or necessary. 
(3)  Fees. Fees for mobile food vending vehicle and non-motorized food vending cart shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(4)  All initial and subsequent mobile food vending vehicle and cart licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(5)  No application shall be accepted for filing, nor mobile food vending vehicle or cart license issued or renewed, unless and until the owner and applicant possesses all necessary State and County Health Department and other required governmental agency license and permit for the mobile food vending vehicle or cart. Each owner or applicant, at the time of filing the City initial application and at the time of all subsequent annual renewal filings, shall provide the City Clerk proof of such other licenses and permits in such form as the City Clerk may, from time to time, deem necessary and/or desirable. 
(6)  No mobile food vending vehicle or cart license may be issued or renewed unless and until the mobile vending vehicle or cart passes the inspection of the county/state health officials and agencies, and holds proper health licensing, permits and certification. 
(7)  No mobile food vending vehicle or cart license may be issued or renewed if the applicant, owner or proposed operator of the mobile food vending vehicle or cart has had a license or permit issued under the ordinance revoked, suspended, or non-renewed unless expressly approved by appeal to the City Council. 
(8)  No mobile food vending vehicle or cart license may be issued by the City Clerk unless and until all requirements set forth in this article have been fully and properly satisfied by the owner or applicant. The decision of the City Clerk shall be final in this regard. 
(f)  Separate license for each vehicle. Each mobile food vending vehicle and cart shall be separately licensed and such licenses shall not be transferable to any other mobile food vending vehicle or cart. 
(g)  License shall be displayed. Each issued license shall be prominently and conspicuously posted and displayed upon each licensed mobile food vending vehicle and cart, visible to the public. 
(h)  License information shall be displayed. At all times, each mobile food vending vehicle and cart shall have permanently affixed to it and prominently displayed a sign no smaller than 12 inches by 12 inches displaying the name, address and telephone number of the licensee. 
(i)  Operation. 
(1)  Mobile food vending vehicle. 
a.  Each mobile food vending vehicle shall be capable of being moved and kept under control by one person. All traffic laws shall be adhered to during operation of the vehicle. 
b.  Each mobile food vending vehicle shall be moved safely to and from its vending location. 
c.  Each mobile food vending vehicle shall be secured at all times so as not to injure or endanger persons or property. 
d.  Each mobile food vending vehicle shall be equipped with at least one leak-proof container for the deposit of waste, garbage, litter, and refuse. A second leak-proof container for the deposit of recycle materials is also required. All such containers shall be kept covered with tight-fitting lids. When leaving the sales area, the licensee and his or her employee shall be responsible for the removal of all litter resulting from his or her business or customer's use of his or her business. 
e.  Each operator, licensee and mobile food vending vehicle shall comply with all state and county laws, codes, regulations, and standards relating to serving and selling food and food products. 
f.  An operator shall be personally and physically present inside or next to the mobile food vending vehicle at all times during which items are displayed or sold. 
(2)  Mobile food vending cart. 
a.  Each cart shall be capable of being moved and kept under control by one person. 
b.  Each cart shall be moved safely to and from its vending location. 
c.  Each cart shall be secured at all times so as not to injure or endanger persons or property. 
d.  Each cart shall be equipped with at least one leak-proof container for the deposit of waste, garbage, litter, and refuse. A second leak-proof container for the deposit of recycle materials is also required. All such containers shall be kept covered with tight-fitting lids. When leaving the sales area, the licensee and his or her employee shall be responsible for the removal of all litter resulting from his or her business or customer's use of his or her business. 
e.  Each operator, licensee and cart shall comply with all state codes and county laws, regulations, and standards relating to the serving and selling of food and food products. 
f.  An operator shall be personally and physically present inside or next to the cart at all times during which items are displayed or sold. 
(j)  Insurance requirement. Each licensee shall obtain, pay for and at all times maintain proof of and actual liability insurance coverage against personal injury, death and property damage in an amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 per person per incident and $1,000,000.00 aggregate per incident. Such insurance shall name the City of Janesville and each and every one of the City's elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, agents and representatives as additional or co-insureds. At the time of filing the initial and all renewal applications, and applicant shall provide a true and correct photocopy of a certificate of insurance and/or other proof of insurance for each mobile food vending vehicle and mobile food vending cart in the form required by the City Clerk. 
(k)  Regulations. 
(1)  Mobile food vending vehicle. 
a.  Mobile food vending vehicles must be stationary at all times when sales and related activities are occurring. 
b.  Mobile food vending vehicles may set up and operate in the public rights-of-way but not the travel lanes. Mobile food vending vehicle service windows shall be oriented to the curb side of the street and not to the front, rear, or travel lane side of the truck. Mobile food vending vehicles may set up and operate within public parking lots within areas zoned B5 and B6. Mobile food vending vehicles shall be located so as not to obstruct a public way, impair the movement of pedestrians or vehicles, or pose a hazard or danger to public safety. 
c.  A mobile food vending vehicle operator may provide or allow a dining area near the mobile food vending vehicle. The dining area shall allow no more than two tables with a maximum seating area of eight people. The dining area is allowed only during hours of operation and the dining components shall be stored and secured when the vending operation is closed. 
d.  Any power required for the mobile food vending vehicle located on a public right-of-way shall be self-contained and shall not use public utilities. No power cable or equipment shall be shall be extended at grade across any City street, alley or sidewalk. 
e.  Mobile food vending vehicles may locate in private parking lots so long as the property owner has granted permission and all required health licenses are valid. However, the host parking lot must remain in compliance with the zoning ordinance including off-street parking requirements for the host lot; the mobile food vending vehicle shall not block the required drive aisles and shall be at least ten feet from the nearest edge of any building. The mobile food vending vehicle must be parked on a paved or hard-surfaced parking area. Notwithstanding the foregoing, not more than one mobile food vending vehicle shall be permitted per private parking lot. 
f.  Any special or civic event organizer desiring to host more than one mobile food vendor on private property shall notify the Building and Development Services Division prior to the event. The special or civic event shall be subject to a site plan review in accordance with Section 42-249 to ensure compliance with Section 42-466(a)(4). The fee for such plan review shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
g.  In City parks, mobile food vending vehicles are only allowed upon issuance of a permit for specific park areas designated by the Recreation Director. Said approval shall also include payment of any associated park use, financial gain and/or other license fee as determined by the Director for each mobile food vending vehicle license. 
h.  No mobile food vending vehicle shall operate before 8:00 a.m. or after dusk in residential areas, or before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. in commercial areas, except for areas zoned B5 or B6 where they may operate until 3:00 a.m. 
i.  No mobile food vending vehicle operator or other person shall use noise-makers, other than bells, lights, or music to attract customers. Such bells and music shall not be used before 8:00 a.m. or after dusk (sunset on any day) anywhere. No electrical or mechanical sound generated within a vending area shall be audible beyond the vendor's immediate working area and in no event more than 50 feet from the vehicle. 
j.  A mobile food vending vehicle may sell products as previously noted within any conservancy, commercial, or industrial district within the City of Janesville. A mobile food vending vehicle may sell only frozen confectionaries, soda, bottled water, or shaved ice within areas zoned residential or office. 
k.  A sandwich board sign not to exceed 24 inches wide by 48 inches tall with letters less than three inches in height shall be allowed to be displayed without a sign permit for each mobile food vending vehicle. Said sign may be located within the public right-of-way and shall not impede pedestrian movement on a public sidewalk. 
l.  A mobile food vending vehicle may not operate for business on public property within 200 feet of an existing licensed restaurant establishment as measured door to vehicle along the curbline of the public street from the entry door into the existing establishment to the vehicle. 
m.  A mobile food vending vehicle may not operate in any one location zoned residence or office for more than 60 minutes at a time. 
n.  See also Section 34-60 (Merchandise or personal property on the sidewalks). As applicable, those provisions are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth verbatim. Any action required or prohibited therein shall be required or prohibited, as applicable, by this article. 
o.  In no instance may a mobile food vending vehicle operate within an area previously permitted for financial gain on public property, including, but not limited to, the Janesville Farmer's Market or the Youth Sports Facility unless expressly allowed by the organization holding the financial gain permit. A mobile food vending vehicle may not operate within 200 feet of a street or area of the City designated for a community-wide special event or parades such as the Labor Day Parade or Fourth of July celebration within Traxler Park as determined by the City Council. Except within those park areas under lease agreement such as the Youth Sports Facility, an approval from both the leaseholder and Recreation Director are required. 
p.  Each owner, operator, and other person, whether or not licensed, who engages in any activities regulated by this article shall at all times fully and timely comply with and abide by each and every requirement and provision set forth in this article and with each and every other ordinance of the City of Janesville, state law, and county ordinance. 
(l)  Non-motorized food vending cart. 
(1)  Carts must be stationary at all times when sales and related activities are occurring. 
(2)  Carts are allowed within the public right-of-way during permitted hours of operation, but not in the travel lane. They also may set up and operate on the public terraces. 
(3)  Only one cart may be open for business at any time while in a privately owned parking lot, provided that the vending cart has permission of the lot owner to locate on the private parking lot. 
(4)  Any power required for the vending cart located on a public way shall be self-contained and shall not use utilities drawn from the public right-of-way. No power cable contained or equipment shall be extended at grade across any City street, alley or sidewalk. 
(5)  Carts shall be prohibited from using, setting up in or on and shall not operate upon the public bike trails or public sidewalks except in those areas zoned B5 and B6 (generally downtown) where carts may be operated on the public sidewalks where a terrace area is not in existence and where a minimum five-foot pedestrian path on the sidewalk is maintained for pedestrian movement. 
(6)  In City parks, carts are only allowed upon issuance of a permit for specific park areas designated by the Recreation Director. Said approval shall also include payment of any associated park use, financial gain and/or other license fee, as determined by the Director for each cart license. 
(7)  All cart vendors may sell pre-packaged frozen confectionaries, soda, bottled water, shaved ice and similar items in all areas of the community. In areas zoned conservancy, commercial or industrial cart vendors may also sell hot/prepared food in addition to frozen confectionaries and similar items as described above. 
(8)  No cart shall operate, sell, or dispense any item before 8:00 a.m. or after dusk (sunset on any day) except for areas zoned B5 or B6 where they may operate until 3:00 a.m. 
(9)  No cart operator or other person shall use noise-makers, other than bells, lights, or music to attract customers. Such bells and music shall not be used before 8:00 a.m. or after dusk (sunset on any day). No electrical or mechanical sound generated within a vending area shall be audible beyond the vendor's immediate working area and in no event more than 50 feet from the cart. 
(10)  See also Section 34-60. As applicable, those provisions are incorporated herein by references as if fully set forth verbatim. Any action required or prohibited therein shall be required or prohibited, as applicable, by this article. 
(11)  A cart may not operate in any one location zoned residence or office for more than 60 minutes at any one time. 
(12)  Each owner, operator, and other person, whether or not licensed, who engages in any activities regulated by this article shall at all times fully and timely comply with and abide by each and every requirement and provision set forth in this article, and with each and every other ordinance of the City of Janesville, state law, and county ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 5.20.030; Ord. No. 2017-705, § IV, 11-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 2018-742, § IV, 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 12-167. - Licensed motorized vendor trucks. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to permit, regulate and license motorized vendor trucks that sell pre-packaged frozen confectionaries, soda, bottled water, shaved ice and similar items and/or prepared food within the City of Janesville. Such licensed motorized vendor trucks operated in strict conformity with each and every provision of this article are exempt from the prohibition set forth in Section 12-164 (Licensing). 
(b)  General regulations. 
(1)  Every person and truck engaged in activities regulated by this article, whether or not licensed, shall at all times comply with each and every provision and regulation set forth in this article. 
(2)  Every motorized vendor truck shall at all times be operated in strict accord with each and every provision and regulation set forth in this article. 
(3)  No person may engage in any activity for which a license is required under this article without first applying for, paying the fee for and holding a valid license for each motorized vendor truck. 
(c)  Truck license required. Every motorized vendor truck in the City shall be licensed. No person may operate, sell or vend from, use a vendor truck or otherwise engage in any activities regulated by this article unless the truck holds an appropriate and valid license from the City. Each owner in his, her or its name shall apply for, pay the fee for, and hold a motorized vendor truck license for each truck in the City prior to use of such truck in the City. 
(d)  Definitions. 
Licensee means the applicant who is issued and holds a license under this article. 
Motorized vendor truck means the device regulated by this article. It includes any and all motorized mobile vehicles that are used directly or indirectly in the sale of any goods or services, including, but not limited to, trucks or vans used for such purposes. Each motorized vendor truck shall be a licensed motor vehicle permitted to function as an operable motor vehicle within the State of Wisconsin. 
Operator means the person who engages in or conducts any activities involving a motorized vending truck. 
Owner means the person who owns the motorized vendor truck. 
Person means each and every natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture, cooperative, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, sole proprietorship and other individual, person and legal entity of whatever kind or nature. 
Vending truck season means all year. 
Vendor means an operator. 
(e)  Vendor truck license application. 
(1)  Initial application. Each owner desiring to conduct or engage in activities regulated by this article shall file a written initial application with the City Clerk or designee on a form provided by the City for a truck license for each motorized vendor truck. No person may operate, conduct or engage in activities regulated by this article without filing an application, paying the fee for such license or without holding an appropriate license under this article. The City Clerk, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, City Council, and/or their appropriate designee may amend and require such information on the initial application as he or she may, from time to time, consider reasonable, proper and/or necessary. 
(2)  Renewal application. Each licensed truck owner desiring to conduct activities regulated by this article after initial licensing shall file a written renewal application with the City Clerk or designee on a form provided by the City for each proposed motorized vendor truck. The City Clerk, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, City Council, and/or appropriate designee may amend and require such information on the renewal application as he or she may, from time to time, consider reasonable, proper and/or necessary. 
(3)  Truck—Initial license fee. Each owner applicant shall pay an initial truck license fee per truck at the time of original filing. The initial application fee is non-refundable. The initial license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(4)  Truck—Annual renewal fee. An annual renewal fee per truck thereafter shall be required and paid. The annual renewal fee is non-refundable. The annual renewal fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(5)  All initial and renewal truck licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(6)  No application shall be accepted for filing, nor truck license issued or renewed, unless and until the owner applicant possesses all necessary County Health Department and other required governmental agency license and permit for the truck. Each owner applicant, at the time of filing the City initial application and at the time of all subsequent annual renewal filings, shall provide to the City Clerk proof of such other licenses and permits in such form as the City Clerk may, from time to time, deem necessary and/or desirable. 
(7)  No truck license may be issued or renewed unless and until the truck passes the inspection of the county/state health officials and agencies, and holds the proper health licensing, permits and certification. 
(8)  No truck license may be issued or renewed if the applicant, owner or proposed operator of the truck has had a license or permit issued under this article revoked, suspended or non-renewed unless expressly approved by appeal to the City Council. 
(9)  In addition to the license fee above, if the truck is to be operated within a private parking lot, approval shall include a site plan review to evaluate location, placement and parking standards in accordance with Section 14-249 (Site Plan Review) to ensure compatibility with Section 42-466(a)(4) (Outdoor Display of Merchandise). 
(10)  No truck license may be issued by the City Clerk unless and until all requirements set forth in this article have been fully and properly satisfied by the applicant. The decision of the City Clerk shall be final in this regard. 
(f)  Separate license for each motorized vendor truck. Each motorized vendor truck shall be separately licensed and such license shall not be transferable to any other motorized vendor truck. 
(g)  License shall be displayed. Each issued truck license shall be prominently and conspicuously posted on each licensed truck at all times. 
(h)  License information shall be displayed. At all times, each truck shall have permanently affixed to it and prominently displayed a sign no smaller than 12 inches by 12 inches displaying name, address, and telephone number to the licensee. 
(i)  Motorized vendor truck operation. 
(1)  Each motorized vendor truck shall be capable of being moved and kept under control by one person. All traffic laws shall be adhered to during operation of the vehicle. 
(2)  Each truck shall be moved safely to and from its vending location. 
(3)  Each truck shall be secured at all times so as not to injure or endanger persons or property. 
(4)  Each motorized vendor truck shall be equipped with at least one leak-proof container for the deposit of waste, garbage, litter, and refuse. A second leak-proof container for the deposit of recycle materials shall also be required. All such containers shall be kept covered with tight fitting lids. When leaving the sales area, the licensee and his or her employee shall be responsible for the removal of all litter resulting from his or her business or customer's use of his or her business. 
(5)  Each operator, licensee and truck shall comply with all state codes, regulations and standards relating to the serving and selling of food or food products. 
(6)  An operator shall be personally and physically present inside or next to the truck at all times during which items are displayed or sold. Vending trucks shall only be allowed within the public right-of-way during permitted hours of operation. 
(j)  Insurance requirement. Each licensee operating on City property, including, but not limited to, City-owned parking lots, right-of-way or City park shall obtain, pay for and at all times maintain proof of and actual liability insurance coverage against personal injury, death and property damage in an amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 per person per incident and $1,000,000.00 aggregate per incident. Such insurance shall name the City of Janesville and each and every of the City's elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, agents and representatives as additional or co-insureds. At the time of filing the initial and all renewal applications, an applicant shall provide a true and correct photocopy of a certificate of insurance and/or other proof of insurance for each truck in the form required by the City Clerk. 
(k)  Regulations. 
(1)  Motorized vendor trucks must be stationary at all times when sales and related activities are occurring. 
(2)  Motorized vendor trucks may set up and operate in the public streets but not in the travel lane. Vending truck service window shall be oriented to the curb side of the street and not to the front, rear or travel lane side of the truck. Motorized vending trucks set up and operate within public parking lots within areas zoned B5 and B6. Motorized vending trucks may also set up and operate within private parking lots subject to a site plan review in accordance with Section 14-249 to ensure compliance with Section 42-466(a)(4). 
(3)  In City parks, motorized vendor trucks are only allowed upon issuance of a permit for specific park areas designated by the Recreation Director. Said approval shall also include payment of any associated park use, financial gain and/or other license fee as determined by the Director for each vendor truck license. 
(4)  No motorized vendor truck shall operate before 8:00 a.m. or after dusk in residential areas, 9:00 p.m. in commercial areas except for areas zoned B5 or B6 where they may operate until 3:00 a.m. 
(5)  No motorized vendor truck operator or other person shall use noise-makers, other than bells, lights, or music to attract customers. Such bells and music shall not be used before 8:00 a.m. or after dusk (sunset on any day). No electrical or mechanical sound generated within a vending area shall be audible beyond the vendor's immediate working area and in no event more than 50 feet from the truck. 
(6)  A motorized vendor truck may sell all products as previously noted within any conservancy, commercial or industrial district within the City of Janesville. A motorized vendor truck may sell only frozen confectionaries, soda, bottled water or shaved ice within areas zoned residential or office. 
(7)  A sandwich board sign not to exceed 24 inches wide by 48 inches tall with letter less than three inches in height shall be allowed to be displayed without a sign permit for each truck. Said sign may be located within the public right-of-way and shall not impede pedestrian movement on a public sidewalk. 
(8)  A motorized vendor truck may not operate for business on public property within 200 feet of an existing licensed restaurant establishment as measured door to truck along the curbline of the public street from the entry door into the existing establishment to the truck. 
(9)  A motorized vendor truck may not operate in any one location zoned residence or office for more than 60 minutes at a time. 
(10)  See also Section 34-60 (Merchandise or personal property on the sidewalks). As applicable, those provisions are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth verbatim. Any action required or prohibited therein shall be required or prohibited, as applicable, by this article. 
(11)  In no instance may a motorized vendor truck operate within an area previously permitted for financial gain on public property, including, but not limited to, the Janesville Farmer's Market or youth sports facility. A vendor truck may not operate within 200 feet of a street or area of the City designated for a community-wide special event or parades such as the Labor Day parade or Fourth of July celebration within Traxler Park as determined by the City Council. Within those park areas under a lease agreement such as the youth sports facility, an approval from both the leaseholder and recreation director are required. 
(12)  Each operator and other person, whether or not licensed, who engages in any activities regulated by this article shall at all times fully and timely comply with and abide by each and every requirement and provision set forth in this article and in each and every other ordinance of the City of Janesville. 
(Code 1976, § 5.20.035; Ord. No. 2017-705, § IV, 11-2-2017 ; Ord. No. 2018-742, § V, 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 12-168. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity of whatsoever kind or nature violating any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof in court, shall be ordered to pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution. In default of the payment of such forfeiture and costs, the violator shall be dealt with in the manner provided, from time to time, by law for such default in payment, including, but not limited to, incarceration in the Rock County Jail for not more than 60 days for each violation. Each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate violation. 
(b)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, the imposition and/or payment of the above forfeitures and remedies, the City may seek and the court may grant injunctive and other legal and/or equitable relief in favor of the City to abate and/or enjoin the violations. 
(c)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, the above forfeitures and remedies, the court or the City Council may suspend and/or revoke any permit or license issued under this or any other article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.20.040)  
Secs. 12-169—12-189. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS 
 
Sec. 12-190. - Definitions. 
The definitions provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 134.65 and 134.66, as from time to time amended, revised or renumbered, pertaining to licensing and restrictions on the distribution of cigarettes and tobacco products are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
(Code 1976, § 5.24.010)  
Sec. 12-191. - Adoption of state laws on retailer licenses for the sale of cigarettes and tobacco products. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions of this article, any and all Wisconsin laws pertaining to and/or governing cigarette and tobacco product sales are adopted by reference, incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
(b)  Any requirement and/or prohibition set forth in Wisconsin law is required and/or prohibited, respectively, by this article. 
(c)  In the event of any conflict between Wisconsin Law and this article, the provisions of this article shall govern to the extent provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 5.24.020)  
Sec. 12-192. - Licensing; posting of license. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, organization, cooperative, association or other entity shall, himself or herself, or cause another to, in any manner, upon any pretense, or by any device, directly or indirectly sell, expose for sale, possess with intent to sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or give away or attempt to sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or give away, any cigarette or tobacco product to any person without holding a retail cigarette and tobacco product license issued by the City of Janesville under this article. 
(b)  The license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(c)  Every person, firm, partnership, corporation, organization, cooperative, association or other entity who must obtain and hold a retail cigarette and tobacco product license issued by the City of Janesville under this article shall post and at all times conspicuously maintain such license in full public view upon the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 5.24.030)  
Sec. 12-193. - Sale of cigarettes and tobacco products to children prohibited. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, organization, cooperative, association or other entity shall himself or herself, or cause another to, in any manner, upon any pretense, or by any device, directly or indirectly sell, expose for sale, possess with intent to sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or give away or attempt to sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or give away, any cigarette or tobacco product to any child. 
(b)  All licensed and unlicensed retailers shall post and at all times maintain a conspicuous sign clearly visible to the public in areas within his, her or its premises where cigarettes or tobacco products are displayed and/or sold to consumers stating that the sale of any cigarette or tobacco product to a person under the age of 18 is unlawful under state law and City ordinance. 
(c)  No manufacturer, distributor, jobber, sub-jobber, licensed or unlicensed retailer, other person, or their employees or agents, may provide or cause to be provided, any cigarette or tobacco product for nominal or no consideration to any person under the age of 18. 
(Code 1976, § 5.24.040)  
Sec. 12-194. - Vending machine provisions. 
(a)  Each vending machine owner, operator and/or possessor shall attach a notice in a conspicuous place on the front of each of his or her vending machines stating that the purchase of any cigarette or tobacco product by a person under the age of 18 is unlawful under state law and City ordinance and that the purchaser is subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $25.00. 
(b)  A retailer or vending machine operator may not sell cigarettes or tobacco products from a vending machine unless the vending machine is located in a place where the retailer or vending machine operator ensures that no person younger than 18 years of age is present or permitted to enter unless he or she is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or by his or her spouse who has attained the age of 18 years. 
(c)  A person who commits a violation of Subsection (b) of this section is subject to a forfeiture of: 
(1)  Not more than $500.00 if the person has not committed a previous violation within 12 months of the violation; or 
(2)  Not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 if the person has committed a previous violation within 12 months of the violation. 
(Code 1976, § 5.24.050)  
Sec. 12-195. - Licensee responsible. 
(a)  The licensee shall at all times be personally responsible for the faithful observance and performance of each and every provision of this article and state law upon the licensee's premises by the licensee and each and every of the licensee's employees, agents and/or representatives. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this article or state law by the licensee's employees, agents and/or representatives upon the licensee's premises shall constitute a violation of the licensee. 
(c)  The licensee shall be responsible for payment of any and all forfeitures imposed against any of the licensee's employees, agents and/or representatives for violations of this article or state law upon the licensee's premises. 
(Code 1976, § 5.24.060)  
Sec. 12-196. - Unlicensed owner, operator and possessor responsible. 
(a)  Every owner, operator, possessor or other person who should but fails to hold a license under this article shall at all times be personally responsible for the faithful observance and performance, by such owner, operator, possessor or other person and each and every of his or her employees, agents and/or representatives, of each and every provision of this article and state law upon such owner's, operator's, possessor's or other person's premises. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this article or state law by the owner's, operator's, possessor's or other person's employee, agent and/or representative upon the premises shall constitute a violation of the owner, operator, possessor or other person. 
(c)  The owner, operator, possessor or other person shall be responsible for payment of any and all forfeitures imposed against any of such owner's, operator's, possessor's or other person's employee, agent and/or representative for violations of this article or state law upon such owner's, operator's, possessor's or other person's premises. 
(Code 1976, § 5.24.070)  
Sec. 12-197. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1976, § 5.24.080)  
Sec. 12-198. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person, retailer, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization or other entity who violates any provision of this article for which a different penalty is not herein specified shall, upon conviction forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution for each offense. 
(b)  Any person, retailer, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization or other entity who violates Section 12-194 shall, upon conviction, forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not more than $25.00 together with the costs of prosecution for each offense. 
(c)  Upon default of payment of any forfeiture specified in this article, the violator shall be imprisoned for not more than 60 days. 
(d)  Each day's continuance of any violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(e)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other forfeitures or penalties set forth in this article, the court and/or the City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this article. 
(f)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other forfeitures or penalties set forth in this article, the City may seek and/or the court may impose injunctive relief in favor of the City and against any violation, including, but not limited to, abatement, removal, and confiscation. 
(Code 1976, § 5.24.090) 
State Law reference— Cigarette retailer licenses, generally, Wis. Stats. § 134.65.  
Secs. 12-199—12-219. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CIRCUS, EXHIBITION, ENTERTAINMENT, THEATRICALS AND THEATERS 
 
Sec. 12-220. - License; required; fees; exceptions. 
No person shall exhibit or give any public theatrical or operatic performance, musical entertainment, circus, menagerie, or other show, exhibition, entertainment, performance or amusement whatsoever, without having obtained a license therefor under the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that exhibitions and musical or other entertainments may be given without obtaining a license therefor when the profits derived therefrom are to be used in the City for charitable or benevolent purposes. The license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5.28.010)  
Sec. 12-221. - Hall, opera house and theater license; entertainment license fee exemption. 
The owner or manager of any hall, opera house or theater may take out a license for such hall, opera house or theater. When such a license is taken, the persons giving entertainments therein shall be exempt from the payment of any license fee therefore while such license remains in force. 
(Code 1976, § 5.28.020)  
Sec. 12-222. - Immoral or indecent shows not allowed. 
No license issued under this article shall be deemed to authorize the giving of any show, exhibition or entertainment which is immoral or indecent, or the giving of any show, exhibition or entertainment other than ordinary street parades within the limits of any public street. 
(Code 1976, § 5.28.030)  
Sec. 12-223. - License application; information required. 
Any person desiring to obtain a license pursuant to Section 12-220 shall make application therefor to the City Clerk. Such application shall specify the character of the performance, exhibition, entertainment or amusement for which a license is desired, the name and residence of the applicant, and the price to be charged for a single admission, but the price of admission need not be stated in any application for an annual license. Each such applicant shall state, in such application, the number of cars which are to be used in the transportation of its property and equipment. 
(Code 1976, § 5.28.040)  
Sec. 12-224. - License; application; Council approval; time limit. 
Upon the filing of an application pursuant to Section 12-223 with the City Clerk and the payment of the proper license fee, the City Clerk shall transmit such application to the City Council at its next regular meeting. If a majority of those present at any such meeting of the Council votes in favor of granting such license, then the City Clerk shall issue to such applicant a license for the period of time for which payment has been made, but not for any length of time greater than the time authorized by the Council. 
(Code 1976, § 5.28.050)  
Sec. 12-225. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction therefor in court, have his or her license revoked and shall further be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 and costs. In default of the payment of the fine and costs, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such fine and costs are paid, not to exceed 60 days. Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense. This penalty shall be independent and exclusive of the right of the Council to revoke any license or permit. 
(Code 1976, § 5.28.060)  
Secs. 12-226—12-243. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - FOOD AND DRINK HANDLERS 
 
Sec. 12-244. - License; required; sanitation regulations compliance; fees; issuance when. 
(a)  No person shall own, manage or operate within the City any hotel, restaurant, lunchroom, lunch stand or counter, cafeteria, tavern, candy store, fountain or other place dispensing drinks, grocery store, meat market, butcher shop or other place of any kind or nature selling food or drink for human consumption without procuring a license therefor. Every person operating any such place of business, as provided in this section, shall keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition and shall comply with all rules, regulations and orders of the proper health authorities of the state and the City. The license fee is required for the purpose of paying the cost of necessary supervision and inspection and the cost of enforcement of necessary regulations under the police power. The license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. Whenever two or more of the businesses listed in this section are owned and conducted by the same person or persons and upon the same premises, one fee shall be sufficient for such combined enterprise but a separate fee shall be required for each such business whenever the ownership or management is different, in whole or in part, from that of any other such business or businesses conducted on the same premises, or whenever the ownership and management may be the same, but separate premises are used for the conduct of one or more such business. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall issue the license upon the applicant's compliance with the provisions of this section and upon payment of the appropriate fee. 
(c)  Exempt from the requirement of this article are wrapped food and unwrapped food and candy, soft drink and gumball vending machines and devices. 
(Code 1976, § 5.44.010; Ord. No. 87-52, § 2, 1987)  
Sec. 12-245. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction therefor in court, have his or her license revoked and shall further be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 and costs. In default of the payment of the fine and costs, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such fine and costs are paid, not to exceed 60 days. Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense. This penalty shall be independent and exclusive of the right of the Council to revoke any license or permit. 
(Code 1976, § 5.44.030)  
Secs. 12-246—12-268. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - JUNK DEALER, SECONDHAND DEALER, SECONDHAND JEWELRY DEALER, PAWNBROKER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Unlawful to receive articles from minors, Wis. Stats. § 943.35; regulation of antique dealers, recyclers, secondhand goods dealers, and pawn brokers, generally, Wis. Stats. §§ 134.695 and 134.71. 
 
Sec. 12-269. - License; required. 
No person shall do business as a pawnbroker, junk dealer, dealer in secondhand goods, secondhand article dealer, secondhand jewelry dealer, secondhand article dealer mall, flea market, or secondhand dealer in junk, wares or merchandise without having first obtained and holding a valid license issued from the City under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.52.010)  
Sec. 12-270. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Article means any of the following articles: 
(1)  Audiovisual equipment. 
(2)  Bicycles. 
(3)  China. 
(4)  Computer, laptops, printers, software and computer supplies. 
(5)  Computer toys, gaming systems and games. 
(6)  Crystal. 
(7)  Electronic equipment. 
(8)  Fur coats and other fur clothing. 
(9)  Ammunition and knives. 
(10)  Microwave ovens. 
(11)  Office equipment. 
(12)  Pianos, organs, guitars and other musical instruments. 
(13)  Compact discs, audiotapes, videotapes, DVDs, GPS units, and other optical media recording or replaying devices. 
(14)  Silverware and flatware. 
(15)  Small electrical appliances. 
(16)  Telephones. 
(17)  Power tools and pneumatic tools. 
(18)  Firearms. 
(19)  Paper currency and coins redeemed for greater than face value. 
(20)  Sports equipment. 
(21)  Jewelry. 
Pawn broker means any person who engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of any article or purchases any article with an expressed or implied agreement or understanding to resell the article in the same or substantially similar form at a subsequent time at a stipulated price. To the extent: 
(1)  That a pawnbroker's business includes buying personal property previously used, rented, or leased, the provisions of this article shall be applicable. 
(2)  A person is not acting as a pawnbroker when engaging in any of the following: 
a.  Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale or an estate sale. 
b.  Any transaction between a buyer of a new article and the person who sold the article when new that involves any of the following: 
(i)  The return of the article. 
(ii)  The exchange of the article for a different, new article. 
c.  Any transaction as a purchaser of a secondhand article from a charitable organization if the secondhand article was a gift to the charitable organization. 
d.  Any transaction as a seller of a secondhand article that the person bought from a charitable organization if the secondhand article was a gift to the charitable organization. 
Secondhand article dealer means any person, other than an auctioneer, who engages in the business of purchasing or selling secondhand articles in the same or substantially similar form at a subsequent time. 
(1)  To the extent that a secondhand article dealer's business includes buying personal property previously used, rented, or leased the provisions of this article shall be applicable. 
(2)  A person is not acting as a secondhand article dealer when engaging in any of the following: 
a.  Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale or an estate sale. 
b.  Any transaction between a buyer of a new article and the person who sold the article when new that involves any of the following: 
(i)  The return of the article. 
(ii)  The exchange of the article for a different, new article. 
c.  Any transaction as a purchaser of a secondhand article from a charitable organization if the secondhand article was a gift to the charitable organization. 
d.  Any transaction as a seller of a secondhand article that the person bought from a charitable organization if the secondhand article was a gift to the charitable organization. 
Secondhand jewelry dealer means any person, other than an auctioneer, who engages in the business of any transaction consisting of purchasing, selling, receiving or exchanging secondhand jewelry. 
(1)  To the extent that a secondhand jewelry dealer's business includes buying personal property previously used, rented, or leased the provisions of this article shall be applicable. 
(2)  A person is not acting as a secondhand jewelry dealer when engaging in any of the following: 
a.  Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale or an estate sale. 
b.  Any transaction between a buyer of a new jewelry and the person who sold the jewelry when new which involves any of the following. 
(i)  The return of the jewelry. 
(ii)  The exchange of the jewelry for different, new jewelry. 
c.  Any transaction as a purchaser of secondhand jewelry from a charitable organization if the secondhand jewelry was a gift to the charitable organization. 
d.  Any transaction as a seller of secondhand jewelry which the person bought from a charitable organization if the secondhand jewelry was a gift to the charitable organization. 
(Code 1976, § 5.52.011)  
Sec. 12-271. - Adoption of state laws; more stringent laws govern. 
(a)  Incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this article as if fully set forth verbatim are Wis. Stats. §§ 134.71 and 134.695, including, but not limited to, the fee schedule set by state law in § 134.71(11), all as from time to time amended or renumbered. Any and all acts required to be performed or prohibited by any statutes so incorporated by reference are required or prohibited by this article. Any future amendments, revisions, or modifications of the statutes incorporated by this article are also adopted and incorporated as a part of this article. 
(b)  The more stringent provision set forth in this article or that set forth in the incorporated state law shall always take precedence and govern, notwithstanding any conflict, inconsistency or ambiguity to the contrary. The intent is to, at all times, render this article in full force and effect and in conformity with Wis. Stats. § 134.71(14), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 5.52.012)  
Sec. 12-272. - License—Application; information required; bond; Council approval; fee; issuance. 
(a)  A person wishing to obtain a license pursuant to Section 12-269 shall apply to the City Clerk for a license. The City Clerk shall furnish application forms that shall require all of the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name, place and date of birth, residence address, residence addresses for the five-year period prior to the date of the application, and all states where the applicant has previously resided. 
(2)  The name and address of the business and of the owner of the business premises. 
(3)  Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, limited liability company or partnership, and: 
a.  If the applicant is a corporation, the state where incorporated and the names and addresses of all officers and directors. 
b.  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners. 
c.  If the applicant is a limited liability company, the names and addresses of all members. 
(4)  The name of the manager or proprietor of the business. 
(5)  Any other information that the City Clerk or Chief of Police may reasonably require. 
(6)  A statement as to whether the applicant, including an individual, manager or proprietor, has been convicted of any crime, statutory violation punishable by forfeiture, or county or municipal ordinance violation. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time, place, and offense of all such convictions. 
(7)  Whether the applicant or any other person listed above has ever used or been known by a name other than the applicant, individual, manager or proprietor's name, and if so, the names used and information concerning dates and places used. 
(8)  Whether the applicant or any other person listed has previously been denied or had revoked or suspended as a pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer license from any governmental unit. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the date, location, and reason for the action. 
(b)  The Police Department shall investigate each applicant and any other person listed. The Department shall furnish the information derived from that investigation in writing to the City Clerk. The investigation shall include each applicant and manager or proprietor. 
(c)  The City may grant a license if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The applicant or proprietor does not have a significant arrest or conviction record, subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335. 
(2)  The applicant provides to the City Clerk a bond of $1,000.00 with not less than two sureties for the observation of all municipal ordinances or state or federal laws relating to pawnbrokers and secondhand article and secondhand jewelry dealers. The bond must be in full force and effect at all times during the term of the license. 
(d)  The following requirements apply to licenses issued under this article: 
(1)  No license may be transferred. 
(2)  Each license is valid from July 1 until the following June 30. 
(3)  Each license issued under this article shall be displayed in a conspicuous place visible to anyone entering a licensed premises. 
(4)  Annual license fees shall apply to licenses under this article. The annual license fees shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5.52.020)  
Sec. 12-273. - License—One place of business only; moving allowed when; reportable transaction. 
(a)  No person licensed as a pawnbroker, junk dealer or dealer in secondhand goods, wares and merchandise shall, by virtue of one license, keep more than one store or place for the carrying on of such business; provided, however, that such person may remove from one place of business to another by giving to the Police Department immediate written notice of such removal. 
(b)  Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer, or secondhand jewelry dealer in which articles are obtained through a pawn, purchase, receipt or trade, or in which a pawn is renewed, extended, voided, or redeemed, or for which a unique transaction number or identifier is generated by their point-of-sale software is reportable except the bulk purchase of new or used articles from a merchant, manufacturer, or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business, and the retail sale of said articles, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a record of such purchase that described each item, and must mark each item in a manner that relates it to that transaction record. 
(Code 1976, § 5.52.030)  
Sec. 12-274. - Licensee—Reports to Police; receipt required. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers, secondhand article dealers, and secondhand jewelry dealers must submit every reportable transaction to the Police Department within 48 hours, excluding legal holidays, in the following manner, except for all consignment transactions and all other transactions of a value of less than $20.00, which must be reported as required by Wis. Stats. § 134.71(8)(e), as from time to time amended or renumbered. Pawnbrokers, secondhand article dealers, and secondhand jewelry dealers must provide to the Police Department all required information pursuant to state statute and this article, by transferring the required information from their computer to the web server via modem designated by the Janesville Police Department. All required records must be transmitted completely and accurately in accordance with standards and procedures established by the Police Department using procedures that address security concerns of the pawnbroker or secondhand article and jewelry dealer and the Police Department. Each pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer, and secondhand jewelry dealer must display a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to the Police Department. 
(b)  If a pawnbroker, or secondhand article dealer, or secondhand jewelry dealer is unable to successfully transfer the required reports by modem within 48 hours, excluding legal holidays, the pawnbroker or secondhand article and jewelry dealer must provide the Police Department with printed copies of all reportable transactions by 12:00 noon the next business day. 
(c)  If the problem is determined to be in the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer's system and is not corrected by the close of the first business day following the failure, the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer must provide the required reports as detailed in state statute and this article, and shall be charged a daily reporting failure fee of $10.00 until the error is corrected; or, if the problem is determined to be outside the pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer, or secondhand jewelry dealer's system, the pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer, or secondhand jewelry dealer must provide the required reports pursuant to state statute and resubmit all such transactions via modem when the error is corrected. 
(d)  Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that prevented the pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer, or secondhand jewelry dealer from uploading the reportable transactions, upon correction of the problem, the pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer, and secondhand jewelry dealer shall upload every reportable transaction from every business day the problem has existed. 
(e)  The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the Police Department may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances, delay the implementation of the daily reporting penalty. 
(f)  Every licensee must provide a receipt to the customer identified in every reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three years. The receipt must include at least the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the licensed business. 
(2)  The date and time the item was received by the licensee. 
(3)  Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the transaction. 
(4)  An accurate description of each item received, including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item. 
(5)  The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that conducted the transaction. 
(6)  The amount advanced or paid. 
(7)  The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn and secondhand article dealers fees and charges. 
(8)  The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by the customer without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount necessary to redeem the item on that date. 
(9)  The full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number, and date of birth of the pledger or seller. 
(10)  The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of the seller: 
a.  Current valid Wisconsin driver's license. 
b.  Current valid Wisconsin identification card. 
c.  Current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by another state or government entity. 
(11)  Description of the customer or seller including approximate sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair. 
(12)  The signature of the customer or seller. 
(Code 1976, § 5.52.040)  
Sec. 12-275. - Licensee—Record keeping duties; information required; digital photo requirement; records required. 
(a)  At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions, redemptions or confiscations, every licensee must immediately record, in English, the following information in a computerized record approved by the Police Department, except for all consignment transactions, which must be recorded as required by Wis. Stats. § 134.71(8)(c), as from time to time amended or renumbered: 
(1)  A complete and accurate description of each item, including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark for such an item. 
(2)  Date, time and place the item of property was received by the licensee, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee's records. 
(3)  Full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number, date of birth and accurate description of the person from whom the item of the property was received, including sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair. 
(4)  The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of the seller: 
a.  Current Wisconsin driver's license. 
b.  Current Wisconsin identification card. 
c.  Current valid photo identification card issued by another state or government entity. 
(5)  The signature of the person identified in the transaction. 
(b)  The licensee must also take a color, digitized photograph of every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or identification number permanently engraved or affixed, excluding only electronic media. One group photo shall suffice for mass items such as several coins acquired in one transaction. If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches in length by two inches in width and must be maintained in such a manner that the photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate. Such photographs must be available to the Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee, upon request. Items photographed must be accurately depicted and submitted as digital images, in a format specified by the issuing authority, electronically cross referenced to the reportable transaction they are associated with. Consignment transactions shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(Code 1976, § 5.52.050)  
Sec. 12-276. - Licensee—Restricted purchases. 
No person or firm licensed under this article shall purchase or take any goods, articles or things from any person under 18 years of age or from any intoxicated person. 
(Code 1976, § 5.52.060)  
Sec. 12-277. - Labels required; holding period; police order to hold property; police to seize property when. 
(a)  Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned, purchased or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies the transaction in the shop's records, the transaction date, the name of the item and the description or the model and serial number of the item as reported to the Police Department, whichever is applicable. Labels shall not be re-used. 
(b)  Any item deposited for security shall be kept on the premises for safe keeping for not less than 30 days after the date of purchase or receipt unless the person known by the pawnbroker to be the lawful owner of the article redeems it. Any item purchased or received by a secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer shall be kept on the premises of safekeeping for not less than 14 days after the date of purchase or receipt. Consignment transactions shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(c)  During this period, the article shall be held separate from saleable inventory and may not be altered in any manner. The pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer, or secondhand jewelry dealer shall permit any law enforcement officer to inspect the article during this period. 
(d)  An investigative hold may be placed on an item when a law enforcement official from any law enforcement agency notifies a licensee not to sell an item. The item must not be sold or removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing by the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect for 15 days from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative order is canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued, whichever comes first. 
(e)  An order to hold may be placed on an item whenever the Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee, notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the Chief or the Chief's designee. The order to hold shall expire 90 days from the date it is placed unless the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing. 
(f)  An order to confiscate may be placed on an item if the item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case. The Chief or Chief's designee may physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a written order from the Chief or the Chief's designee, or place the item on hold or extend the hold and leave it in the shop. 
(g)  When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification upon request of the licensee, and shall provide the licensee the name and telephone number of the confiscating agency and investigator, and the case number related to the confiscation. 
(h)  When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the Chief of Police or Chief's designee shall so notify the licensee. 
(Code 1976, § 5.52.070)  
Sec. 12-278. - License; business area requirements. 
No application for a license pursuant to this article shall be issued and no person, firm or corporation shall operate any business for which a license is required by this article unless the area used in such business, including any storage area, is enclosed by a fence, wall or other structure which shall block from view all activities of said business that could be viewed by a person standing on the ground near the property on which such business is located; however, windows may be placed in said fence, wall or other structure. In any event, every such fence, wall or other structure shall be at least seven feet in height. 
(Code 1976, § 5.52.080)  
Sec. 12-279. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article may, upon conviction therefor in court, have their license revoked and shall further be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 and costs. In default of the payment of the fine and costs, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such fine and costs are paid, not to exceed 60 days. Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense. This penalty shall be independent and exclusive of the right of the Council to revoke any license or permit. 
(Code 1976, § 5.52.090)  
Secs. 12-280—12-306. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - MASSAGE THERAPISTS AND ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 12-307. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Massage means the practice, process, or procedure consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping, by physical or mechanical means, including, but not limited to, the use of oil rubs, heat lamps, salt glows, hot and cold packs, tub and shower or cabinet baths, upon the external parts or tissues of the body of another for remuneration. 
Massage establishment means a place of business where private massage is practiced, used or made available as a principal use of the premises. 
Massage technician shall mean any person, not licensed or registered as a massage therapist or body worker by the state, who practices, administers or uses or offers to practice, administer or use massage, as defined above, for remuneration. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.010)  
Sec. 12-308. - Massage technician license; required. 
No person or persons shall engage in the practice, or attempt to practice, massage for remuneration without securing a massage technician license from the City issued pursuant to the provisions of this article unless licensed or registered under the licensing and registration provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 460, Massage Therapy and Bodywork Therapy, as from time to time amended or renumbered. The licensing provisions of this article do not apply to the extent and degree as specifically preempted by Wis. Stats. ch. 460, Massage Therapy and Bodywork Therapy. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.020)  
Sec. 12-309. - Massage establishment license; required. 
No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall operate a massage establishment without first obtaining a massage establishment license from the City issued pursuant to the provisions of this article unless limited by Wis. Stats. § 460.17, Local regulation, as from time to time amended or renumbered, or other applicable laws. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.030)  
Sec. 12-310. - Exemptions. 
The requirements of this article shall not apply to the following classes of individuals while engaged in the duties of their respective professions: duly licensed physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, physical therapists, nurses, or massage therapists and body workers registered or licensed under the laws of the State of Wisconsin. Nor shall this section apply to barber shops and beauty parlors, barbers and beauticians licensed under the laws of the State of Wisconsin provided that such massage as is practiced is limited to the head and scalp. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.040)  
Sec. 12-311. - Massage technician license—Application; form; information required; fee; applicant's health certificate. 
(a)  Every person intending to operate as a massage technician or give massages for remuneration must apply for and be granted a massage technician license. Every person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity intending to operate a massage establishment must apply for and be granted a separate massage establishment license as provided in this article. A massage technician operating as a sole proprietor and employing no other person must apply for and be granted a massage technician license in order to practice massage. Such application shall be on forms supplied by the City Clerk and shall be signed by the applicant, and contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent home address; 
(3)  Proposed business address; 
(4)  Two recent photographs; 
(5)  Complete set of fingerprints; 
(6)  Massage or similar business history or experience, including whether such person has ever had a massage or similar business license revoked, suspended or denied; 
(7)  A complete list of all criminal convictions and City ordinance convictions; 
(8)  A copy of the diploma or other written proof of graduation from a school of massage. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by a license fee. The annual license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. In addition, the application shall be accompanied by the statement of a physician, licensed as such by the state, dated within ten days of the application, certifying that the applicant is free of contagious, infectious, or communicable diseases. Upon receipt of any such application, accompanied by the bond or insurance required in this article, and presentation of the receipt showing the payment of the prescribed fee, the City Clerk shall notify the City Council of the application. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.050; Ord. No. 2017-705, § V, 11-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 2018-742, § VI, 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 12-312. - Massage establishment license—Application; form; information required; fee; applicant's health certificate. 
(a)  Every person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity intending to operate a massage establishment must apply for and be granted a massage establishment license. A massage technician operating as a sole proprietor and employing no other person must also apply for and be granted both a massage technician license, as provided in this article, and a massage establishment license in order to practice massage upon a business premises primarily used for massage and bodywork. Such application shall be on forms supplied by the City Clerk, shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of applicant or corporate agent; 
(2)  Permanent home address; 
(3)  Proposed business address; 
(4)  Two recent photographs; 
(5)  Complete set of fingerprints; 
(6)  Massage or similar business history or experience, including whether such person has ever had a massage or similar business license revoked, suspended or denied; 
(7)  A complete list of all criminal convictions and City ordinance convictions. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by a license fee for a massage establishment license. The application license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. Upon receipt of any such application, accompanied by the bond or insurance required in this article and presentation of the receipt showing the payment of the prescribed fee, the City Clerk shall notify the City Council of the application. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.060; Ord. No. 2017-705, § VI, 11-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 2018-742, § VII, 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 12-313. - License—Issuance when. 
The City Clerk shall issue the appropriate license if the application is in proper form, the fee is paid and proof of insurance is on file with the City Clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.070)  
Sec. 12-314. - License—Denial when. 
No license under this article shall be granted to any person convicted of a crime of violence or to any person whose character or physical or mental condition is found to be inimical to public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.080)  
Sec. 12-315. - License—No processing or grant due to incompleteness; void if application incomplete or non-use. 
(a)  No massage technician license or massage establishment license application may be processed by the City Clerk's office, granted by the City, City Clerk and/or City Council, or issued by the City Clerk if the application is incorrect, false, misleading or incomplete. 
(b)  Any license granted or issued under this article shall be void and of no further force or effect if the application is incorrect, incomplete, false or misleading, or if the license, if granted, is not used for more than 60 consecutive days. Non-use, for purposes of this section and article, shall mean the failure to provide licensed services to the public under said license in an ongoing and substantial manner, and/or if the licensed establishment is not open for business for more than 60 consecutive days, and/or if the licensed therapist does not perform or offer massage services to the general public for more than 60 consecutive days. 
(c)  In the event that an application is incorrect, incomplete, false or misleading, or if a granted license is based upon an application that is incorrect, incomplete, false or misleading, or if a granted or issued license is not used for more than 60 consecutive days, then: 
(1)  If the massage technician license or massage establishment license has not yet been granted or issued, then the application shall not be processed by the City Clerk's Office. In addition, the application shall not be considered, acted upon or license granted by the City Council. 
(2)  If the license has been granted, then the license shall not be issued. 
(3)  In addition, if the license is already granted or issued, then the license shall immediately become void and of no further force or effect. 
(4)  In all such events, the City Clerk's office shall provide an applicable written notice to the applicant and/or licensee of such process termination, application non-consideration, or license non-issuance and/or voiding. The applicant or licensee may appeal said action in the manner set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.082)  
Sec. 12-316. - Incorrect, false, misleading applications, voided/revoked licenses; three-year wait period before new application can be considered or license granted. 
Any person whose massage technician license or massage establishment license is not processed, denied, not issued, voided or revoked because of an incorrect, false or misleading application, or whose license under this article is voided or revoked for any other reason, shall not have his or her new license application under this article processed or considered, or license granted or issued, for three years from the date of the notice to the applicant or licensee. After that date, the City Council may consider such new application based upon all factors, including, but not limited to, new information, past revocation, suspension, actions, and related criteria. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.084)  
Sec. 12-317. - License; revocation; appeal procedure; hearing; decision. 
The City Clerk shall revoke any license granted under this article or refuse to issue such a license if it is established that the application therefor was in any manner incorrect or that the licensee or applicant has violated any part of this article or may not be granted a license under this article. The licensee or applicant may appeal such revocation or refusal to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within 30 days of the license being revoked or refusal to issue said license by the City Clerk. Upon filing such appeal, the licensee may continue to operate under an existing license until the decision of the City Council. The City Council shall conduct a hearing to determine if the revocation or refusal was justified, giving the licensee or applicant full due process rights. The City Council may then revoke the license, concur in the refusal to issue, or order its reinstatement or issuance. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.090)  
Sec. 12-318. - Licensee—Duties. 
Every person licensed under this article shall: 
(1)  Refrain from massaging or operating a massage establishment if such person contracts a contagious, infectious, or communicable disease; 
(2)  Refrain from massaging any other person in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify lust, passion, sexual desires, prurient interests or in any manner massage or have sexual contact with a customer's sexual organs or genitalia or the female breast. It is prohibited for any massage technician to massage the genitals or genital area of any client or the breasts of any female client, or for any massage establishment to allow or permit such massage in such massage establishment or facility, or for any client to permit such massage upon his or her body. No massage technician shall permit clients to perform massage upon massage technicians or others. Massage technicians shall not engage in sexual conduct, exposure or gratification, or any other sexual behavior with or in the presence of a client; 
(3)  Keep a record listing the name and complete address of each customer with the day and hour of treatment and the name of the technician administering the massage; 
(4)  Refrain from massaging any customer in any room containing a one-way mirror; 
(5)  Refrain from massaging any patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruptions; 
(6)  Report any change of fact required in the application form to the City Clerk within ten days after such change; 
(7)  Massage technicians shall remain fully clothed while performing massage and related services; 
(8)  Massage services shall not be given unless clients are clothed, covered, or draped fully covering genitals of both sexes and the breasts of female clients. With the consent of the client, this clothing, covering or draping may be repositioned to accommodate specific and appropriate work on underlying musculature of the chest or abdomen, excluding the mammary glands; 
(9)  Massage establishments and massage technicians shall maintain good and sufficient professional liability insurance issued by some surety or indemnity or insurance company duly authorized to transact business in the state. Such bond or insurance shall describe the coverage for the massage establishment and/or massage technician. Said bond or insurance shall provide that the owner or operator issuing the same shall be directly liable for and shall pay all damages, of whatever sort, that may be recovered against said establishment or technician by reason of the negligence, malpractice or other causes for a minimum of $100,000.00 to any one person or $1,000,000.00 per incident. The bond or insurance provided for by this subsection shall be deemed to include any policy of insurance or other contract in writing by which any surety or insurance company authorized to execute such contract shall assume the liability prescribed in this subsection. The City of Janesville shall be named as certificate holder for such a bond or insurance and the City Clerk-Treasurer shall be notified, in writing, if such bond or insurance lapses within five days of the lapse or, in the event of cancellation or expiration of such bond or insurance, at least 15 days prior to such cancellation or expiration. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.100)  
Sec. 12-319. - Inspection. 
Every massage establishment shall permit inspections of the premises at any time during business hours or at other reasonable times upon reasonable notice by Building Inspectors, Fire Inspectors, Health Inspectors, or personnel of any law enforcement agency. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.110)  
Sec. 12-320. - License—Display required. 
Licenses granted under this article must be displayed where the customers can observe them on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.120)  
Sec. 12-321. - License—Transfer or sale prohibited. 
No massage establishment or massage technician license shall be transferred between locations or between persons nor shall any massage establishment license be sold or subject to transfer of corporate assets or change of corporate officers or directors. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.130)  
Sec. 12-322. - Severability. 
The provisions of any part of this article are severable. If any provision or subsection hereof or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the other provisions, subsections and applications of such article to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. It is declared to be the intent of this article that the same would have been adopted had such invalid provisions, if any, not been included in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.140)  
Sec. 12-323. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity who violates any part of this article shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeiture to the City as follows: 
(1)  Not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for a first violation within 12 months. 
(2)  Not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for a second violation within 12 months. 
(3)  Not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for a third violation within 12 months. 
(4)  Not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for a fourth and subsequent violation within 12 months. 
(b)  To each such forfeiture, the court shall add and impose against the violator all customary prosecution court costs, fees, penalties and assessments. 
(c)  Each and every day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  The City, in addition to the above penalties, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation, and/or the City Council may revoke any license or permit issued under this article. 
(e)  If, in any action, a license was issued, it shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight, or dereliction of duty on the part of the City official constitute a defense. 
(Code 1976, § 5.56.150)  
Secs. 12-324—12-350. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - MOBILE HOME AND MOBILE PARKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authorizing of city to license and regulate manufactured and mobile home communities, Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. 
 
Sec. 12-351. - state statutes adopted. 
The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(1) to (8), and definitions therein, are adopted by reference. 
(Code 1976, § 5.60.010)  
Sec. 12-352. - Nonexemptions; parking fees. 
There is imposed on each occupied, nonexempt mobile home located in the City a monthly parking fee as determined in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(3). Said fees shall be paid to the City Treasurer on or before the tenth day of the month for which such fees are due. 
(Code 1976, § 5.60.020)  
Sec. 12-353. - License; required; application; fee; expiration date; statutory code compliance; preliminary and final plans; processing fee. 
It is unlawful for any person to establish or operate, upon property owned or controlled by him or her said person within the City, a mobile home park without having first secured a license therefor from the City Clerk. The application for such annual license shall be accompanied by a fee for each space in the existing or proposed park. The application license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. The license year shall be from July 1 to June 30. The license shall expire each year on June 30. There is no proration of a license fee for a period less than one year. Such parks shall comply with Wisconsin Administrative Code H 77, which is adopted by reference. The applications for preliminary and final plans must be accompanied by a processing fee, each. The processing fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5.60.030)  
Sec. 12-354. - Nonexemptions—Inform City Clerk and Assessor of additional homes; form. 
Licenses of mobile home parks and owners of land on which are parked any occupied nonexempt mobile homes shall furnish information to the City Clerk and City Assessor on such homes added to their park or land within five days after arrival of such home on forms furnished by the City Clerk in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(3)(c) and (e). 
(Code 1976, § 5.60.040)  
Sec. 12-355. - Nonexemptions—Parked outside of mobile home park; fees remitted when; Licensee's responsibility to collect fees. 
Occupants or owners of nonexempt mobile homes parked outside of a mobile home park shall remit such fees directly to the City Treasurer as provided in Section 12-352. It shall be the full and complete responsibility of the licensee of a mobile home park to collect such fees from each occupied, nonexempt mobile home therein and to remit such fees to the City Treasurer as provided in Section 12-352. 
(Code 1976, § 5.60.050)  
Sec. 12-356. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 together with the costs of prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment of such forfeiture and costs, but not less than five days nor exceeding 30 days; provided that the maximum forfeiture for violation of Section 12-354 shall be $25.00 or five days of imprisonment in the county jail. 
(Code 1976, § 5.60.070)  
Secs. 12-357—12-385. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - MOTOR VEHICLE SALVAGE DEALERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle salvage dealers, generally, Wis. Stats. § 218.20 et seq.; storage of junked automobiles, Wis. Stats. § 175.25. 
 
Sec. 12-386. - License—Required; outside storage. 
Outside storage of junked automobiles, trucks or tractors requires a license. 
(Code 1976, § 5.64.010)  
Sec. 12-387. - License—Business conducted outside of enclosed building allowed when; requirements. 
No person, firm or corporation shall carry on or conduct the business of wrecking or dismantling any motor vehicle or selling parts thereof outside of a fully enclosed building unless licensed by the City, and except in accordance with the terms and requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.64.020)  
Sec. 12-388. - License—Application; form; information required. 
(a)  Applications for motor vehicle salvage dealers' licenses shall be on forms provided by the City Clerk. The license year shall be from July 1 to June 30. The license application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant, length of time a resident of Janesville and Rock County and whether a citizen of the United States; 
(2)  Address, location, and legal description of the premises for which license is sought; 
(3)  If applicant is a partnership, association or corporation, the names and addresses of the partners or officers or members together with the information required in Subsection (a)(1) of this section; 
(4)  A description of the type of business to be carried on and the type and character of goods to be handled; 
(5)  A plat, survey or drawing showing the boundary lines of the premises for which the license is sought, the location and outline of any buildings located thereon, the type of zoning, street, curb, and sidewalk line, building setback lines, and the location and outline of any residences, apartments, stores, businesses or industries within 500 feet of the boundaries of said premises. If the applicant has difficulty obtaining permission to go onto any of the premises to be covered by the plat, survey or drawing, the applicant may submit a plat, survey or drawing made as accurately as possible from measurements made from the street or from other lands on which permission is granted to conduct measurements, or a survey. 
(b)  A photostatic copy or certified copy of the motor vehicle dealer's license required by the state under Wis. Stats. § 218.20 shall be affixed to the application. 
(c)  The plat required under Subsection (a) of this section also shall disclose whether the applicant shall accumulate or store any junked automobiles or parts thereof outside of any building, the proposed quantity thereof, and the proposed manner of storing the same. 
(Code 1976, § 5.64.030; Ord. No. 75-472, § 1, 1975)  
Sec. 12-389. - License—Fee; prorated when. 
The fee for a motor vehicle salvage dealer's license shall be per license year, and shall not be prorated. The license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5.64.040)  
Sec. 12-390. - License—Application; Building Inspector, Fire Chief and Sanitary Inspector's report to Council. 
Applications for a motor vehicle salvage dealer's license shall be referred by the City Clerk to the Building Inspector, the Fire Chief and the Sanitary Inspector who shall report on same to the Council within 15 days after referral. 
(Code 1976, § 5.64.050)  
Sec. 12-391. - License—Council action; issuance when. 
Upon receipt of the reports referred to in Section 12-390 and upon a finding by the Council that the granting of the license will not adversely affect the public health, welfare and safety, and will not cause a substantial depreciation of property values in the neighborhood, the license shall be granted by the Council, shall be signed by the City Manager and City Clerk, and thereafter shall be issued by the City Clerk, subject to revocation as set forth in Section 12-395. At the time of granting the license, the Council, under authority of Wis. Stats. § 175.25, shall specify the quantity and manner of storing junked automobiles outside of buildings on said premises. 
(Code 1976, § 5.64.060)  
Sec. 12-392. - Junked automobiles; burning prohibited when. 
The burning of auto bodies, tires, upholstery or any other parts of junked automobiles in such a manner as to violate the standards set out in Sections 42-498 through 42-501, or so as to create an offensive smell or nuisance in the neighborhood or elsewhere, or a health hazard is prohibited. The burning of rubber tires or floor mats is expressly prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 5.64.070)  
Sec. 12-393. - Salvage yards and salvage automobiles; restrictions. 
The following restrictions apply to auto salvage yards and salvaged automobiles: 
(1)  Each auto salvage yard shall be fenced with a solid fence for screening purposes for protection of life, limb and property at least seven feet in height in accordance with directions of the Building Inspector. 
(2)  No salvage automobiles shall be stored, parked, or kept outside of the fenced area. 
(3)  No salvage yard shall be located except in an area zoned industrial, and in no event so that any portion of the yard is within 500 feet of a first or second residential district. 
(Prior Code § 9.28(6); Code 1976, § 5.64.080)  
Sec. 12-394. - Licensed premises to comply with ordinances and official orders; cleanliness requirements; inspection. 
All licensed premises shall be kept reasonably clean and shall comply with all lawful ordinances and orders of the City and its official. No rat harborages, sources of filth or causes of sickness, or fire hazards shall be maintained. The premises shall be open to inspection by City Police, Health, Fire and Licensing Officers during normal business hours. 
(Code 1976, § 5.64.090)  
Sec. 12-395. - License; revocation; hearing procedure; licensee notification. 
The license provided for in this article shall be revocable at any time by the Council after a hearing at which it has been found that the licensee has failed or refused to comply with the terms and conditions of this article or lawful orders issued under this article. The revocation hearing shall be held by the Council upon its own motion or upon the complaint in writing duly signed and verified by a complainant. Such complaint shall state the nature of the alleged failure to comply with this article or lawful order issued under this article. A copy of the complaint, together with a notice of hearing, shall be served upon the licensee not less than ten days prior to the date of hearing. The licensee may be represented by counsel at the hearing. 
(Prior Code, § 9.28(8); Code 1976, § 5.64.100)  
Sec. 12-396. - Violation; penalty. 
Violators of this article shall forfeit not less than $10.00, nor more than $200.00 for each offense, or in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 60 days. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 9.28(9); Code 1976, § 5.64.110)  
Secs. 12-397—12-420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - SOLICITORS 
 
Sec. 12-421. - Solicitation regulated—Applicability. 
(1)  All solicitation within the City is regulated by this article. 
(2)  Each and every person who directly or indirectly engages in solicitation within the City is regulated by this article. 
(3)  Each and every person exempt from registration under this article shall comply with each and every non-registration provision and requirement of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.010)  
Sec. 12-422. - Solicitation regulated—Prohibition. 
No person shall directly or indirectly engage in any solicitation contrary to this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.020)  
Sec. 12-423. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person who files a registration form with the Liquor License Advisory Committee for the purpose of obtaining a solicitor permit. 
Chief of Police and Police Chief mean the City Chief of Police and/or his or her representative. 
City means the City of Janesville, a Wisconsin municipal corporation located in the County of Rock. 
Clerk means the City Clerk and/or his or her representative. 
Hold and holding mean an applicant's physical possession of an approved, valid and issued solicitor permit. 
Issue means the physical delivery of a solicitor permit by the City Clerk to the applicant. 
Non-profit means holding the current written determination by the Internal Revenue Service that a person is exempt from federal income taxation. 
Person means each and every individual, firm, corporation, partnership, organization, cooperative, venture, and combination of persons of whatsoever kind or nature. 
Registered means having been issued a solicitor permit by the City Clerk. 
Registration means the application for a solicitor permit in the manner set forth below. 
Solicitation means each and every transaction, activity or conduct, occurring wholly or in part within the City, engaged in by any person who directly or indirectly: 
(1)  Sells; 
(2)  Offers or attempts to sell; 
(3)  Takes or attempts to take one or more sales and/or purchase orders for the later delivery of goods or services; or 
(4)  In any manner requests, asks, solicits, or demands or attempts to request, ask, solicit, or demand anything of value; at any location other than the permanent business place or residence of said person. 
Solicitor means a person who directly or indirectly engages in any solicitation in the City. 
Solicitor permit means the City document requested by an applicant, reviewed by the Chief of Police, and, if approved, issued by the Clerk, according to the procedures set forth in this article, permitting a non-exempt person to engage in solicitation. 
Valid solicitor permit means an issued solicitor permit which is not expired, revoked or suspended. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.030)  
Sec. 12-424. - Prohibited practices. 
No person engaged in solicitation shall: 
(1)  Call at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by appointment. 
(2)  Call at any residential dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of similar meaning or nature. 
(3)  Call at the rear door of any dwelling place at any time. 
(4)  Remain on any portion of any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises. 
(5)  Fail to obey any lawful order of the Chief of Police or any law enforcement officer. 
(6)  Litter, accumulate, or allow the littering or the accumulation of any litter, refuse, or rubbish, in or around the area in which such solicitor is conducting business. 
(7)  Disturb the peace, make noise, or use any sound-amplifying device to attract people if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 50-foot radius of the source. 
(8)  Block vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(9)  Damage property. 
(10)  Directly or indirectly misrepresent or make false, deceptive, misleading, or incomplete statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any good offered for sale, the purpose of the visit, the solicitor's activity, the solicitor's identity, or the identity or purpose of the organization represented. 
(11)  Violate any other ordinance or law. 
(12)  In the event that the person is acting on behalf of a charitable, benevolent, educational or non-profit organization or corporation, refuse to specifically and accurately disclose, as a percentage of the sale or donation price of the goods or services, the portion of the sale or donation price of the goods or services offered which shall actually be used for the charitable, benevolent, educational or non-profit purpose for which the solicitation is being made. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.040)  
Sec. 12-425. - Required practices—Disclosure. 
Each and every person, whether or not exempt from registration under this article, shall, after the initial greeting and before any other solicitation-oriented statement is made to a prospective customer, donee, or solicitee, expressly disclose such solicitor's name, the name of the affiliated organization or business, if any, and a complete and truthful identification of the goods, services, and purpose for the solicitation. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.050)  
Sec. 12-426. Required practices—Right to cancellation; notice. 
Each and every person, whether or not exempt from registration under this article, shall: 
(1)  In the event that such person/solicitor sells or attempts to sell any goods or services for immediate or future delivery, immediately notify the buyer verbally and in writing that the buyer has and shall have, the right to cancel any part or the entire sale and/or other transaction and recover the entire consideration paid, if any, no later than midnight of the third night after closing the transaction and otherwise in compliance with all federal and state laws, rules, regulations, and directives. 
(2)  In the event that such person/solicitor takes a sales and/or other order for the later delivery of goods or services, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement signed by the solicitor containing the terms of the agreement; the amount paid in advance, whether full, partial or no advance payment is made; the name, address and telephone number of the solicitor; the delivery or performance date; and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.060)  
Sec. 12-427. - Registration—Required. 
Each and every person, prior to engaging in any solicitation or other activities regulated by this article, shall file for registration with the City Clerk, pay the permit fee, seek to obtain, and, if and when issued, hold a valid solicitor permit. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.070)  
Sec. 12-428. - Registration—Exemptions. 
The following persons shall be exempt from the registration provisions of this article: 
(1)  Any person exclusively delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery good to regular customers on established routes. 
(2)  Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods. 
(3)  Any person selling agricultural products which such person or member of his or her immediate family has grown. 
(4)  Any person who has an established place of business where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact with and specifically requested a home visit by said person. 
(5)  Any person who has had and any person who represents a person who has had a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with prospective customer. 
(6)  Any person conducting a sale required by law or by order of any court. 
(7)  Any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law. 
(8)  Any person conducting or engaging in any activity as a member of any benevolent, charitable, educational or non-profit organization or corporation. Except those persons who are not members of the organization and who have been independently contracted by and receive compensation for their solicitation activities from the herein described organizations. 
(9)  Any person engaging in solicitation upon property zoned commercial, business or industrial buy only if the solicitor has received prior express permission from the owner or legal possessor of such property; and the solicitor fully complies with the applicable City outdoor storage and display of merchandise ordinance. 
(10)  Any and all minors but only if an adult responsible for the activities and representations of such minor applies for registration and, in the manner required by this article, is investigated, approved, is issued and holds a valid license, and each minor shall, at all times while soliciting, carry and show upon demand, a photocopy of the responsible adult's permit. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.080)  
Sec. 12-429. - Registration—Procedure. 
Each and every person not exempt from registration, in addition to complying with each and every other provision of this article, shall: 
(1)  As required by this article, complete and file with the Clerk the registration form, pay the registration fee, obtain approval from the Chief of Police, and have issued and hold a valid solicitor permit prior to engaging in any solicitation, transaction, conduct or other activity regulated by this article. 
(2)  Neither directly nor indirectly engage in any solicitation, transaction, conduct or activity regulated by this article without holding a valid solicitor permit. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.090)  
Sec. 12-430. - Registration—Form; contents; fee. 
(a)  The registration form furnished by the Clerk shall require the following information which the applicant shall provide fully, accurately, and in writing: 
(1)  Applicant's name, permanent address, telephone number, and local/temporary address (if any). 
(2)  Applicant's age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes. 
(3)  Name, permanent address, telephone number of the business, partnership, firm, association, or corporation the applicant represents, is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold. 
(4)  Local/temporary address and telephone number from which the applicant's activities will be conducted. 
(5)  Nature of the business and/or activities to be conducted and a brief description of the goods and/or services offered. 
(6)  Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable. 
(7)  Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by applicant in the conduct of such applicant's activities. 
(8)  Last three cities, villages, or towns where applicant conducted similar activities. 
(9)  Locations where applicant can be contacted for at least 14 days after leaving the City. 
(10)  A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchant business or solicitation activities within the last five years, the nature of the offense, and the place of conviction. 
(11)  A statement appointing the Clerk such person's agent to accept service or process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale, service or activity performed by the applicant in connection with the activities of the applicant governed by this article, in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally. 
(12)  Attached to the registration form shall be two recent photographs of the applicant, which pictures shall be not less than two inches by two inches and showing the face and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(b)  At the time of filing the registration form with the Clerk, each applicant shall present to the Clerk for examination: 
(1)  A driver's license or some other adequate proof in identity as may be required by the Clerk. 
(2)  A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights and measures when the applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities. 
(3)  A state Health Officer's certificate when the applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law, which certificate states that the applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease and dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the registration form is filed. 
(c)  At the time the registration is filed, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a non-refundable fee. The non-refundable fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.100)  
Sec. 12-431. - Issuance of permit; investigation. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed registration form and fee, the Clerk shall indicate upon the face of the form whether the fee has been paid and then refer it to the Chief of Police who may make and complete an investigation of the statements made upon the registration form, the applicant, or both. 
(b)  The Chief of Police shall either approve or disapprove the registration application upon the face of the registration form and return it to the Clerk. 
(c)  In the event that the Chief of Police approves such registration application, the Clerk shall issue a solicitor permit to the applicant. 
(d)  In the event that the Chief of Police disapproves such registration, the Clerk shall not issue a solicitor permit to the applicant. 
(e)  The Chief of Police may disapprove any registration in the event he or she finds any one or a combination of the following: 
(1)  The registration form contains any material omission or any inaccurate, false, or misleading statement. 
(2)  The applicant violated any provision of any similar or related state, federal, or local ordinance or law anywhere in the previous five years. 
(3)  That there is reason to believe that the applicant violated any provision of any similar or related state, federal, or local ordinance or law anywhere in the previous five years. 
(4)  The applicant failed and/or fails to comply with any provision of this article. 
(5)  The Chief of Police finds that the applicant's proposed activity and/or issuance to the applicant of a City solicitor permit might not be consistent with, or might be contrary to, or might not be in the best interest of, or otherwise not in the furtherance of, the health, safety or welfare of the community. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.110)  
Sec. 12-432. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any person whose registration application is disapproved by the Chief of Police may appeal such decision to the City Council for consideration at one of its regularly scheduled meetings but only upon filing with the City Clerk a written appeal within five days of receiving notice of denial and permit non-issuance. 
(b)  No fee shall be required for such an appeal. 
(c)  The written appeal shall state, with particularity, both the reasons why the applicant contends that the disapproval is not justified and the reasons why a solicitor permit should be issued to the applicant. 
(d)  Upon hearing and considering the reasons proffered at such public hearing by the applicant in favor of issuance and the Chief of Police's reasons against the issuance of a solicitor permit to the applicant, together with whatever evidence may be offered thereto by any person, the City Council, upon not less than four affirmative votes, may authorize the issuance of a solicitor permit to the applicant for such period of time as the Council deems appropriate under the instant particular facts and circumstances. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.120)  
Sec. 12-433. - Required practices; records; registered solicitors. 
Each and every person required by this article to register shall: 
(1)  At all times, keep proper and adequate records of every contact and transaction occurring within the City. 
(2)  Forthwith present any and all City solicitation and related records and documents for inspection and/or photocopying whenever required or requested by the City Clerk, the Chief of Police, or any person acting on behalf or either. 
(3)  Maintain and preserve such records for not less than seven years from the date of the contract or transaction. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.130)  
Sec. 12-434. - Revocation and suspension; solicitor permit. 
(a)  Any solicitor permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked at any time by the City Clerk, the Chief of Police, or the City Council upon: 
(1)  Violation of any provision of this article by the solicitor or any of the solicitor's agent, representative, or employee; 
(2)  The City Clerk's, Chief of Police's, or City Council's determination that the applicant's continued solicitation is not consistent with or is in any manner detrimental to or contrary to the health, safety, or welfare of the community; or 
(3)  As otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  A registered solicitor may appeal the City Clerk's or Chief of Police's suspension or revocation of his or her solicitor permit to the City Council in the manner set forth in this article for appeals of permit non-issuance. It shall take four affirmative votes of the City Council to overturn such administrative suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.140)  
Sec. 12-435. - Adoption of federal and state laws; violations. 
(a)  To the degree consistent with law, every federal and state law, rule, regulation, and directive, as from time to time amended, governing solicitors, as that term is understood by this article, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
(b)  Each and every act required to be performed or prohibited by such adopted federal or state laws, rules, regulations, and directives is required or prohibited by this article. 
(c)  In the event that this provision is in conflict with any other law, rule, regulation, or directive, this article shall govern to the extent permitted by law. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.150)  
Sec. 12-436. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by forfeiture of not less than $50.00 and not more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day's continuance shall constitute a separate violation. In default of payment of the forfeiture, the violator shall be imprisoned for not less than ten days nor more than 90 days in the county jail. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.160)  
Sec. 12-437. - Severance clause. 
The provisions of this article are declared to be severable, and if any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article which shall remain in effect, it being the City Council's legislative intent that this article shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part. 
(Code 1976, § 5.68.170)  
Secs. 12-438—12-457. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - BOWLING CENTERS 
 
Sec. 12-458. - License—Required. 
No person shall erect or keep, or permit to be erected, placed or kept upon his or her premises within the limits of the City, any bowling center used or kept for hire without first having obtained a license therefor as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.72.010)  
Sec. 12-459. - License—Application; form; information required; Council action. 
(a)  Every application for the license required by Section 12-458 shall be made in writing upon blanks furnished by the City for such purpose, and every such applicant must state their full name and address. In the event that two or more persons are associated together, the full names of all persons financially interested and their addresses must be given. If the applicant is a club, society or corporation, the application shall contain a complete list of the officers. The applicant on the application shall also provide the following information: 
(1)  The premises where said bowling center is to be maintained; 
(2)  The age, home residence address, and current home and business telephone numbers of the applicant; 
(3)  Whether the applicant has previously been engaged in operating a bowling center and, if so, where, when and for what length of time in each place and related information about its operation and history; 
(4)  The name of the owner of the premises on which such centers are to be located. 
(b)  A separate application for each premises shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall forward said application to the Council for action thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 5.72.020)  
Sec. 12-460. - Police investigation; report. 
Before any license pursuant to Section 12-458 is issued, an investigation of the premises and of the character of the applicant shall be made by the Police Department and a written report thereon filed with the City Clerk and made a part of the application. 
(Code 1976, § 5.72.030)  
Sec. 12-461. - License—Application and police report; Council action. 
Every application for a license pursuant to Section 12-458, together with the Police Department's report accompanying it, shall be presented to the Council at the next meeting following the filing thereof. No license shall be issued until the Council passes favorably on the application. 
(Code 1976, § 5.72.040)  
Sec. 12-462. - License—Fee; issuance. 
The applicant for a license pursuant to Section 12-458 shall pay the prescribed license fee to the City Treasurer on filing the application. The license shall be issued by the City Clerk after it has been approved by the Council. If the license is not granted, the fee deposited shall not be refunded. The license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5.72.050)  
Sec. 12-463. - License—Transferable when. 
No license issued under this article shall be transferable without the prior consent of the Council. 
(Code 1976, § 5.72.060)  
Sec. 12-464. - License—Posting requirements. 
Every licensee shall keep his or her license posted in a conspicuous place in the room in which license centers are kept. 
(Code 1976, § 5.72.070)  
Sec. 12-465. - Gambling prohibited. 
No dice shall be thrown for money, merchandise, or credit nor shall cards, raffles or other games of chance, or gambling or betting in any form be permitted in any room or place where any licensed center is located, nor shall there be any open or secret connection with any other room or place where persons congregate for gambling, or engage in any manner in gambling or immoral purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 5.72.080)  
Sec. 12-466. - Sanitary, lighting, and ventilation requirements. 
All rooms or places where licensed centers are maintained shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition, and shall be well ventilated and lighted, and shall comply with all lawful rules or orders of the Health Department or other health authorities of the City. 
(Code 1976, § 5.72.090)  
Sec. 12-467. - View obstruction not permitted. 
No blinds, screens, curtains, partitions or other obstructions shall be permitted to shield from view any such room or place where licensed centers are maintained, and a clear view of the interior of any such room or place from the front entrance to the rear thereof must be maintained at all times. 
(Code 1976, § 5.72.100)  
Sec. 12-468. - License; revocation; hearing. 
Any license issued under this article may be forfeited or revoked by a majority vote of the Council for any disorderly or immoral conduct permitted on the premises covered by the license, or for the violation of any rules, regulations, ordinances or laws governing or applying to any such licensed centers, or the premises where the same are maintained; provided, however, that before any such license is revoked, the licensee by given an opportunity to be heard. In case of the revocation of any such license, no portion of the license fee shall be returned. 
(Code 1976, § 5.72.110)  
Sec. 12-469. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article may, upon conviction therefor in court, have his or her license suspended or revoked by the court and/or suspended, revoked or not renewed by the City Council, and shall further be punished by the imposition and payment of a forfeiture in an amount of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution and in default of the payment of such imposed forfeiture, shall be imprisoned until such forfeiture and costs are paid, not to exceed 90 days. Each day's continuance of a violation constitutes a separate offense. This penalty shall be independent and exclusive of the right of the Council to suspend, revoke and/or non-renew any license or permit. 
(Code 1976, § 5.72.120)  
Secs. 12-470—12-491. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - SERVICE STATIONS 
 
Sec. 12-492. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum standards and requirements governing location, operation, maintenance and regulation of gasoline service stations within the City. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.010)  
Sec. 12-493. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aesthetic treatment means an area set aside for the planting of grass, shrubs, trees, flowers, or other natural treatment; however, the Plan Commission may count as much as five percent towards the aesthetic treatment requirement if the proposed building has unusual natural aesthetic appeal. 
Bay means an area within the building intended for, or usable as, a location to service, repair or wash a car. Each area large enough to accommodate one car shall be considered as one bay. 
Emergency services means a service rendered to a customer that is unusual due to some type of urgent situation. This service, due to unusual circumstances, requires services performed outside the building, but in no case takes more than 24 hours to complete. 
Gasoline dispensing station means a station dispensing gasoline and related automotive products. 
Gasoline service station means a station dispensing gasoline and related automotive products, and in addition, provides auto servicing and repairs in a service bay. 
JATS Plan means an approved plan of the Janesville Area Transportation Study showing future widening of some arterial streets. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot line of a lot, measured at right angles to the lot depth, said measurement to be made at the rear line of the required front yard. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.020; Ord. No. 74-383, § 1, 1974)  
Sec. 12-494. - General provisions. 
(a)  All activities necessary for, or incidental to the operation of the station, shall be conducted entirely within the building with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Emergency services and tire changing; 
(2)  Dispensing of gasoline and minor service functions customarily performed while dispensing gasoline. 
(b)  All materials, goods, merchandise, parts, or supplies, both new and used, except those necessary for the permitted outside uses outlined under Subsection (a) of this section shall be kept, stored or displayed entirely within the building, regardless of whether such materials, goods, merchandise, parts or supplies are intended for sale, use, dispensation or disposal. The following shall be permitted provided they conform to all setback lines: 
(1)  Outside tire cabinets or tire merchandisers for tire display and storage of tires only, will be permitted outside the building, provided that such cabinets are of a totally enclosed type. 
(2)  Coin-operated machines for vending of soft drinks, cigarettes and similar items will be permitted outside the building, provided that such machines are located in an orderly manner. 
(3)  Trash or refuse storage areas will be permitted outside the building provided that such storage areas are completely screened from view from any point on the perimeter of the site by an enclosure of the same material as the immediate adjacent wall of the station building, located immediately adjacent to, and attached to the service station building. Such an enclosure shall extend from ground level to a minimum of five feet. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.030)  
Sec. 12-495. - New station construction; application approval or denial procedure; fee. 
(a)  Any person intending to build a gasoline station shall apply to the City Plan Commission for approval to construct such station. Approval must be obtained prior to making application for a building permit. The applicant shall submit to the secretary of the City Plan Commission an application fee accompanied with plans showing the building elevations, display of merchandise, storage of supplies, storage of refuse, and a plot plan of the site showing lot size, driveways, sign locations, aesthetic treatment and parking. Such fee shall be retained whether or not approval is granted. The license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(b)  In order to determine if the application is in the public interest, the Plan Commission, after holding a public hearing, may deny permission to construct a new station if any one, or combination of the following conditions is found to exist: 
(1)  The use of the site, in the judgment of the Plan Commission, for a service station would impair, endanger, inhibit, or in some manner impede the proper flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in, about, or on the street or street upon which such service station fronts. 
(2)  The auxiliary service units, such as bulk tank trucks and other serving units would, in the judgment of the Plan Commission, be inherently dangerous in the geographical location due to population, or traffic density or pattern. 
(3)  The use of the geographical location, in the judgment of the Plan Commission, would be aesthetically unreasonable, and would not be compatible with surrounding structures, green areas, or land uses. 
(4)  The proposed station does not comply with all applicable standards presented in this section, or with other applicable laws or codes. 
(c)  In determining its finding, the Plan Commission shall take into account the character and use of adjoining buildings, and those in the vicinity, the number of persons residing or working in such buildings, and traffic conditions in the vicinity. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.040)  
Sec. 12-496. - Abandoned, vacant or inoperative stations. 
Where the applicant for approval to construct a new station, or the person, firm, or corporation whose products it is intended that the station will dispense, owns, formerly owned within the past 36 months, or controls any abandoned, vacant or inoperative station or stations within the City, the application for the service station shall be accompanied by an additional fee, and a definite and complete plan for the future of the abandoned, vacant, or inoperative station or stations. Such plan shall be approved by the City Plan Commission before, or as part of the approval of application for the new station, and the Commission shall establish a reasonable time limit within which such plan must be carried out. The additional fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. For the purposes of this section, any station which has been abandoned, vacant or inoperative for any seven consecutive days in the 60-day period prior to the application for a new station, or which has been used for other than a gasoline station for any seven consecutive days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, in said 60-day period, shall be considered to be an abandoned, vacant or inoperative station. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.050)  
Sec. 12-497. - Operative stations; regulation compliance. 
(a)  All operative stations, at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, which have been in continual operation for at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article shall comply with the provisions of Section 12-494 within two years of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article. 
(b)  All stations in existence or under construction, but not in operation at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, and stations which have not been in continual operation for at least 30 days prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article shall comply with the provisions of Sections 12-494 and 12-496 before resuming or continuing operations. 
(c)  All stations which are in existence at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, which do not conform to the provisions of Subsection (a) of this section and Section 12-495(b)(1) through (3) and Sections 12-499, 12-500, 12-502 through 12-504 may continue as a nonconforming use if all other provisions are met as described in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.060)  
Sec. 12-498. - Minimum standards; compliance. 
All stations shall comply with the minimum standards in Sections 12-492 through 12-504, unless specifically excluded elsewhere in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.070)  
Sec. 12-499. - Minimum lot area. 
The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet for each gasoline dispensing station, and 10,000 square feet plus 2,000 square feet per bay for each gasoline dispensing and service station. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.080)  
Sec. 12-500. - Minimum lot width. 
The minimum lot width shall be 100 for each gasoline dispensing station and 120 for each gasoline dispensing and service station. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.090)  
Sec. 12-501. - Parking requirements. 
The parking requirements for gasoline service stations shall be as follows: 
(1)  One stall shall be provided for each employee on duty when fully staffed. 
(2)  In addition, three stalls shall be provided for each bay intended for service, repair or other use. 
(3)  The minimum size of such stall shall be nine feet by 20 feet. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.100)  
Sec. 12-502. - Driveway opening. 
No driveway opening shall be located closer than 40 feet to a block corner, or closer than 15 feet to a property line. No driveway opening shall exceed 35 feet at the curb, and 30 feet at the sidewalk line. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.110)  
Sec. 12-503. - Planted areas. 
(a)  At least ten percent of the gasoline station lot shall be permanently set aside, planted and maintained in grass, flowers, shrubs, trees, or devoted to other aesthetic treatment acceptable to the Plan Commission. 
(b)  The area between the sidewalk and the future curbline as shown in the JATS Plan may be counted as part of the ten percent required, but in no case counted as more than five percent, although it is not part of the area of the lot upon which the ten percent is computed. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.120)  
Sec. 12-504. - Location. 
Stations, except those in the Central Business Zone, or Industrial Zones, shall be located only on property fronting on federal, state or county highways, as such highways are routed and marked within the City. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.130)  
Sec. 12-505. - Appeals. 
Any interested person who feels aggrieved by a decision of the Plan Commission may appeal from such decision to the City Council by serving a notice of appeal in writing upon the City Clerk within 20 days from the date of such decision. Any interested person may appeal from the decision of the City Council to the circuit court for Rock County, Wisconsin, by filing a notice of appeal in writing with the Liquor License Advisory Committee of said court within 30 days from the date of decision of the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.140)  
Sec. 12-506. - Article provisions to take precedence. 
This article shall take precedence over all other regulations thereto within this Code governing the location, operation, maintenance and regulations of gasoline service stations. 
(Code 1976, § 5.76.150)  
Secs. 12-507—12-536. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - TAXICABS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate and license taxicabs and taxicab operators, Wis. Stats. § 349.24. 
 
Sec. 12-537. - Taxicab company license—Required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any cab, taxicab or any other vehicle carrying passengers for hire within the City without first securing a taxicab company license from the City. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.010)  
Sec. 12-538. - Taxicab company license—Application; information required; fee; bond; issuance when. 
(a)  Applicants for a taxicab company license, pursuant to Section 12-537, shall file with the City Clerk an application giving the name of such applicant, the number of such vehicles to be used or operated and the length of time for which such license is desired and shall pay to the City Treasurer the license fee provided in Section 12-29. 
(b)  Such application shall be accompanied by a good and sufficient indemnity bond issued by some surety or indemnity company duly authorized to transact business in the state, which bond or insurance shall describe each vehicle to be licensed by factory number, maker's name and carrying capacity. Said bond or insurance shall provide that the owner or operator issuing the same shall be directly liable for and shall pay all damages, whether to persons or property, that may be recovered against said owner or operator by reason of the negligent use and operation of each such licensed vehicle for a minimum of $50,000.00 to any one person or $100,000.00 for any one accident. The bond or insurance provided for by this subsection shall be deemed to include any policy of insurance or other contract in writing by which any surety or insurance company authorized to execute such contract shall assume the liability prescribed in this subsection. The City of Janesville shall be named as certificate holder for such a bond or insurance and shall be notified if such bond or insurance lapses within five days of the lapse of such bond or insurance. If any such bond so filed becomes inoperative or lapses for any reason, the vehicle or vehicles covered thereby shall not be operated until a bond meeting the requirements of this subsection has been filed. 
(c)  Upon receipt of any such application, accompanied by the bond or insurance required by Subsection (b) of this section and payment of the prescribed fee for each taxicab, the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a taxicab company license for each taxicab for which application, bonding/insurance and fee payment have been made. The prescribed fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. The issued license shall bear the signature of the City Clerk. Any denial of a new or renewal application or issuance by the City Clerk for any reason may be appealed within 30 days of the denial by the applicant to the City Council by filing a written appeal, signed by the applicant, setting forth in detail the reasons why the taxicab company license should be issued. Upon such filing, the matter shall be placed upon the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. The applicant shall be provided an opportunity to appear and, under oath, present evidence and testimony as to why the license should be issued, and the City Clerk shall be provided an opportunity to show why the license should not be issued. Each party may provide testimony, present witnesses, and cross-examine witnesses. A majority vote of the City Councilmembers present at the hearing shall govern and a tie vote sustains the City Clerk's decision to not issue the license. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.020)  
Sec. 12-539. - Taxicab company license—Information required; register kept; exhibited; additional vehicles. 
Each taxicab company license shall be numbered and dated and shall contain the name of the person applying for the same. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep a register of all licenses granted under this article wherein shall be stated the number of such license, to whom issued and the date thereof. Every person, firm or corporation who may be licensed as aforesaid shall forthwith cause the license number to be plainly exhibited on the right and left side of each vehicle so operated in figures not less than 1½ inches in height. Where any licensee operates more than one such vehicle, all vehicles operated by such licensee shall be individually numbered, consecutively from one to the total number of such vehicles, and on each such vehicle there shall be exhibited on each side thereof, in letters of like size, the individual vehicle number in addition to the license number. Such vehicle number and license number shall be separated by a dash. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.040)  
Sec. 12-540. - Taxicab company license—Rented or leased vehicles. 
This article shall require a taxicab company license for every vehicle which may be leased or rented for use as a taxicab with or without a driver. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.050)  
Sec. 12-541. - Municipal taxicab driver's license—Required. 
No person, other than a licensed driver holding a municipal taxicab driver's license issued by the City, shall operate any cab, taxicab or any other vehicle covered by Section 12-537 carrying passengers for hire within the City limits. 
(Code 1976, § 5.90.060)  
Sec. 12-542. - Municipal taxicab driver's license—Application; fee; information required; denied when; receipt; Council determination. 
(a)  Applicants for a municipal taxicab driver's license shall file an application with the City Clerk and shall pay a license fee in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. Such application shall state the applicant's name, age, physical description, the person, firm or company for whom the applicant is to drive and any convictions in any court of record for any offense within the previous five years. Two passport-size photos shall be submitted with each application, one of which will be retained by the City Clerk's office and the other will be attached to the license when issued. No such license shall be issued to any person under the age of 18 years, nor shall any license be granted to any applicant who has been convicted of driving while under the influence of intoxicants or other related violations within one year prior to the date of filing such application. Applicants must possess a valid driver's license issued by the state in which they reside, be eligible to drive in Wisconsin, and have no current Wisconsin revocations or suspensions of driving privileges. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application and presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the prescribed fee, only if the applicant satisfies all of the requirements set forth in Subsection (a) of this section and all of the other requirements for taxicab drivers and driver's license applications set forth of this article, and only if issuance is recommended by the Chief of Police, the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a taxicab driver's license to said applicant. The issued license shall be dated, contain the name of the licensee and be signed by the City Clerk. An application for a new or renewal taxicab driver's license may be denied due to the applicant's regular or CDL driver license or taxicab driver's license related history of drug or alcohol violations and/or recent (within five years) moving traffic violations and/or other related offenses, when, in the discretion of the City Clerk or Chief of Police, it is deemed necessary and/or appropriate to deny said application for the public safety, welfare, peace, good order, and/or health of the community. Any denial of the application or issuance by the City Clerk for any reason may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council within 30 days of the denial by filing a written appeal, signed by the applicant, setting forth in detail the reasons why the taxicab driver license should be issued. Upon such filing, the matter shall be placed upon the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. The applicant shall be provided an opportunity to appear and under oath present evidence and testimony as to why the license should be issued, and the City Clerk shall be provided an opportunity to show why the license should not be issued. Each party may provide testimony, present witnesses, and cross-examine witnesses. A majority vote of the City Councilmembers present at the hearing shall govern and a tie vote sustains the City Clerk's decision to not issue the license. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.070)  
Sec. 12-543. - Municipal taxicab driver's license—Exemptions. 
The provisions in this article requiring taxicab drivers to be licensed shall not apply to persons operating such vehicles under a permit for special occasions as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.080)  
Sec. 12-544. - Municipal taxicab driver's license—Nontransferable. 
No municipal taxicab driver's license shall be transferable. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.090)  
Sec. 12-545. - Municipal taxicab driver's license—Display required. 
All persons mandated by this article to have a municipal taxicab driver's license shall have and keep the same displayed in a conspicuous place on the inside of the vehicle within clear view of all passengers. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.100)  
Sec. 12-546. - Fares; display in cab required. 
All persons mandated by this article to have a municipal taxicab driver's license shall at all times conspicuously and legibly post and display their fares, fees and other charges in writing inside the cab within clear view of all passengers. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.102)  
Sec. 12-547. - Special occasion permit—Requirements. 
The City Clerk may issue to any person, firm or corporation a permit to operate a cab, taxicab, or other conveyance, carrying passengers for hire, for any special day of occasion subject to the conditions in Sections 12-548 through 12-552. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.110)  
Sec. 12-548. - Special occasion permit—Application fee; Treasurer's receipt; information required; display. 
Applications for special permits must be made to the City Clerk and the same must be accompanied by a payment of a fee in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. The applicant must state the number of vehicles to be operated by such driver and the names of persons who are to act as drivers. Such permit shall not be issued for any vehicle unless the City Clerk is satisfied that the driver thereof is a fit person to operate the same. Such special permit shall bear the date for which it is issued, contain the name of the driver and be signed by the City Clerk. A separate permit shall be issued for each vehicle to be used. Such permit shall be displayed within clear view of all passengers. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.120)  
Sec. 12-549. - Special occasion permit—Bonding procedure. 
Each applicant for any special permit shall file with the City Clerk an indemnity bond to cover each vehicle to be operated under such permit in the same manner and amount as prescribed in Section 12-538. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.130)  
Sec. 12-550. - Special occasion permit—Operator to be licensed or listed in permit; effective date. 
No special permit fee shall be required for the operation of any licensed vehicle on any such special occasion, but all drivers of any vehicle, whether licensed or operating under permit for special occasion, must either be licensed or included and listed in the application for said permit and approved by the City Clerk. Each such special permit shall state the day for which it is issued and shall have no force or effect on any other day. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.140)  
Sec. 12-551. - Licenses and permits—Revocation when. 
In addition to the penalties prescribed in Section 12-553, the City Council may at any time revoke any taxicab company or municipal taxicab driver's license, or special permit provided for in this article, when in its discretion public safety requires such revocation. A municipal taxicab driver's license is automatically revoked for the period of one year upon the licensee's conviction of driving a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicants or controlled substances or upon suspension or revocation of the licensee's state operating privileges. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.150)  
Sec. 12-552. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to vehicles which are owned by licensed funeral directors nor to the drivers of such vehicles when employed by such licensed funeral directors in the conduct of funerals, weddings and christenings. Any such vehicles, and the drivers thereof, shall be licensed as required by this article if used in any other class of work. Furthermore, every vehicle and the driver thereof must be licensed, even though the same is employed in the conduct of a funeral, wedding or christening if such vehicle is not owned by a licensed funeral director. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.160)  
Sec. 12-553. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction therefor in court, have his, her, or its license revoked and/or suspended, and shall pay to the City a forfeiture in the amount of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture and costs, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, not to exceed 60 days. 
(b)  Each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(c)  A violation of any provision of this article by an employee, agent or taxicab driver shall constitute a violation of and by the owner, licensee, and/or taxicab company. 
(d)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other forfeitures or penalties set forth in this article, the City may seek and/or the court may impose injunctive relief in favor of the City and against any violation of this article. 
(e)  Penalties shall be independent and in addition to the right of the City Council to revoke or suspend any license or permit granted under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.80.170)  
Secs. 12-554—12-584. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - WEIGHTS AND MEASUREMENTS PROGRAM[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Municipality authorized to regulate, administer and charge for the weights and measurements program, Wis. Stats. § 98.04. 
 
Sec. 12-585. - Adoption of State Weights and Measurements Program. 
The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 98.04, inclusive of the Wisconsin Statutes and any applicable Wisconsin Administrative Codes, each as from time to time amended and renumbered, describing and defining regulations and procedures with respect to weights and measurements, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute or code so incorporated by reference is required or prohibited by this article. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of such statutes and administrative codes incorporated by this article are also adopted and incorporated herein. 
(Code 1976, § 5.86.010)  
Sec. 12-586. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial weighing device or measuring device means those devices used or employed in establishing the size, quantity, extent, area or measurement of quantities, things, produce or articles for sale, hire or award, or in computing any basic charge or payment for goods or services rendered on the basis of weight or measure. 
Occasional sale means an isolated and sporadic sale which takes place where the infrequency, in relation to the other circumstances, support the inference that the seller is not pursuing a vocation, occupation or business or a partial vocation or occupation or part-time business as a vendor of items subject to weights and measures as covered by this article. Such occasional sale shall be for special events or temporary events operating infrequently and not at a regular and/or permanent location for conducting transactions requiring the use of weighing or measuring devices. 
Testing entity means the City of Janesville or any other person, business organization, or any other entity, including the State of Wisconsin, under contract with the City of Janesville, that provides testing and related services for the City of Janesville weights and measures program. 
Weights and measures program means and includes the administration and enforcement of this article and Wis. Stats. § 98.04 and any related sections and Wisconsin Administrative Code section, as from time to time amended and renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 5.86.020)  
Sec. 12-587. - Participation required. 
(a)  Except as provided in Subsections (b) and (c) of this section, each and every person, corporation, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership, business, group, organization or other entity who holds, owns, possesses, operates and/or maintains weights and measures, weighing or measuring devices and/or systems and accessories relating thereto which are used commercially within the City of Janesville in determining the weight, measure, count or cost of commodities or things sold or offered or exposed for sale on the basis of weight, measure or count is deemed to be a participant in the City of Janesville weights and measures program subject to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Occasional sales are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Devices tested under the jurisdiction of another municipality or a non-City of Janesville related testing program by the State of Wisconsin and used temporarily in the City of Janesville for no more than five consecutive days per year are exempt under this section from the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.86.030)  
Sec. 12-588. - Assessments/costs/fees. 
(a)  The City of Janesville Clerk-Treasurer and/or his or her designee shall annually assess costs and fees to each participant holding, owning, possessing, operating, and/or maintaining such devices and utilizing the services provided in this article based on the number of weighing and measuring devices held as of the date of the last inspection and testing of such devices. Such assessments shall be determined no later than 90 days from the receipt of any billing received by the City of Janesville from the State of Wisconsin or other testing entity relating to weights and measurement testing and calibration. The total of the costs and fees assessed and collected shall not exceed the actual costs of the weights and measures program billed to the City together with a 15 percent City administration cost which shall be added thereto. Such total assessment shall then be divided and assessed proportionally against each and every person, corporation, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership, business, group, organization or other entity tested which gave rise to the City's expense. 
(b)  The City of Janesville Clerk-Treasurer and/or his or her designee shall prepare a statement of assessments and mail to each participant said statement together with an invoice for the amount of the participant's assessment. Invoices shall be mailed by First Class Mail no later than 30 days after the assessments have been determined as set forth in Subsection (a) of this section. This will be the per-device fee. The charge to each participant shall be based on the total number of devices it holds, owns, possesses, operates or maintains, multiplied by the proportionately distributed individual assessment amount. 
(c)  Each and every participant who is subject to inspection and testing and/or holds, owns, possesses, operates or maintains, devices subject to inspection and testing is subject to this article, liable for said assessment and the payment of such assessments, and shall pay to the City of Janesville the fee assessed no later than 30 days from the date the invoice is mailed. 
(d)  Schedules, statements, notices and invoices shall be considered mailed to a participant when mailed by First Class Mail to the location where the device was held, owned, possessed, operated, maintained and/or tested. 
(Code 1976, § 5.86.040)  
Sec. 12-589. - Non-payment; noncompliance; enforcement. 
In the event that the assessed fee is not paid in full by the assessed participant within 30 days of the mailing of the invoice, the Clerk-Treasurer may charge and levy the amount of such unpaid assessment or part thereof or allocate such unpaid assessment against the participant's tax bill if not paid before the next immediately following October 1. Any assessment fee or part thereof not paid within 30 days of invoicing, shall accrue interest at the rate of one percent per month upon the outstanding delinquency until paid in full. In addition, failure to pay within the 30 days of the mailing of the invoice constitutes a violation of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5.86.050)  
Sec. 12-590. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City, as and for a penalty, a forfeiture in the following dollar amounts, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned for not more than 60 days for each unpaid forfeiture in addition to such other penalties, remedies, sanctions and relief as may be, from time to time, provided by law: 
(1)  For a first offense, a forfeiture of not less than $30.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(2)  For a second offense, a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(3)  For a third offense, a forfeiture of not less than $75.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(4)  For a fourth offense, a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(5)  In addition to the imposition of forfeiture, the City may request and the court may grant injunctive relief, abatement, mandamus and such other equitable relief and orders as the court may deem appropriate to terminate the violations. 
(b)  Each occurrence shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 5.86.060)  
Secs. 12-591—12-613. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Food safety regulations, generally, Wis. Stats. § 97.01 et seq. 
 
Secs. 12-614. - Sanitation regulations; conformance. 
Every person operating any hotel, tavern, restaurant, lunchroom, lunch stand or counter, cafeteria, candy store, fountain or other place dispensing drinks, grocery store, meat market, butcher shop, or other place of any kind or nature selling food or drink for human consumption shall keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition and shall comply with all rules, regulations and orders of the proper health authorities of the state and Rock County. 
(Code 1976, § 8.48.010)  
Sec. 12-615. - License; suspension; when. 
In case any violation of Section 12-614 should occur in any premises for which a food license has been issued, which in the judgment of the Rock County Health Officer or Rock County Sanitarian is potentially dangerous to the health of the customers or employees of the establishment, either of such officers is empowered to suspend the food license until the violation is corrected to the satisfaction of the officer. 
(Code 1976, § 8.48.020)  
Sec. 12-616. - Effect of article on other business regulations. 
This article does not affect or limit the provisions of Section 12-29. 
(Code 1976, § 8.48.040)  
Sec. 12-617. - Fly control. 
All places which handle food and drink for human consumption shall be securely protected by having screens at all doors and windows or shall provide other acceptable means to effectively keep flies and other insects from gaining access to the interior of the building and food-stuffs. 
(Code 1976, § 8.48.050)  
Sec. 12-618. - New eating establishments. 
New eating establishments shall provide: 
(1)  Hand-washing facilities with both hot and cold running water; 
(2)  Filtered hood over cooking area; 
(3)  Three-compartment sink in lieu of dishwasher or in case of replacement; 
(4)  Sneeze shield on self-service area or other acceptable protection; 
(5)  Two restrooms, one for each sex, in all drive-ins; 
(6)  Steam tables maintaining a minimum temperature of 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1976, § 8.48.070)  
Sec. 12-619. - Dispensing food or drink out-of-doors; parking area requirements. 
No person shall operate a place of business dispensing food or drink in the out-of-doors unless the drive-in and parking areas are so surfaced or treated as to eliminate dust and dirt from either wind or traffic. 
(Code 1976, § 8.48.080)  
Sec. 12-620. - State regulations adopted. 
Chapter ATCP 75 (Retail Food Establishments) of the Wisconsin Administrative Code (Wis. Admin. Code ch. ATCP 75) is adopted by reference. 
(Code 1976, § 8.48.090)  
Sec. 12-621. - Temporary restaurant permits. 
Temporary restaurant permits may be granted by the City Council pursuant to Section 12-620 and shall not be required to conform to the requirements of Sections 12-617 through 12-618. 
(Code 1976, § 8.48.100)  
Sec. 12-622. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for each offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned in the county jail not less than five days nor more than 60 days. 
(Code 1976, § 8.48.110)  
Secs. 12-623—12-652. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 12-653. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable Television Franchise Ordinance." 
(Code 1976, § 15.56.010)  
Sec. 12-654. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross revenues of a grantee means and includes: 
(1)  Any and all direct and indirect revenues of any grantee, including, but not limited to, any and all annual gross revenues, income, commissions, remunerations, compensation, capital gains, other gains, receipts, benefits, payments, earnings, recompense, restitution, settlements, gifts and/or reparation of whatsoever kind or nature howsoever derived and/or received directly or indirectly by any grantee, in connection with, and applicable to, the operation of the Janesville Cable Television System, including, but not limited to, basic service tier, extended basic, monthly subscriber service fees, pay cable fees, installation fees, reconnection fees, late charges, commissions derived from home shopping, advertising, advertising commissions, rental of converters, rental of remotes, any and all other rental income, and any and all other sources of income of whatsoever kind or nature. 
(2)  The term "gross revenues" does not include any taxes or services furnished by any grantee and imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the City, state or other governmental unit and collected by any grantee on behalf of said governmental unit. 
Gross receipts means all revenues received by and paid to a video service provider by subscribers residing within the City for video service, or received from advertisers, including all of the following: 
(1)  Recurring charges for video service. 
(2)  Event-based charges for video service, including pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges. 
(3)  Rental of set top boxes and other video service equipment. 
(4)  Service charges related to the provision of video service, including activation, installation, repair, and maintenance charges. 
(5)  Administrative charges related to the provision of video service, including service order and service termination charges. 
(6)  Revenues received from the provision of home shopping or similar programming. 
(7)  All revenue, except for refunds, rebates, and discounts, derived by the video service provider for advertising over its video service network to subscribers within the City. If such revenue is derived under a regional or national compensation contract or arrangement between the video service provider and one or more advertisers or advertising representatives, the amount of revenue derived for the City shall be determined by multiplying the total revenue derived under the contract or arrangement by the percentage resulting from dividing the number of subscribers in the City by the total number of regional or national subscribers that potentially receive the advertising under the contract or arrangement. 
Notwithstanding Subsections (1)—(7) of this definition, the term "gross receipts" does not include any of the following: 
(1)  Discounts, refunds, and other price adjustments that reduce the amount of compensation received by a video service provider. 
(2)  Uncollectible fees, except that any uncollectible fees that are written off as bad debt but subsequently collected shall be included as gross receipts in the period collected, less the expenses of collection. 
(3)  Late payment charges. 
(4)  Amounts billed to video service subscribers to recover taxes, fees, surcharges or assessments of general applicability or otherwise collected by a video service provider from video service subscribers for pass through to any federal, state, or local government agency, including video service provider fees and regulatory fees paid to the FCC under 47 USC 159, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(5)  Revenue from the sale of capital assets or surplus equipment not used by the purchaser to receive video service from the seller of those assets or surplus equipment. 
(6)  Charges, other than those described in Subsection (1) of this definition, that are aggregated or bundled with amounts described in Subsection (1) of this definition, including, but not limited, to any revenues received by a video service provider or its affiliates for telecommunications services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing, if a video service provider can reasonably identify such charges on books and records kept in the regular course of business or by other reasonable means. 
(7)  Reimbursement by programmers of marketing costs actually incurred by a video service provider. 
(Code 1976, § 15.56.030)  
Sec. 12-655. - Incorporation of federal and state laws. 
(a)  Each and every federal and state law pertaining to and/or regulating the cable television industry and local government involvement and empowerment thereto are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
(b)  Each and every act and prohibition required therein are required by this article, unless a provision in this article and/or in any franchise agreement between the City and a grantee provides otherwise, in which event, the provision in this article and/or franchise agreement shall govern to the extent permitted by law. 
(Code 1976, § 15.56.060)  
Sec. 12-656. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  In addition to, and not in lieu, abrogation or diminishment of any and all remedies and penalties set forth elsewhere in this article upon any violation by a grantee and/or other person of any provision of this article, such grantee and/or person shall forfeit and pay to the City a sum of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(b)  Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  In addition to, and not in lieu, abrogation or diminishment of imposition of the forfeitures set forth above, and in addition to, and not in lieu, abrogation or diminishment of any or all remedies and/or penalties set forth elsewhere in this article , upon a violation of any provision set forth in this article, the grantee and/or other person shall be subject to, and the City may seek the grant and imposition of, one and/or more equitable and/or legal order of the court, including, but not limited to, injunction and mandamus in order to effectuate and achieve compliance, performance, abatement, and/or such other legitimate public interest. 
(d)  Prior to the imposition of a penalty hereunder, the City shall provide a grantee with a 30-day notice and a right to cure the violation upon which such penalty is to be imposed. In the event of a failure to cure by a grantee within such 30 days, the penalty shall accrue from the first day of such violation. 
(Code 1976, § 15.56.070)  
Secs. 12-657—12-690. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI. - CABLE TELEVISION BASIC RATES 
 
Sec. 12-691. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  In addition to, and not in lieu, abrogation or diminishment of any and all remedies and penalties set forth elsewhere in this Code upon any violation by a grantee, other cable television provider or person of any provision of this article, such grantee, other provider or person shall: 
(1)  Forfeit and pay to the City such penalties as permitted and/or mandated by the applicable federal laws and applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Communication Commission, as from time to time amended; and/or 
(2)  Forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 per violation, together with the costs of prosecution, if permitted by law. 
(b)  Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate violation, if permitted by law. 
(c)  Upon default in payment of the forfeiture, the violator shall be incarcerated in the Rock County Jail for not more than 60 days and/or penalized otherwise in the manner as provided by law, if permitted by law. 
(Code 1976, § 15.58.020)  
Chapter 14 - FINANCE AND REVENUE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning municipal budget systems, see Wis. Stats. Ch. 65. For provisions concerning municipal borrowing and municipal bonds, Wis. Stats. ch. 67. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions setting the calendar year as the fiscal year of a City, see Wis. Stats. 62.12. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Designated. 
The fiscal year shall be the calendar year. 
(Code 1976, § 3.04.010)  
Sec. 14-2. - Licenses; expiration date; not applicable when. 
(a)  Any and all licenses of every nature and kind hereafter issued by the City shall expire on June 30 following their issue. The full license year shall be from July 1 to July 1 for every kind of license. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to such licenses as those where dates of issue or expiration are fixed or determined by statute and over which the Council has no control, but shall apply to all licenses over which the Council has power to fix such dates. 
(Code 1976, § 3.04.020)  
Secs. 14-3—14-22. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET [3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning municipal budgets, see Wis. Stats. § 65.90. 
 
Sec. 14-23. - Generally. 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to submit and recommend to the Council, not later than November 15 of each year, an itemized estimate of budget covering the amount necessary to be raised by taxation for all City purposes for the ensuing fiscal year. The Council shall hold such hearings as may be required by Wis. Stats. § 65.90, if still in force and effect, or by any other statute, and shall thereupon consider such recommended budget and make such changes or additions as it determines to be necessary, and shall promptly adopt such budget as so amended. Changes in the amount or purpose of any appropriation shall be made in accordance with the procedure specified in Wis. Stats. § 65.90, if such section is still in force and effect, or by any other section which may then be applicable and effective. 
(Code 1976, § 3.08.010)  
Sec. 14-24. - Tax determination; appropriations. 
Upon the adoption of the yearly budget, the Council shall then officially determine the amount of money to be raised by taxation for all City purposes for the ensuing year, and shall likewise appropriate for the operation of each office, department or function the amount as fixed in each budget. 
(Code 1976, § 3.08.020)  
Secs. 14-25—14-44. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISBURSEMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning disbursements from a local treasury, see Wis. Stats. § 66.042. For provisions concerning disbursements and the budget, see Wis. Stats. 62.12. For statutory provisions concerning claims, see Wis. Stats. §§ 62.12 and 62.25. 
 
Sec. 14-45. - Statutory conformance; definitions; signature authorization. 
Disbursements from the City Treasury shall be made as provided for by Wis. Stats. § 66.0821. When the term "Mayor" appears in such statute, it shall be construed to mean City Manager. During the absence or inability of the City Manager to sign or countersign checks or vouchers, the same may be signed by the president of the Council. 
(Code 1976, § 3.12.010)  
Sec. 14-46. - Expenditures; authorization; compliance; additional funds. 
The City Manager and City Treasurer shall have authority to expend City funds in strict compliance with the appropriations as made by the Council. No funds shall be expended and no obligations incurred, except by express action of the Council, in excess of such appropriations. In case the appropriation made for the use of any board, officer or department is insufficient, the Council may provide, by a majority vote of all members, additional funds for such need from any funds in the treasury which have not already been definitely appropriated for other purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 3.12.020)  
Sec. 14-47. - Signatures allowed. 
In lieu of the personal signatures of the City Manager and the City Clerk-Treasurer, these officers are authorized to affix their lithographed signatures to the City's order checks or other checks including required signatures on school board orders or checks as provided in Wis. Stats. 66.0821. 
(Code 1976, § 3.08.030)  
Secs. 14-48—14-62. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWER AND WATER SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning special assessments, see Wis. Stats. § 66.60 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-63. - Generally. 
In cases in which sewer and/or water mains have been laid abutting any property and no assessment has been levied against such property for the benefits from such main or mains, a special assessment shall be levied for the benefit against such property on connection with such sewer or water mains being made. 
(Code 1976, § 3.16.010)  
Sec. 14-64. - Cost per linear foot; adjustment when. 
Such assessment shall, subject to adjustment by the Council after a hearing if requested by the property owner, be based on the current cost per linear foot assessment for similar mains. 
(Code 1976, § 3.16.020)  
Sec. 14-65. - Hearing when; notice; amount determination. 
In case waivers of the assessment procedure are filed and/or the assessment paid, no hearing shall be necessary. In case the property owner requests permission to make a connection and does not file a waiver or pay the assessment or makes a connection without payment, the City Clerk shall give notice of the amount of the assessment and set a date for hearing by the Council. Notice of the hearing shall be given in writing to the property owner or his or her agent at least ten days prior to the hearing unless such notice is waived in writing. The Council shall determine the amount of the assessment at the hearing. 
(Code 1976, § 3.16.040)  
Sec. 14-66. - Appeal procedure. 
The property owner may appeal to the circuit court as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0703(12), provided notice of appeal is given within 40 days from the Council determination. If no such appeal is filed, the assessment shall be extended on the tax roll. 
(Code 1976, § 3.16.050)  
Secs. 14-67—14-82. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ROOM TAX 
 
Sec. 14-83. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hotel or motel means a building or group of buildings in which the public may obtain accommodations for a consideration, including, without limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts, lodginghouses, roominghouses, summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins and any other building or group of buildings in which accommodations are available to the public. Exempt from the definition of the term "hotel" or "motel" are mobile homes, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.058(1)(d), and accommodations rented for a continuous period of more than one month and accommodations furnished by any hospitals, sanitoriums, or nursing homes, or by corporations or associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
Transient means any person residing for a continuous period of less than one month in a hotel, motel or other furnished accommodations available to the public. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.010)  
Sec. 14-84. - Annual room tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to applicable provision of the currently Wis. Stats. § 66.75, a tax is imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing, at retail, of rooms or lodging to transients by hotel keepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, pursuant to the above definitions, irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the accommodations. 
(b)  Such annual room tax shall be at the rate of eight percent of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodgings. 
(c)  Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by Wis. Stats. § 77.52(2)(a)1. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.020)  
Sec. 14-85. - Administration; returns. 
(a)  This article shall be administered by the City Clerk. 
(b)  Each person governed by this article shall have the following reporting period: 
Amount of Room Tax Due 	Reporting Period 
Less than $300.00 per year 	Annual 
At least $300.00 per year but not more than $600.00 in any one quarter 	Quarterly 
More than $600.00 in any one quarter 	Monthly 
 
(c)  A room tax return shall be filed with the City Clerk and the room tax imposed by this article shall be due and payable in full to the City no later than the last day of the month immediately following that person's reporting period, except that those persons whose room tax liability is greater than $3,600.00 per quarter shall file their room tax return no later than the 20th day of the month immediately following the end of their reporting period. 
(d)  The room tax return shall be in a form as required by the City Clerk and shall show, among other items, the gross receipts derived from the retail furnishing of rooms and lodging for that reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other information as the City Clerk or his or her representative deems necessary, provided it is directly related to the tax. The City Clerk may, for good cause, extend the time of filing any return, but no longer than 30 days from the original filing due date. 
(e)  Each room tax return shall be signed by the person required to file such return or his or her duly authorized agent. The City Clerk may, for good cause, extend the time of filing any return, but not longer than 30 days from the filing date. 
(f)  For administration expenses in reporting the room tax and the accounting connected therewith, any person liable for any amount of tax imposed by this article may deduct two percent of the room tax due provided that the payment of the tax is not delinquent. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.030)  
Sec. 14-86. - Successor's responsibility for tax payment. 
(a)  If any person, liable for any amount of tax imposed by this article, in any manner, in whole or in part, terminates, transfers, conveys, sells, gifts or divides his or her business stock of goods, his or her successor or assign shall withhold sufficient sums from the purchase price to fully and completely satisfy the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Such withheld sum shall be due and payable in full to the City Clerk upon demand. 
(c)  Each such assignee and successor is personally liable and responsible to the City of Janesville for the full amount of such transferor's unpaid room tax. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.040)  
Sec. 14-87. - Office/field audit determination. 
(a)  The City Clerk or City Finance Director, or representatives acting on their behalf may, by office or field audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the City or the refund due any person under this article. 
(b)  Such office or field audit determination may include any and all information obtained by the City Clerk or the City Finance Director or representative acting on their behalf, may be without cause, may be in the manner prescribed by the City Clerk or City Finance Director, and may occur as often as deemed necessary by either the City Clerk or City Finance Director. 
(c)  Each person governed by this article shall present to the City Clerk, City Finance Director, or representative acting on their behalf, any and all information, data, documents, financial records, receipts, and papers of whatever kind and nature requested by the City Clerk, City Finance Director, or representatives acting on their behalf within five working days of such request. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall prevent either the City Clerk or the City Finance Director from making a determination of the tax or the tax due at any time. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.050)  
Sec. 14-88. - Failure to file return; estimate and penalty. 
(a)  If any persons fail to file a return as required by this article, the City Clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts under Section 14-84. 
(b)  Such estimate shall be made for the period for which such person failed to make a return and shall be based upon any information which is in the City Clerk's possession or which may come into his or her possession. 
(c)  On the basis of this estimate the City Clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the City, adding to the sum the interest as set forth in Section 14-89. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.060)  
Sec. 14-89. - Interest rate. 
(a)  All unpaid taxes imposed by this article shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum. 
(b)  Interest shall be imposed from the due date of the tax payment until the day on which the tax is paid or deposited with the City Clerk. An extension of time within which to file the return shall not operate to extend the due date of the return for the purposes of interest computation. 
(c)  All refunded taxes shall bear interest at the same rate computed from the due date of the return until the day on which said taxes are refunded. 
(d)  If the City Clerk determines that any overpayment of tax has been made intentionally or by reason of carelessness or neglect, or if the tax which was overpaid was not accompanied by a properly completed return, or if information requested was not provided within the time set forth above, no interest shall be allowed upon the refund of the overpaid tax. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.070)  
Sec. 14-90. - Delinquent returns; tax-evasion. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this section shall become delinquent if not paid within 30 days after the due date of the return, or within 30 days after the expiration of an extension period if one has been granted. If a return is filed late, or there is no return filed, the due date for the taxes imposed is the due date of the return. 
(b)  No person may fail to file a return when due, or file an intentionally false or fraudulent return. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.080)  
Sec. 14-91. - Security deposit. 
(a)  In order to protect the revenue of the City, the City Clerk may require that a taxpayer, who has had prior delinquencies and is liable for the tax imposed by this article, to place with the City security in an amount equal to the taxpayer's average monthly tax due over the period of the previous 12 months, but in no case less than $500.00. 
(b)  Upon a delinquency in the payment of the taxes imposed by this article, the City Clerk may, upon ten days' notice, recover the taxes, interest and penalties from such security. 
(c)  No interest shall be paid or allowed by the City to any person for the deposit of such security. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.090)  
Sec. 14-92. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  Each person governed by this article shall keep or cause to be kept adequate financial and other records, receipts, invoices and related papers and documents sufficient to accurately establish revenues and tax liabilities imposed by this article. 
(b)  Each person governed by this article shall keep or cause to be kept adequate financial and other records, receipts, invoices and related papers and documents as required by the City Clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.100)  
Sec. 14-93. - Confidentiality—Who may have access to information. 
(a)  All returns, schedules, exhibits, writing or audit reports relating to such returns, on file with the City, are deemed to be confidential, except the City Clerk may divulge their contents to the following, and no others. 
(b)  Persons using the information in the discharge of duties imposed by law or the duties of their office or by order of a court. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.110)  
Sec. 14-94. - Confidentiality—Responsibility of Administrators. 
No person having an administrative duty under this article, or having access, lawfully or unlawfully, to information provided to the City under this article, shall make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records of any person on whom a tax is imposed by this article, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined by any person, except as provided in Section 14-93. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.120)  
Sec. 14-95. - Expenditure of room tax revenues collected. 
In accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.75(1m)(d)2, as from time to time amended or renumbered, the room taxes collected by the City shall be annually allocated and spent for tourism promotion and development, and the balance retained by the City, as follows: 
(1)  The City shall make monthly payments during the year of 60 percent of the revenue produced from an eight percent room tax rate directly to the Janesville Area Convention and Visitors (JACVB) and retain the balance. The City shall retain the greater of either 30 percent of its current year room tax revenues; or: 
For Fiscal Year 	Maximum Retained by City 
2017 	$419,355.00 
2018 	$424,170.00 
2019 	$454,142.00 
2020 	$433,054.00 
2021 and beyond 	$419,352.00 
 
(2)  All remaining annual room taxes collected by the City and not allocated in the manner set forth above for tourism promotion and development shall go into the City's general fund. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.130; Ord. No. 2018-716, § I, 3-26-2018 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-716 , § II, adopted 3-26-2018, states that these fees shall take effect on April 1, 2018.  
Sec. 14-96. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Every person, firm, organization or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who is subject to the tax imposed by this article who fails or refuses to comply with a request to permit the inspection or audit of his or her records by the City Clerk, City Finance Director, or representatives acting in their behalf, shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed five percent of the tax due, plus such other penalties and interest imposed by this article, or in default of payment of the forfeiture imposed in this section, shall be incarcerated in the Rock County Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
(b)  Every person, firm, organization or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who fails to pay the tax, or any portion of the tax, imposed by this article, shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed 25 percent of the room tax due for the previous year or $5,000.00, whichever is less, plus such other penalties and interest imposed by this article. If no room tax had been due for the previous year, the forfeiture required shall not be less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00, plus such other penalties and interest imposed by this article. In default of payment of the forfeiture required by this subsection, there shall be imposed a period of incarceration in the Rock County Jail not to exceed 90 days. 
(c)  Every person, firm, organization or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates Section 14-93 or 14-94 shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, or in default of payment of the forfeiture imposed in this subsection shall be incarcerated in the Rock County Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
(d)  Every person, firm, organization or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates any other provision of this article for which a forfeiture is not already specified, shall be subject to a forfeiture of not to exceed $250.00, or in default of payment of the forfeiture imposed by this section shall be incarcerated in the Rock County Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
(Code 1976, § 3.20.140)  
Secs. 14-97—14-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOTOR REGISTRATION FEE 
 
Sec. 14-116. - Authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 341.35, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 3.22.010)  
Sec. 14-117. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide the City of Janesville a source of revenue in addition to other revenue sources currently being utilized to maintain public streets, highways, and for all other transportation-related purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 3.22.020)  
Sec. 14-118. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motor vehicle means an automobile or motor truck registered under Wis. Stats. § 341.25(1)(c) at a gross weight of not more than 8,000 pounds. 
(Code 1976, § 3.22.030)  
Sec. 14-119. - Imposition of motor vehicle registration fee. 
(a)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 341.35, an annual flat City registration fee is hereby imposed upon all motor vehicles registered in the State of Wisconsin that are customarily kept in the City. The annual flat registration fee will be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(b)  This fee shall be paid by the registration applicant at the time that a motor vehicle is first registered and at each time of registration renewal. 
(c)  The City registration fee shall be paid as provided in Wis. Stats. § 341.35(5). 
(d)  The City registration fee shall be in addition to state registration fees. 
(Code 1976, § 3.22.040)  
Sec. 14-120. - Administrative costs. 
WisDOT shall retain a portion of the monies collected equal to the actual administrative costs related to the collection of these fees. The method for computing the administrative costs will be reviewed annually by WisDOT, as provided in Wis. Stats. § 341.35. 
(Code 1976, § 3.22.050)  
Sec. 14-121. - Exemptions. 
The following motor vehicles are exempt from the annual Janesville vehicle registration fee: 
(1)  All vehicles exempted by Wis. Stats. ch. 341 from payment of a state vehicle registration fee. 
(2)  All vehicles registered by the state under Wis. Stats. § 341.26 for a fee of $5.00. 
(Code 1976, § 3.22.060)  
Sec. 14-122. - Replacements. 
No City vehicle registration fee may be imposed on a motor vehicle which is a replacement for a motor vehicle for which a current City vehicle registration fee has been paid. 
(Code 1976, § 3.22.070)  
Sec. 14-123. - Deposit of fee revenues; administration. 
(a)  All monies under the applicable statute and this article remitted to the City by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation or other applicable agency shall be deposited into the City's general fund and special revenue fund. 
(b)  The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be responsible for the administration of this article and funds. 
(c)  This article and its fees shall take effect at 12:01 a.m. on January 1, 2016, the public interest, welfare, benefit, and good so requiring, and the City Council so finding. 
(Code 1976, § 3.22.080)  
Secs. 14-124—14-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DIRECT DISTRIBUTION OF SCHOOL LEVY, LOTTERY AND GAMING AND FIRST DOLLAR PROPERTY TAX CREDITS 
 
Sec. 14-141. - Approving distribution and notification. 
The City Council hereby approve the school levy, lottery and gaming, and first dollar tax credits distribution methodology and formula set forth in Wis. Stats. § 79.10(7m)(cm)1.a, as from time to time amended and/or renumbered and direct that the City Clerk-Treasurer and other pertinent City of Janesville officials and officers notify the Departments of Revenue and Administration to directly distribute such credit payments to the City of Janesville for tax year 2018 and all subsequent years unless and until they are otherwise notified by the City. 
(Code 1976, § 3.30.010; Ord. No. 2018-713, § I, 2-26-2018 )  
Sec. 14-142. - Factual basis. 
The City of Janesville receives more than $3,000,000.00 in payments from the State of Wisconsin for the state school levy, lottery and gaming, and first dollar property tax credits. 
(Code 1976, § 3.30.020; Ord. No. 2018-713, § I, 2-26-2018 )  
Sec. 14-143. - Actions. 
Pursuant to said applicable state laws, municipalities receiving greater than $3,000,000.00 in state property tax credits may notify the State Departments of Administration and Revenue that the municipality approves the direct distribution of the property tax credits to the municipality until or unless the ordinance is repealed, or the property tax credits to be distributed no longer exceed $3,000,000.00 annually. 
(Code 1976, § 3.30.030; Ord. No. 2018-713, § I, 2-26-2018 )  
Sec. 14-144. - Immediate effect. 
This article shall take effect immediately upon passage, the health, safety, and general welfare of the community so requiring. 
(Code 1976, § 3.30.040; Ord. No. 2018-713, § I, 2-26-2018 )  
Chapter 16 - FIRE AND FIRE PREVENTION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE HAZARDS, THEATERS, HOTELS AND NURSING HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Regulations prohibiting smoking in enclosed places, Wis. Stats. § 101.123. 
 
Sec. 16-19. - Theaters and auditoriums—Smoking prohibited; exceptions; Fire Department inspection and approval. 
No person shall light a match or other flame-producing device, or smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe in any theater, motion picture theater or auditorium while the same is being used as a theater or place of entertainment, except in areas designated as areas in which smoking may be permitted, which areas shall be free of all flammable and combustible floors, walls, furniture, fixtures and decorations. No such area shall be used for smoking until after the same has been inspected and approved by the chief of the Fire Department. 
(Code 1976, § 8.24.010)  
Sec. 16-20. - Theaters and auditoriums—No smoking announcement required; signs to be posted. 
It shall be the duty of the operator or local manager of such theater or motion picture theater or place of entertainment, before the beginning of each performance, to announce from the stage or by projection on the screen that smoking is prohibited by local ordinance except in approved areas, if there are any, and to further erect signs approved by the Chief of the Fire Department stating that smoking is prohibited by ordinance except in approved areas. 
(Code 1976, § 8.24.020)  
Sec. 16-21. - Theaters and auditoriums—Smoking violation when; manager action; exceptions. 
Whenever a patron is observed smoking in violation of Sections 16-19 and 16-20, it shall be the duty of the operator or theater manager or manager of such place of entertainment and of the employees of such theater, motion picture theater, or place of entertainment to notify such person of the violation and to use their best efforts to prevent such violation. This section and Sections 16-19 and 16-20 shall not be construed to prohibit the use of a cigar, cigarette or pipe upon the stage of any such theater when used in connection with any such performance, under proper safeguards. 
(Code 1976, § 8.24.030)  
Sec. 16-22. - Hotels, homes for the aged, and nursing or convalescent homes—Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Home for the aged means any institution, public or private, or any residence, except county homes, to which aged persons are admitted for residence and whose principal business is furnishing board, room, laundry and care. 
Hotel means all places wherein sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to transients. 
Nursing or convalescent home means any institution, public or private, or residence, except county homes, in which there is provided nursing or convalescent care. 
(Code 1976, § 8.24.040)  
Sec. 16-23. - Hotels, homes for the aged, and nursing or convalescent homes—Future regulations. 
Sections 16-22 through 16-26 are in addition to any future regulations on hotels, homes for the aged, and nursing or convalescent homes. 
(Code 1976, § 8.24.050)  
Sec. 16-24. - Hotels; responsible person on premises when; hourly inspections. 
Any person, firms or corporation operating a hotel having 30 or more rooms available for sleeping accommodations shall, at all times between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. each night, have some responsible person on duty and awake on the premises as a precaution against fire and other hazards. During the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., hourly inspections shall be made of all floors of such premises including the basement, as a further precaution against fire and other hazards. 
(Code 1976, § 8.24.060)  
Sec. 16-25. - Home for the aged, nursing or convalescent home; responsible person on duty; hourly inspections. 
Any person, firm or corporation operating a home for the aged or a nursing or convalescent home having 20 or more patients, including those who may be roomers, as long as there are patients in residence receiving nursing or convalescent care, shall at all times between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. each night have some responsible person on duty and awake on the premises as a precaution against fire and other hazards. During the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. hourly inspections shall be made of all floors of such premises, including the basement, as a further precaution against fire and other hazards. 
(Code 1976, § 8.24.080)  
Sec. 16-26. - Smoking unlawful when; notice posted. 
(a)  No person, by smoking or attempting to light or to smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes or tobacco in any manner in which lighters or matches are employed, shall, in a careless, reckless or negligent manner, set fire to any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes or household fittings located in any of the following enumerated buildings or to any of the following buildings, namely, hotels, roominghouses, lodginghouses, or other places of public abode. 
(b)  In each sleeping room of such buildings, a plainly printed notice shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place advising tenants of the regulation set out in this section or of the corresponding statutory regulation. 
(Code 1976, § 8.24.090)  
Sec. 16-27. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Section 16-136. 
(Code 1976, § 8.24.100; Ord. No. 82-301, § 1, 1982)  
Secs. 16-28—16-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING FURNACES PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 16-60. - Intent and purpose. 
The City Council of the City of Janesville hereby find that: 
(1)  It is recognized and found that wood smoke is hazardous to an individual's health and may affect the health of the general public when they are involuntarily exposed to the presence of wood smoke. 
(2)  Reliable scientific studies, including studies conducted by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), have shown that breathing wood smoke is a significant health hazard particularly to children, elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory functions, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease. 
(3)  This article is adopted for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, comfort, and the general welfare of the people of the City of Janesville; educating citizens affected by these provisions; and assisting property owners and managers in maintaining compliance. 
(Code 1976, § 8.26.010)  
Sec. 16-61. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Outdoor wood burning furnace means a furnace, or similar device, designed and intended, and/or used, through the burning of wood, for the purpose of heating the principal structure or another accessory structure on the premises. These types of furnaces are characterized by a short stack height. They are typically located out-of-doors and are contained in freestanding structures, or enclosed within another accessory structure, such as a garage or corral. This definition includes outside wood burning water stoves. 
(Code 1976, § 8.26.020)  
Sec. 16-62. - State law empowerment and incorporation; conflicts. 
(a)  This article is authorized by Wisconsin Law, including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. § 101.123(2)(c), as from time to time are amended or renumbered. 
(b)  Wis. Stats. § 101.123, as from time to time amended or renumbered, is incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this article as if fully set forth verbatim. 
(c)  Any action prohibited or required by state law so incorporated herein is prohibited or required, as applicable, by this article. 
(d)  This article is consistent with the intent and goals of the provisions set forth in Wis. Stats. § 101.123, as from time to time amended or renumbered. This article also acts as a local supplement to the provisions of the state statutes. 
(e)  In the event of any conflict between any word, term, definition, provision, section, or requirement specifically set forth in this article and those set forth elsewhere in this article, other ordinances, state statute or State Administrative Code, and/or the degree permitted by law, the more restrictive shall govern. 
(f)  In the event of any conflict between any word, term, definition, provision, section or requirement specifically set forth in this article and those set forth in any state statute or state administrative code incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference, the more restrictive provision shall take precedence and govern at all times, to the extent provided by law. In no event, however, shall a prohibition against the use of wood burning furnaces, or a requirement mandated by state statute or state law be modified, waived, or amended by the application of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8.26.030)  
Sec. 16-63. - Prohibition of outdoor wood burning furnaces in the City of Janesville. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use an outdoor wood burning furnace in the City of Janesville. 
(Code 1976, § 8.26.040)  
Sec. 16-64. - Nonconforming use. 
(a)  Continuation of nonconforming uses. The lawful use of any existing outdoor wood burning furnace existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions of this law as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Extension or enlargement. No nonconforming or pre-existing outdoor wood burning furnace shall hereafter be extended, enlarged, or expanded. 
(c)  Abandonment and discontinuance. Any currently existing and used outdoor wood burning furnace which is abandoned or not used for a period of 12 consecutive months shall not be permitted to be re-established as a nonconforming use, cannot be used, and must be immediately removed by the property owner from the subject premises. If the property owner fails to remove the outdoor wood burning furnace by the end of said 12 months, the City of Janesville Building Director shall give written notice by certified mail, personal service, or posting to the property owner upon which the outdoor wood burning furnace is located. Such notice shall provide that such person shall remove the same within 15 days of the notice. Should the outdoor wood burning furnace not be removed in the time specified, the Building Director shall arrange for the removal of the outdoor wood burning furnace. The cost of said removal shall be charged to the owner of said premises. Said cost if not paid within 30 days shall be assessed and collected in the same manner, by the same proceedings, at the same time, under the same penalties, and having the same lien upon the property so assessed as the General City of Janesville Tax and as a part thereof. 
(d)  Termination. At such time as the useful life of a nonconforming or pre-existing outdoor wood burning furnace has elapsed or would need to be repaired to function properly, the unit cannot be replaced and must be abandoned, not used, and removed from the property immediately. 
(Code 1976, § 8.26.050)  
Sec. 16-65. - Enforcement and inspection. 
The City of Janesville Building Division and the Department of Neighborhood and Community Services, and affiliated officials shall have the power, whenever they deem it necessary, to enter upon the premises/property to inspect and ascertain compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8.26.060)  
Sec. 16-66. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision or section is held to be invalid or unconstitutional or if the application of any provision or section to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the other provisions, sections or applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision, section, or applications. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City Council that this article would have been adopted had any invalid or unconstitutional provision or application not been included herein. 
(Code 1976, § 8.26.070)  
Sec. 16-67. - Effective date. 
This article shall be effective upon adoption by the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 8.26.080)  
Sec. 16-68. - Violation; penalty; injunctive relief. 
(a)  Any owner, proprietor, manager, or other person in charge of or who uses a property in violation of any provision of this article upon conviction shall be required to forfeit and pay not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 plus the costs of prosecution. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense for which a separate penalty may be imposed. 
(b)  Injunctive relief. Consistent with Wis. Stats. § 101.123(9), as from time to time amended or renumbered, notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 165.60, the City, state, local officials, including, but not limited to, sworn peace officers, Building/Code Inspectors, and any affected party may institute an action in any court with jurisdiction to enjoin repeated violations of this section. The City may also seek, and the court may grant, other related injunctive relief to abate or prevent repeated violations and to seek compliance. 
(Code 1976, § 8.26.090)  
Secs. 16-69—16-94. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE DEPARTMENT EMERGENCY SERVICES RESPONSE FEES 
 
Sec. 16-95. - Purpose. 
In order to continue to provide quality emergency services responses while minimizing the cost to the property taxpayer by recovering certain fees from the users of those rendered emergency services, and cognizant that Janesville residents already pay for these services through property taxes, the Janesville City Council hereby desire and create a fair and equitable procedure to collect user fees for emergency services responses provided by the Janesville Fire Department. 
(Code 1976, § 8.28.010)  
Sec. 16-96. - Emergency services response; fee. 
(a)  The term "emergency services response" means any event in which the Janesville Fire Department is required to and/or does respond and take action. Emergency services include, but are not limited to, Fire Service and Emergency Medical Service. 
(b)  Every person, firm, corporation, and/or other entity who requires, receives, and/or is provided an emergency services response by the Janesville Fire Department shall be responsible for payment to the City for emergency services response fees which will be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(c)  Notwithstanding and in addition to anything to the contrary, the City Fire Department may enter into individual "transport only" agreements with commercial entities upon varying terms, fees, and provisions, with approval of the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 8.28.020)  
Sec. 16-97. - Lift assist response; fee. 
(a)  The term "lift assist response" means any event in which the Janesville Fire Department is requested to and/or does respond and take action. Service includes assisting individuals that have fallen and are not injured. 
(b)  Staffed nursing and health care facilities who requires, receives, and/or is provided a lift assist response by the Janesville Fire Department shall be responsible for payment to the City for the service response fee which will be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 8.28.030)  
Secs. 16-98—16-122. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 16-123. - Adoption of statutes, code and regulations. 
(a)  All State of Wisconsin statutes, administrative codes, fire codes, fire regulations, and fire provisions, including, but not limited to, the Wisconsin Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations' Wisconsin State Fire Prevention Manual, Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 314, and all amendments, modifications, additions and deletions thereto, are adopted by reference and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Any act required to be performed, except issuance of permits under the Fire Prevention Code, and any act prohibited by the Wisconsin State Fire Prevention Manual or by the Fire Prevention Code incorporated above by reference is required or prohibited by this article. 
(c)  This section adopts such other Wisconsin State Fire Prevention Manual and Fire Prevention Code as may supersede, supplant, or any way modify, change, or add to the Wisconsin State Fire Prevention Manual or Fire Prevention Code as adopted above. 
(Code 1976, § 8.32.010; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 16-124. - Blasting permits—Council approval. 
All permits provided for by Section 12.3.a.(3) of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by Section 16-123 shall be issued by the Clerk, but only if so authorized by the City Council. Once an application for a permit pursuant to this section is received and the date it will first appear on the Council's agenda is known, the Clerk shall cause notice of the application, describing the location of the proposed activity and the date it will first appear on the Council's agenda, to be published at least three days prior to such Council meeting. 
(Code 1976, § 8.32.020; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 16-125. - Bureau of Fire Prevention; duties. 
The term "Bureau of Fire Prevention," as used in the Fire Prevention Code adopted by Section 16-123 shall be the Janesville Fire Department, except for permits issued pursuant to Section 12.3.a.(3) of the Fire Prevention Code. Whenever the term "Bureau of Fire Prevention" is used in such code, the term "Janesville Fire Department" shall be substituted therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 8.32.030; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 16-126. - Enforcement—Authority; duties, generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Fire Chief, as created in Section Chapter 2, Article IV, Division 7 to enforce the provisions of the Fire Code as provided in this article. 
(1)  When used in this article, the term "Fire Code" shall include any fire-related regulations in this article, or Articles II or VII of this chapter. 
(2)  When used in this article, the term "Fire Chief" shall mean the Fire Chief or his or her duly authorized representative. 
(b)  When the Fire Chief determines that there may be a violation of any provision of this article, Article V or VII of this chapter or a situation which affects the health or safety of the general public, or the occupants of a building, the Fire Chief shall proceed to take necessary action as provided for in Sections 16-126 through 16-135. 
(Code 1976, § 8.32.040; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 16-127. - Enforcement—Authority; inspection duties. 
(a)  Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith, under the provisions of the Fire Code, shall be the responsibility of the Fire Chief or his or her designee. Wherever, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any conditions by any other department, he or she shall arrange for this to be done in such manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders. No order for correction of any violation under the Fire Code shall be issued without the approval of the Fire Chief. It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Chief, before issuing any such order, to determine that it has the concurrence of other departments or officials of the government concerned with any matter involved in the case in question. 
(b)  When the Fire Chief determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of the Fire Code may exist or that conditions exist which adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants or the public, he or she may make or cause to be made inspections to determine the conditions of buildings or structures in order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public under the provisions of the Fire Code. In addition, the Fire Chief shall make or cause to be made those inspections that are required by the Wisconsin Statutes. The Fire Chief is authorized to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his or her duties under the Fire Code. The owner, operator or occupant of every building or structure or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Fire Chief free access thereto, and to all parts thereof, and to the premises on which it is located at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection. All of the enforcement provisions of the Fire Code are subject to the constitutional laws of the United States and the state, and all rights of individuals as defined therein. 
(c)  Fees for re-inspection. Any person who shall fail or neglect to comply with any lawful order of the Fire Chief and/or his or her designee issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be assessed a fee in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code, per re-inspection in the event that such a compliance re-inspection occur. Re-inspection fees that are not timely paid shall be entered upon the tax roll as a special charge against the lot or parcel of land, pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0627, for collection and settlement under Wis. Stats. ch. 74. 
(d)  Frequency of fire inspections. Pursuant to and consistent with Wisconsin SPS 314.01(13)(b)3, as from time to time amended or renumbered, all buildings, structures, and places of employment subject to the Code shall be inspected not less than once each calendar year, provided that the interval between inspections does not exceed 15 consecutive months. 
(Code 1976, § 8.32.050; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 16-128. - Access by dwelling owner or operator. 
Every occupant of a building or structure shall give the owner or operator thereof, or his or her agent or employee, access to any part of such unit at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspections, maintenance, repairs, or alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of the Fire Code. 
(Code 1976, § 8.32.060; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 16-129. - Enforcement; methods. 
In enforcing the Fire Code, the Fire Chief or any other person authorized to enforce it may do so by vacation of building, order to correct violation, citation procedure, forfeiture action, injunctive relief, or any combination of those remedies. 
(Code 1976, § 8.32.070; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 16-130. - Emergency vacation of hazardous buildings; procedure. 
(a)  Whenever the Fire Chief finds that a Fire Code violation exists which presents a situation so dangerous as to be an immediate hazard or threat of damage or injury to any property or to any person's life, safety or health, the Fire Chief may order an immediate vacation of the building, structure or premises which is so threatened. 
(b)  The order to vacate in an emergency situation may be given orally by the Fire Chief to those persons present in the building, structure or premises. 
(c)  If such order is given orally, the Fire Chief shall post on each entrance to the vacated building a sign or notice that the building has been ordered vacated or is unfit for occupancy. 
(d)  If the emergency situation terminates within three days, the Fire Chief shall prepare a report of the emergency situation and vacation. Such report shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the premises sufficient for identification; 
(2)  Specification of the condition requiring immediate vacation and the section of the Code under which such emergency order was issued; 
(3)  Date of issuance of the order to vacate; 
(4)  Date of withdrawal of the order to vacate; and 
(5)  The names of the person who were ordered to vacate the building, structure or premises, and the date on which they were so ordered. 
(e)  If the emergency situation exists longer than three days, the Fire Chief shall, after three days, prepare a written order which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the premises sufficient for identification; 
(2)  An order that the building, structure, or premises be vacated and remain vacated until such order to vacate is withdrawn; 
(3)  Specification of the condition requiring immediate vacation and the section of the Code under which such emergency order is being issued; 
(4)  The date the oral order to vacate was given; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty for defacing or removal of the copy of the order; 
(6)  The signature of the Fire Chief and a statement that the order was issued from the Fire Department; and 
(7)  The date of posting of the written order. 
(f)  A copy of any written order shall be posted on the premises and shall be served on the owner as provided in Section 16-133. 
(g)  When the Fire Chief is satisfied that the hazard or condition causing the emergency situation has been corrected, he or she shall withdraw the order to vacate and remove any posted order or notice. If a written order was posted, the Fire Chief shall notify the owner in writing of the withdrawal of the order to vacate. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of the owner of a building to notify the occupants of any order to vacate and of the withdrawal of such order. Any damage, loss or injury to either the owner or occupants of the building ordered to be vacated shall not be the responsibility of the City, unless directly caused by the City's negligence. Any damage, loss or injury to either the owner or occupants shall be the responsibility of the person who caused the Fire Code violation or who allowed the Fire Code violation to exist. 
(i)  The Fire Chief shall furnish a copy of all orders to vacate and notices of withdrawal thereof to any other official concerned therewith. 
(Code 1976, § 8.32.080; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 16-131. - Emergency authority of Fire Chief. 
In circumstances where, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, the Fire Code violation presents a situation so dangerous as to be an immediate threat of damage or injury to any property or any person's life, safety or health, the Fire Chief may cause the immediate abatement, removal or correction of the violation. Any and all costs incurred by the municipality in the performance of the abatement, removal or correction of such violation shall be charged to the owner, occupant, person in control of or person responsible for such violation. In case of a failure to pay these costs, a statement of such costs shall be filed with the City Clerk, and any and all costs thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the violation was located, shall be a lien upon the real estate, and shall be assessed and collected as a special tax. 
(Code 1976, § 8.32.090; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 16-132. - Order to correct violations—Requirements. 
(a)  Where a violation of the Fire Code exists which, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, does not require vacation, he or she may order the owner or occupant to correct the violation. 
(b)  The order to correct shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the premises sufficient for identification; 
(2)  An order to correct the violation; 
(3)  Specification of the condition requiring repair or correction, the City ordinance, regulation or state law which is being violated, and the chapter and section of the Code under which such order is being issued; 
(4)  A reasonable time period in which the condition is to be corrected, normal at least 30 days, but correction of emergency conditions may be required to be performed immediately; 
(5)  The name of the Fire Chief and a statement that the order was issued from the Fire Department; and 
(6)  The date of service of the order. 
(c)  A copy of the order shall be served as provided in this article on the owner or occupant being ordered to correct the violation. For informational purposes, a copy of the order shall be sent by regular mail to any owner not being ordered to correct and not being served. 
(Code 1976, § 8.32.100; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982; Ord. No. 83-329, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 16-133. - Order to correct violations—Posting and serving procedures. 
(a)  An order required by the chapter to be posted shall be affixed in a conspicuous place on an exterior wall of the building facing a street. 
(b)  An order required by this article to be served shall be served as follows: 
(1)  By delivery to the individual personally, or by leaving the order at his or her usual place of abode with a person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2)  If with reasonable diligence service cannot be made under Subsection (b)(1) of this section, by certified mail addressed to the individual at his or her last-known address with postage prepaid thereon; or 
(3)  If with reasonable difference service cannot be made under Subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section, by posting and keeping posted for 24 hours a copy of the order in placard form in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
Code 1976, § 8.32.110; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 16-134. - Order to correct violations—Removal of posted copy. 
No person shall deface or remove a posted copy of an order from any premises upon which it has been placed under this article except by authority from the Fire Chief. 
Code 1976, § 8.32.120; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 16-135. - Order to correct violations—Failure to do so. 
In case any order is not promptly complied with, the Fire Chief may follow any, several, or all of the following procedures: 
(1)  Issue a citation to the owner, operator or other person responsible for the violating, pursuant to the provisions of this Code; 
(2)  Request the City Attorney to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or an equity against the owner, operator or other person responsible for the violation, ordering him or her to: 
a.  Restrain, correct or remove the violation, or refrain from any further execution of work; 
b.  Restrain or correct the erection, installation, or alteration of such building in violation of the Fire Code; 
c.  Remove work in violation; 
d.  Prevent the occupancy or use of the building, structure, or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with, the provisions of the Fire Code, or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was issued; or 
e.  Pay a forfeiture pursuant to the penalty provisions of the Fire Code. 
Code 1976, § 8.32.130; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 16-136. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any provision of the Fire Code or any order issued under the provisions of the Fire Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof shall be committed to the Rock County jail for a term of not less than five days nor more than 60 days. It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate the violation as expeditiously as possible, and each day that such violation is permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense. The City, in addition to the above penalty, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation, or the City Council may revoke any license or permit. If, in any action, a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the Fire Chief constitute a defense. 
(Code 1976, § 8.32.140; Ord. No. 82-301, § 3(part), 1982)  
Secs. 16-137—16-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SMOKE DETECTOR CODE 
 
Sec. 16-156. - Adoption of state laws. 
Each and every Wisconsin and Federal statute, administrative code, rule, and other law governing smoke detectors, their installation, maintenance, definition, and use and all future enactments, revisions, modifications, and amendments pertaining thereto are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of and incorporated into this article as if fully set forth herein, except as otherwise provided in this article. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any such adopted Wisconsin and Federal smoke detector statute, administrative code, rule, and other law is required or prohibited by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8.34.010)  
Sec. 16-157. - Requirements. 
(a)  Each and every owner, possessor and/or occupant of a structure and/or dwelling regulated by this article shall install or have installed, and all structures and dwellings regulated by this article shall at all times contain, approved and fully operable smoke detectors. 
(b)  Each and every person regulated by this article shall, at all times, fully comply with each and every Wisconsin and Federal smoke detector statute, administrative code, rule, other law, and provision of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8.34.020)  
Sec. 16-158. - Inspection; enforcement; evidence; search warrant. 
(a)  The provisions of this article may be enforced by any City Fire, Building Code, or Police official. 
(b)  Inspections may not be conducted on a random basis for the purpose of determining compliance with this article. 
(c)  Evidence of violation of any provision of this article may be based upon eye witness observation of such violation, including, but not limited to, during: 
(1)  Any public safety response regardless of the requester; 
(2)  A request for inspection or observation by the owner, possessor and/or occupant; 
(3)  For all new occupancy; and/or 
(4)  For all new construction, remodeling and/or alterations. 
(d)  Special inspection warrants, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 66.122 and 66.123, as from time to time amended, may be obtained and used for the purpose of verifying compliance with any provision of this article in the manner provided therein upon any refusal by any owner, possessor, or other person in charge to consent to entry for inspection purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 8.34.030)  
Sec. 16-159. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Each and every person, firm, corporation, association, officer of any corporation, association, or other legal entity, who violates any provision of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment shall be incarcerated in the Rock County jail for not less than three days nor more than 90 days for each offense. 
(b)  In addition to the above forfeiture, the City may institute and maintain injunctive and/or such other actions or proceedings against the owner, possessor, occupant, structure and/or property for the purposes of compliance. 
(c)  In addition to the above penalties and remedies, the City Council may revoke any other license or permit, regardless of type, issued to such owner, possessor, occupant, structure, and/or property. 
(d)  No error, oversight, act, omission, or dereliction of duty on the part of the Fire Chief, the City, any of its inspectors, or any of its other officials, employees, agents, or representatives, shall constitute a defense. 
(Code 1976, § 8.34.040)  
Secs. 16-160—16-186. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FIRE REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— For provisions regarding the control of electrical wiring, see Ch. 10 of the Janesville Building Code on file in the City Clerk's Office. 
 
Sec. 16-187. - Ashes; disposition requirements. 
No person shall keep or deposit or allow to be kept or deposited upon any property in which such person possesses any ownership or possessory interest, any ashes in any wooden vessel within the limits of this City, nor shall any person throw or deposit or permit to be thrown or deposited any ashes upon his, her, or its premises or property within ten feet of any wooden (in whole or in part) building, structure, fence, other wooden improvement, or tree, unless the ashes are deposited and kept in a secure stone, brick, cement, or metallic receptacle or ash room. Any such receptacle shall not rest or stand upon any wooden or other combustible surface or object. 
(Code 1976, § 8.36.020)  
Sec. 16-188. - Burning regulations; restrictions; exception. 
(a)  No person shall burn rubbish, trash, leaves, or debris anywhere within the City or in any cooking device or in any campfire pit. 
(b)  Leaves may be burned on public lands by City employees and upon cemetery property by City or cemetery employee if the burning occurs not less than 200 feet from the nearest privately owned land and then only if the express permission of the Chief of the Fire Department or his or her designee is granted. 
(c)  Incinerators may be allowed and used upon commercial properties provided that each such incinerator is approved by the Chief of the Fire Department of the City or his or her designee. Such incinerator shall be installed and operated solely in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications, all applicable City of Janesville General Ordinances, Fire Ordinances, Building Codes, state and federal Fire Codes, and other applicable life-safety codes, regulations, and laws. 
(d)  Fires started by the Fire Department for training purposes or otherwise shall be allowed within the City limits. 
(e)  Prior to conducting any burning on a property by someone other than the property owner, permission shall be obtained from the property owner. 
(f)  Smoke, ash, and fire from any outdoor fire of any kind shall not create a nuisance for neighboring properties, and fires shall be completely extinguished when any police officer, code inspection, Fire Marshal, or other Fire Department employee or officer determines a nuisance is present. 
(Code 1976, § 8.36.030)  
Sec. 16-189. - Outdoor cooking and recreational fires; exceptions. 
(a)  All wood-fired outdoor cooking and recreational fires are subject to the following rules: 
(1)  Wood-fired outdoor cooking fires are only allowed in portable, commercially-manufactured cooking devices intended for such use except as provided in Section 16-189(d). 
(2)  Wood-fired outdoor recreational fires are only allowed in above ground, commercially-manufactured, portable, campfire pits, herein referred to as campfire pit, that is manufactured with a lid and screening around the burning area to prevent sparks from escaping except as provided in Section 16-189(d). 
(3)  All outdoor cooking devices and campfire pits shall be used as an entire unit. 
(4)  Lids and screening shall be in place during use of the cooking device or campfire pit except as provided in Section 16-189(d). 
(5)  Cooking devices, campfire pits and masonry fire pits shall only be used a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest portion of any building, lumber pile, wood pile, wooden fence, wooden deck, dry grass, or other combustible materials or vegetation. 
(6)  Cooking devices, campfire pits and masonry fire pits cannot be used if winds or gusts reach 20 miles per hour or greater. 
(7)  Cooking devices, campfire pits and masonry fire pits must be constantly attended by a responsible adult until the fire is completely extinguished and a garden hose connected to a water supply or other acceptable fire-extinguishing equipment must be at all times readily available for use while the fire is kindled. 
(8)  No combustible materials other than clean, dry natural wood and kindling may be burned outdoors and then only in a manufacturer-made cooking device, campfire pit or masonry fire pit. No accelerants may be used to start a fire. 
(9)  Cooking devices and campfire pits shall be maintained in good repair and in a safe condition at all times. 
(b)  Gas-fed outdoor cooking and recreation fires are subject to the following rules: 
(1)  All burners, appliances, devices, and associated equipment shall be tested and listed by an accepted agency such as Underwriters Laboratories. 
(2)  All burners, appliances, devices, and associated equipment shall be installed, operated, and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications at all times. 
(3)  All outdoor cooking and recreational fires must be constantly attended by a responsible adult while kindled. 
(4)  No solid combustible materials may be burned in any gas-fed appliance or device. 
(5)  Natural gas-fed burners, appliances, devices, and associated equipment require a plumbing permit prior to installation and inspection for the gas piping. Plumbing permits may be obtained through the City's Building Services Division. 
(6)  Where the outdoor cooking or recreational fire burner, appliance, device, or associated equipment is incorporated into a structure, building, or other improvement, the Uniform Dwelling Code shall also apply. 
(c)  The use of sky lanterns or similar devices which carry an open flame into the air is prohibited with the City limits. 
(d)  Masonry fire pits shall be permitted if in existence on October 27, 2014 with a minimum of 24 inches of masonry encircling the fire pit. These structures do not require a screen. All other masonry fire pits are prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 8.36.035)  
Sec. 16-190. - Special outdoor fire permits. 
(a)  Bonfire or temporary burn permits may be granted for special events. 
(1)  To obtain a permit, a signed and dated letter must be submitted to the Fire Marshal. The letter must include the following: 
a.  The date, specific time, and specific place of the bonfire or burn. 
b.  The nature of the event (reason for the request). 
c.  A brief description of the bonfire or burn and any precautions that will be taken. 
d.  The name and contact information for the person who will be in charge of the bonfire or burn. 
(2)  Approval of requests for a bonfire or burn will be mailed to the applicant or can be picked up at Fire Station Number One. 
(3)  Approved bonfires and burns are subject to the following additional regulations: 
a.  The person in charge of the bonfire or burn must call the non-emergency phone number for the 911 Center prior to and after completing the bonfire or burn. 
b.  An adequate number of operable fire extinguishers shall be available at all times within 100 feet of the bonfire or burn. 
c.  The bonfire or burn shall not be closer than 50 feet from the nearest portion of any building, lumber pile, wood pile, wooden fence, wooden deck, or other combustible material. 
d.  The bonfire or burn cannot occur if winds or gusts reach 20 miles per hour or greater. 
e.  The bonfire or burn shall be constantly attended by an adequate number of responsible adults until the fire is completely extinguished. 
f.  The bonfire or burn shall be contained in an area where it cannot spread. 
g.  The material to be burned shall not emit large flying embers, excessive smoke, or toxic or harmful gasses other than that produced by untreated burned wood and paper. 
h.  No accelerants may be used to start the bonfire or burn. 
(b)  Campfires may be allowed in City parks by requesting a permit from the City Recreation Division. 
(c)  Requests for prairie burns shall follow applicable City of Janesville General Ordinances, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the burning ordinance shall result in one or more of the following Firefighter, Fire Marshal, Fire Chief, Police, Building Official, and/or City Attorney Office enforcement action, depending upon the severity and/or danger of the situation, potential or actual harm, and/or nature of the violation: 
(1)  First contact may result in an oral or written warning. 
(2)  Subsequent contacts may result in enforcement actions and/or the imposition of forfeitures and/or injunctive relief for abatement and/or prevention. 
(3)  The Janesville Fire Chief has final discretion. 
(Code 1976, § 8.36.040)  
Sec. 16-191. - Inflammables; removal when. 
No person shall keep or maintain or permit to be kept or maintained, on any premises which he or she may own, lease, occupy or control, any empty boxes, wastepaper, rags, or other inflammable or combustible material in such quantities or manner that the same will create a fire hazard. 
(Code 1976, § 8.36.050)  
Sec. 16-192. - Gunpowder; storing requirements. 
No person shall keep or store more than five pounds of gunpowder at any place within the City without the permission of the council. No dealer, permitted to keep at his or her place of business gunpowder in quantities exceeding five pounds, shall keep in such premises more than 50 pounds at any one time, and the same shall be kept in a safely constructed box painted yellow and having the word powder printed or painted thereon in black letters not less than five inches in length, and also having handles so that the same may be easily moved in case of fire. Such box shall be kept in such part of such dealer's place of business as may be directed by the Chief of the Fire Department. 
(Code 1976, § 8.36.060)  
Sec. 16-193. - Explosives; possession allowed when; restrictions. 
No person shall keep or store at any place within the City any nitroglycerine, dynamite, giant powder, or other explosives more violent than gunpowder without the permission of the Council, or otherwise than in accordance with the conditions prescribed in the permission therefor. In no case shall more than 25 pounds of any such explosive be stored or kept within 20 rods of any dwelling house or other occupied building. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have authority to direct as to place and manner of keeping the same and precautions to be taken in respect thereto. 
(Code 1976, § 8.36.070)  
Sec. 16-194. - Bulk gasoline storage stations; conformance; regulations. 
All bulk gasoline storage stations shall be built in full conformity with all the regulations as required by the Wisconsin Statutes and the rules and regulations of the Wisconsin Industrial Commission. In addition thereto, all bulk gasoline storage stations having tanks aboveground shall be surrounded by a dike, wall or embankment built high enough to confine, within the enclosure surrounded by the dike, wall or embankment, the full capacity of the storage tanks enclosed. 
(Code 1976, § 8.36.080) 
State Law reference— Storage of dangerous substances, generally, Wis. Stats. § 168.21 et seq.  
Sec. 16-195. - Flammable combustible storage tanks; removal; fees. 
(a)  No person, firm, corporation or other entity may remove or close in place any flammable combustible storage tank regulated by state law, as from time to time amended or renumbered, without first applying for, paying the fee for, and holding a flammable combustible storage tank removal permit issued under this section by the City Clerk. 
(b)  No flammable combustible storage tank removal permit may be issued until the prior happening of each and every one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant submits with his or her application written plans for the removal of the storage tank. 
(2)  The Janesville Fire Department approves such plan and the issuance of such permit. 
(3)  The applicant pays in full both the plan review fee and site inspection fee at the time of application. 
(c)  The fees for each flammable combustible storage tank removal permit shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 8.36.085)  
Sec. 16-196. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 8.36.090; Ord. No. 82-301, § 2, 1982)  
Secs. 16-197—16-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FIREWORKS CODE 
 
Sec. 16-216. - State code and administrative agency regulations adopted. 
All provisions relating to fireworks contained in the Wisconsin Statutes and the State of Wisconsin Administrative Code, and all subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated into this article as if fully set forth herein. All acts permitted and prohibited therein are permitted and prohibited by this article except as expressly set forth herein. 
(Code 1976, § 8.40.010)  
Sec. 16-217. - Prohibition. 
No person may possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, store, handle, use, expose or offer for sale, sell, attempt to sell, display, discharge, ignite, attempt to ignite, explode or attempt to explode any firework, firework devices, firecracker or other volatile item defined and prohibited by the State of Wisconsin or any of its Administrative Agencies, except as allowed by and in a manner consistent with this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8.40.020)  
Sec. 16-218. - Exploding and smoke producing devices prohibited. 
In addition to any other prohibitions set forth in this article, no person may possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, store, handle, use, expose or offer for sale, sell, attempt to sell, display, discharge, ignite, attempt to ignite, explode or attempt to explode any device which explodes or which is designed or intended to explode or which produces large quantities of smoke or which is designed or intended to explode or which produces large quantities of smoke. 
(Code 1976, § 8.40.030)  
Sec. 16-219. - Certain public display permitted; fireworks permit required. 
(a)  Fireworks and other devices otherwise prohibited under this article may be used, display and discharge by public authorities or private persons or organizations only for public display, only in the manner allowed by this subsection and only by those to whom the City Manager has issued a nontransferable fireworks display permit. 
(b)  The City Manager is hereby vested with and shall have the sole and final authority to grant or deny the issuance of a fireworks display permit to any public or private person or organization for pyrotechnic displays for any reason, including, but not limited to, considerations of public health, welfare, safety, peace and tranquility, operator experience, display location or traffic congestion. 
(c)  Any public or private person or organization which desires a fireworks display permit shall file a written request with the City Manager not less than 30 days prior to the first day of the intended display. The written request shall contain such information as required by the City Manager. 
(d)  A fireworks display permit shall not be issued unless the applicant: 
(1)  In writing fully indemnifies and holds harmless the City of Janesville from any and all liability of whatever kind and nature arising from the purchase, transport, handling, storage, use, display, and discharge of fireworks and other devices allowed under this section; 
(2)  Provides to the City certificate of liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 for payment of any and all claims which may arise by reason of injury to person or property directly or indirectly arising from the purchase, transport, handling, storage, use, display, and discharge of fireworks and other devices allowed under this Subsection (d). The City shall be named as an additional or co-insured and the certificate of liability insurance shall be in such form as required by the City Manager; 
(3)  In writing indemnifies and holds harmless the City from any and all loss and injury of whatever kind or nature directly and indirectly arising from the revocation of the fireworks display permit; 
(4)  In writing permits the City to confiscate any and all fireworks and other devices at any time in the manner and for the reasons set forth in this article; 
(5)  In writing fully indemnifies and holds harmless the City from any and all loss and injury of whatever kind or nature directly and indirectly arising from such confiscation; 
(6)  Provides to the City evidence that all pyrotechnic operators used shall be at least 21 years old; and 
(7)  Provides to the City evidence that all pyrotechnic operators have actual experience as an operator or assistant as part of demonstrating competency to the Janesville Fire Chief or his or her designee. 
(e)  The fireworks display permit shall be granted for a period not to exceed six days. 
(f)  The fireworks display permit shall be nonrefundable, and shall not be waived. The permit shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(g)  The public use and display shall take place only upon open fields, public parks, rivers, lakes or ponds and upon such other public or private locations that are adequate for the safe and enjoyable display of the proposed fireworks or devices, and that are approved by the City Manager. 
(h)  No public or private person or organization shall engage in any fireworks display or activity otherwise prohibited by this article without having been issued a fireworks display permit. 
(i)  The City and each of its employees and authorized representatives may demand inspection of the fireworks display permit any time. The permittee shall immediately produce and display the fireworks display permit upon such demand. 
(j)  The City Manager, the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department, jointly and severally, are hereby vested with and shall have the authority to, at any time, revoke the fireworks display permit, terminate and prohibit any display or other fireworks activity, and confiscate any and all fireworks and other firework devices when, in the opinion of any one of them, the proposed or continued display or other fireworks activity presents or tends to present a danger to any person or property. 
(k)  The fireworks display permit is a privilege and not a right. Nothing in this article shall be construed as bestowing or in any manner creating or vesting a right in any person. 
(l)  Fireworks and other devices shall not be stored, handled, kept, sold, used, displayed or discharged within 500 feet of any gasoline pump, storage facility, service station, filling station, bulk station, or any structure in which gasoline or other volatile liquids are kept in quantities in excess of one gallon. 
(Code 1976, § 8.40.040; Ord. No. 2018-742, § VIII, 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 16-220. - Firework stands; license; regulation. 
(a)  The term "firework stand" means any and all outdoor and indoor merchandise displays of any and all firework and firework devices in any manner regulated or addressed by this article. 
(b)  No person may erect, possess, own, operate, maintain or sell from any firework stand for any purpose except as allowed by this article and only in conformity with all state laws, administrative codes, regulations, and other City ordinances. 
(c)  No person may erect, possess, own, operate, maintain or sell from any firework stand for any purpose without a firework stand permit, which permit shall be nontransferable. 
(d)  Application for a firework stand permit shall be made to the City Clerk on a form and in the manner required by the Chief of the Fire Department, which form shall include a provision which empowers the Chief of the Fire Department, Chief of the Police Department, and/or the Code Administration Director and any and all other persons acting on their behalf, to inspect the firework stand, inventory, merchandise, related structures, and surrounding area, at any time, without notice. 
(e)  Application for the nontransferable fireworks stand permit shall be accompanied with a non-refundable application fee, which fee shall be applied to help defray the City's actual inspection and administrative review costs. The permit shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(f)  The firework stand permit shall be, at all times, conspicuously posted upon the firework stand. 
(g)  The firework stand permit may be revoked at any time the Chief of the Fire Department, The Chief of the Police Department, or the Code Administration Director or his or her representative finds any violation of this article or any other law, and any time the Chief of the Fire Department, the Chief of the Police Department, or the Code Administration Director or his or her representative believes the firework stand, in any manner, poses any risk or potential risk to human or property safety. 
(h)  The Chief of the Fire Department, the Chief of the Police Department, and/or the Code Administration Director or their representative may require, as a condition to not revoking an issued firework stand permit, compliance with any and all health and safety requirements as they or their representatives, may from time to time, deem in the best interest of human or property well being or safety. Any and all requirements of the Chief of Fire, the Chief of Police, and/or the Code Administration Director or their representative shall be construed, for all purposes, as required by this article. 
(i)  The firework stand permit shall be for a term not to exceed 30 days. 
(j)  No firework stand permit may be issued for any firework stand erected or proposed to be erected in an area not properly zoned for such stand or activity. 
(k)  No firework stand permit may be issued unless the applicant first applies for, pays for and obtains from the City a temporary sign permit and all other permits and licenses required for such stand and activities. 
(l)  The Chief of the Fire Department, Chief of the Police Department, and/or the Building Director and all other persons acting on their behalf, will issue correction notices for any violations of federal law, state law, and/or local ordinances. Any violations shall be corrected forthwith. 
(m)  The Chief of the Fire Department, Chief of the Police Department, and/or the Building Director and all other persons acting on their behalf will have the responsibility upon their finding of a violation to issue citations for the amount of $500.00 per violation. 
(n)  No license or permit required under this article may be issued by the City Clerk to any person or other entity who has previously violated any provision of this article or any similar law anywhere. 
(Code 1976, § 8.40.050; Ord. No. 2017-705, § VII, 11-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 2018-742, § VIII, 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 16-221. - Confiscation of non-permitted fireworks and fireworks devices. 
The City may confiscate and remove any and all fireworks and other firework devices for which no fireworks display permit or firework stand permit has been issued which, in the opinion of the City Manager, the Chief of the Fire Department or the Chief of Police, present or tend to present risk or potential risk to any person or property. 
(Code 1976, § 8.40.060)  
Sec. 16-222. - Exemption for certain uses. 
This article does not apply to devices and articles used by the construction industry in the normal course of its business nor to high explosives used for blasting or similar purposes when used solely for the necessary conduct of business or industry nor to the necessary conduct of the affairs of the Armed Forces. 
(Code 1976, § 8.40.070)  
Sec. 16-223. - Permit and inspection for firework display and stand. 
(a)  No person may display for sale, offer for sale, or attempt to sell any firework or firework device, including those permitted by state law, or own, possess, operate or in any manner work at any firework display or firework stand without first obtaining a nontransferable firework display permit or firework stand permit from the City Clerk. 
(b)  Every firework stand and firework display for which no firework display permit or firework stand permit has been issued may be ordered closed by the City Manager, the Chief of the Police Department, the Chief of the Fire Department, or someone acting on their behalf and all fireworks and firework devices may be confiscated. 
(c)  Every firework display and every firework stand, including those for which no permit has been issued, is subject to inspection in the manner set forth in this article. 
(d)  The City Manager, the Chief of the Police Department, the Chief of the Fire Department, and anyone acting on their behalf, may take one or more samples of any firework and/or firework devices offered for sale regardless of where located in the City for the purpose of testing for compliance with this article and/or state law. 
(Code 1976, § 8.40.080)  
Sec. 16-224. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,000.00 for each offense together with the costs of prosecution and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned for not more than 120 days in the county jail. Each day's continuance of any violation transported, possessed, used, stored, contained, handled, offered for sale, sold, displayed or discharged shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 8.40.090)  
Chapter 18 - HOUSING  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-774 , § I, adopted December 9, 2019, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 18-19—18-32, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1976, §§ 16.04.010—16.04.140. 
 
Sec. 18-19. - Intent; declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is the express policy and intent of the City of Janesville ("City") to protect its residents from discrimination in housing and to render discrimination in housing unlawful. It is the declared policy of the City that all persons shall have an equal opportunity for housing regardless of race, color, sex, national origin, religion, disability/handicap, family/familial status, age, ancestry, marital status, lawful source of income, sexual orientation; status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking; or gender identity and/or gender expression. 
(b)  It is the intent of the City to hereby create an administrative process to enforce equal opportunity in housing for all residents of Janesville. 
(c)  Furthermore, it is the intent of the City and this chapter to render discrimination in housing unlawful, and to assist in the orderly prevention and removal of all discrimination in housing through the powers granted under current Wisconsin law, including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats., §§ 66.1011 and 101.132, and such other applicable statutes as may, from time to time, amend, supersede, supplant or in any way modify, change, or add to these statutory provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.010), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-20. - Title; Fair Housing Code. 
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the "Fair Housing Code" and/or as the "Fair Housing Code of the City of Janesville." 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.020), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-21. - Definitions. 
In this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise: 
Advertise means to publish, circulate, issue, or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued, or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement, or sign in connection with the sale, financing, or rental of housing. 
Age, in reference to a member of a protected class, means at least 18 years of age. 
Complainant means any person who files a complaint alleging discrimination in housing under this chapter. 
Complaint means the written allegation of one or more violations of any provision of this chapter, naming the alleged violator(s), filed with the Fair Housing Officer, and otherwise completed and filed in accord with the time limit and other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
Disability means an actual or perceived physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, a record of having such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment. Disability does not include the current illegal use of a controlled substance, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 961.01(4), or a controlled substance analog, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 961.01(4m), unless the individual is participating in a supervised drug rehabilitation program. 
Discriminate, discrimination, and discriminating mean to segregate, separate, exclude, or treat, to any degree, any person or class of persons unequally, unless expressly exempted by this chapter, because of race, color, sex, national origin, religion, disability/handicap, family/familial status, age, ancestry, marital status, lawful source of income, sexual orientation; status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking; or gender identity and/or gender expression. 
Discriminate, discrimination, and discriminating against the handicapped includes a refusal to permit, at the expense of a handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; and a refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services when such an accommodation may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a residential, rental dwelling. 
Emotional support animal means an animal that provides emotional support, well-being, comfort, or companionship for an individual but that is not trained to perform specific tasks directly related to the disability for the benefit of an individual with a disability. 
Fair Housing Officer means the person, appointed from time to time by and serving for an indeterminate period at the pleasure of the City Manager, with whom a complaint is filed, and who administers the complaint review and determination process. 
Familial status means one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) and who are domiciled with: (1) a parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or (2) the designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person. The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Family status means any of the following conditions that apply to a person seeking to rent or purchase housing or to a member or prospective member of the person's household regardless of the person's marital status: 
(1)  A person is pregnant. 
(2)  A person is in the process of securing sole or joint legal custody, periods of physical placement, or visitation rights of a minor child. 
(3)  A person's household includes one or more minor or adult relatives. 
(4)  A person's household includes one or more adults or minor children in his or her legal custody or physical placement, or with whom he or she has visitation rights. 
(5)  A person's household includes one or more adults or minor children placed in his or her care under a court order, under a guardianship, or with the written permission of a parent or other person having legal custody of the adult or minor child. 
Gender identity and/or gender expression means a person's gender related self-identity, appearance, expression, or behavior, regardless of the person's assigned sex at birth. 
Handicap and handicapped mean a physical or mental impairment or the perception of a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of the person's major life activities, or a record of having such an impairment, or being regarded of having such an impairment; but such terms do not include current, illegal use of, or addiction to a controlled substance (as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802) as from time to time amended). 
Hearing means a formal and/or informal hearing or other fact finding gathering, meeting, procedure, and/or process under the jurisdiction and direction of an appointed Hearing Examiner. 
Hearing Examiner means the person(s) appointed by the Fair Housing Officer to render a determination of probable cause in each complaint alleging housing discrimination or a violation of any other provision of this chapter. 
Housing means any improved property, or any portion thereof, including a mobile home, manufactured home, or condominium, that is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied, as a home or residence. Housing includes any vacant land that is offered for sale or rent for the construction or location thereon of any building, structure or portion thereof that is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a home or residence. 
Housing for older persons means any of the following: 
(1)  Housing provided under any state or federal program that is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program. 
(2)  Housing solely intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older. 
(3)  Housing primarily intended and primarily operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per dwelling unit. 
Mediator means one or more persons, appointed from time to time by and serving for an indeterminate period at the pleasure of the Fair Housing Officer, who shall, in addition to such other duties and responsibilities as provided by law, attempt to resolve, through, but not limited to, conference, mediation, conciliation, and/or persuasion, each complaint in a manner mutually agreeable to the complainant and respondent and in a written and enforceable form acceptable to the City Attorney, signed by the complainant, respondent, and Mediator, and filed with the Fair Housing Officer. 
Person means each and every individual, partnership, labor or other association, organization of whatsoever kind or nature, corporation, legal representative, receiver, trustee in bankruptcy, or other fiduciary, or the lessee, proprietor, manager, employee ,or any other agent of any such person. 
Probable cause means the determination that there are reasonable grounds to believe that one or more persons has, may have, or may be violating one or more provisions of this chapter. 
Respondent means the person accused in a complaint or amended complaint of discrimination in housing and any other person identified in the course of an investigation as allegedly having discriminated in housing. 
Settlement agreement means the written resolution of the complaint and alleged violation(s), enforceable at law and equity and otherwise pursuant to this chapter, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, signed by the complainant and respondent, filed with the Fair Housing Officer, and in some manner eliminating the alleged discrimination and/or other violation of any provision of this chapter, and/or providing compensation to victims of unlawful discrimination. 
Sexual orientation means having a preference for heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality, having a history of such a preference, or being identified with such a preference. 
Single occupancy room means each and every room in a structure of five such rooms or less which the owner has leased or rented, or in any way offered for lease or rent, to a sole individuals, provided the owner permanently resides in the same structure. 
Status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking means the status of a person who is seeking to rent or purchase housing, or of a member or prospective member of the person's household having been, or being believed by the lessor or seller of housing to be, a victim of domestic abuse, as defined in Wis. Stat. §. 813.12(1)(am), sexual assault under Wis. Stat. § 940.225, 948.02, or 948.025, or stalking under Wis. Stat. § 940.32. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.030), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-22. - Discrimination; prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to discriminate: 
(1)  By refusing to sell, lease, finance, or contract to construct housing, or by refusing to discuss the terms thereof; 
(2)  By refusing to permit inspection, or exacting different or more stringent price, terms or conditions, for the sale, lease, financing, or rental of housing; 
(3)  By refusing to finance or sell an unimproved residential lot or to construct a home or residence upon such lot; 
(4)  By advertising in a manner that indicates discrimination by a preference or limitation; 
(5)  For a person in the business of insuring against hazards, by refusing to enter into, or by exacting different terms, conditions, or privileges with respect to a contract of insurance against hazards to a dwelling; 
(6)  By refusing to renew a lease, causing the eviction of a tenant, from a rental housing, or engaging in the harassment of a tenant; 
(7)  In providing the privileges, services, or facilities that are available in connection with housing 
(8)  By falsely representing that housing is unavailable for inspection, rental, or sale; 
(9)  By denying access to, or membership or participation in, a multiple listing service or other real estate service; 
(10)  By coercing, intimidating, threatening, or interfering with a person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or enjoyed, a right granted or protected under this chapter, or with a person who has aided or encouraged another person in the exercise or enjoyment of a right granted or protected under this chapter; 
(11)  In making available any of the following transactions, or in the terms or conditions of such transactions, for a person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions: 
a.  The making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining housing, or the making or purchasing of loans, or the provisions of other financial assistance, secured by residential real estate. 
b.  Selling, brokering, or appraising residential real property. 
(12)  By otherwise making unavailable or denying housing. 
(b)  Representations designed to induce panic sales. No person may induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent housing by representations regarding the present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular economic status or a member of a protected class, or by representations to the effect that such present or prospective entry will or may result in any of the following: 
(1)  The lowering of real estate values in the area concerned; 
(2)  A deterioration in the character of the area concerned; 
(3)  An increase in criminal and antisocial behavior in the area concerned; or 
(4)  A decline in the quality of the schools or other public facilities serving the area. 
(c)  No person may coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this chapter, or with any person who has aided or encouraged another person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.040), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-23. - Discrimination against persons with disabilities prohibited. 
(a)  Types of discrimination prohibited. In addition to discrimination prohibited under section 18-22, no person may do any of the following: 
(1)  Segregate, separate, exclude, or treat unequally in the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, housing to a buyer or renter because of a disability of that buyer or renter, a disability of a person residing in or intending to reside in that housing after it is sold, rented, or made available, or a disability of a person associated with that buyer or renter. 
(2)  Segregate, separate, exclude, or treat unequally a person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of housing, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such housing, because of a disability of that person, a disability of a person residing in or intending to reside in that housing after it is sold, rented, or made available, or a disability of a person associated with that person. 
(3)  Refuse to permit, at the expense of a person with a disability, reasonable modifications of existing housing that is occupied, or is to be occupied, by such a person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the housing, except that in the case of rental housing, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the tenant's agreement to restore the interior of the housing to the condition that existed before the modification, other than reasonable wear and tear. The landlord may not increase any customarily required security deposit. Where it is necessary to ensure that funds will be available to pay for the restorations at the end of the tenancy, the landlord may negotiate as part of a restoration agreement, a requirement that the tenant pay into an interest-bearing escrow account, over a reasonable period, a reasonable amount of money not to exceed the cost of the restorations. The interest in any such account shall accrue to the benefit of the tenant. If escrowed funds are not used by the landlord for restorations, they shall be returned to the tenant. 
(4)  Refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services that are associated with the housing, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy housing, unless the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the owner of the housing. 
(b)  Animals that do work or perform tasks for individuals with disabilities. 
(1)  If an individual has a disability and a disability-related need for an animal that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the individual, it is discrimination for a person to refuse to rent or sell housing to the individual, cause the eviction of the individual from housing, require extra compensation from the individual as a condition of continued residence in housing, or engage in the harassment of the individual because he or she keeps such an animal. 
(2)  If an individual keeps or is seeking to keep an animal that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks in housing, an owner, lessor, lessor's agent, owner's agent, or representative of a condominium association may request that the individual submit to the owner, lessor, agent, or representative reliable documentation that the individual has a disability and reliable documentation of the disability-related need for the animal, unless the disability is readily apparent or known. If the disability is readily apparent or known but the disability-related need for the animal is not, the individual may be requested to submit reliable documentation of the disability-related need for the animal. 
(3)  An individual with a disability who keeps an animal that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks in housing shall accept liability for sanitation with respect to, and damage to the premises caused by, the animal. 
(4)  Nothing in this subsection prohibits an owner, lessor, lessor's agent, owner's agent, or representative of a condominium association from denying an individual the ability to keep an animal in housing if any of the following applies: 
a.  The individual is not disabled, does not have a disability-related need for the animal, or fails to provide requested documentation. 
b.  Allowing the animal would impose an undue financial and administrative burden or would fundamentally alter the nature of services provided by the lessor, owner, or representative. 
c.  The specific animal in question poses a direct threat to a person's health or safety that cannot be reduced or eliminated by another reasonable accommodation. 
d.  The specific animal in question would cause substantial physical damage to a person's property that cannot be reduced or eliminated by another reasonable accommodation. 
(c)  Emotional support animals. 
(1)  If an individual has a disability and a disability-related need for an emotional support animal, it is discrimination for a person to refuse to rent or sell housing to the individual, cause the eviction of the individual from housing, require extra compensation from the individual as a condition of continued residence in housing, or engage in the harassment of the individual because he or she keeps such an animal. 
(2)  If an individual keeps or is seeking to keep an emotional support animal in housing, an owner, lessor, lessor's agent, owner's agent, or representative of a condominium association may request that the individual submit to the owner, lessor, agent, or representative reliable documentation that the individual has a disability and reliable documentation of the disability-related need for the emotional support animal from a licensed health professional. 
(3)  An individual with a disability who keeps an emotional support animal in housing shall accept liability for sanitation with respect to, and damage to the premises caused by, the animal. 
(4)  Nothing in this subsection prohibits an owner, lessor, lessor's agent, owner's agent, or representative of a condominium association from denying an individual the ability to keep an animal in housing if any of the following applies: 
a.  The individual is not disabled, does not have a disability-related need for the animal, or fails to provide requested documentation. 
b.  Allowing the animal would impose an undue financial and administrative burden or would fundamentally alter the nature of services provided by the lessor, owner, or representative. 
c.  The specific animal in question poses a direct threat to a person's health or safety that cannot be reduced or eliminated by another reasonable accommodation. 
d.  The specific animal in question would cause substantial physical damage to a person's property that cannot be reduced or eliminated by another reasonable accommodation. 
(5)  An individual shall forfeit not less than $500.00 if he or she, for the purpose of obtaining housing, intentionally misrepresents that he or she has a disability or misrepresents the need for an emotional support animal to assist with his or her disability. 
(6)  A licensed health professional shall forfeit not less than $500.00 if he or she, for the purpose of allowing the patient to obtain housing, misrepresents that his or her patient has a disability or misrepresents his or her patient's need for an emotional support animal to assist with his or her patient's disability. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.050), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-24. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit familial status discrimination or discrimination on the basis of age in relation to housing for older persons. Housing may qualify as housing for older persons only if the owner of the housing maintains records containing written verification that it meets the required factors in Wis. Stat. § 106.50 (5m)(a). 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from exacting different or more stringent terms or conditions for financing based on the age of the individual applicant if the terms or conditions are reasonably related to the individual applicant. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the development of housing designed specifically for persons with a handicap nor discrimination on the basis of handicap in relation to such housing. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter requires that housing be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the safety of other tenants or persons employed on the property or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others, if the risk of direct threat or damage cannot be eliminated or sufficiently reduced through reasonable accommodations. A claim that an individual's tenancy poses a direct threat or a substantial risk of harm or damage must be evidenced by behavior by the individual that caused harm or damage, that directly threatened harm or damage, or that caused a reasonable fear of harm or damage to other tenants, persons employed on the property, or the property. No claim that an individual's tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the safety of other persons or would result in substantial damage to property may be based on the tenant's status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking. 
(e)  It is not discrimination based on status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking for a landlord to bring an action for eviction of a tenant based on a violation of the rental agreement or of a statute that entitles the landlord to possession of the premises, unless subsection (1) or (2) applies. A tenant has a defense to an action for eviction brought by a landlord if the tenant proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the landlord knew or should have known any of the following: 
(1)  That the tenant is a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking and that the basis for the action for eviction is conduct that related to the commission of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking by a person who was not the invited guest of the tenant. 
(2)  That the tenant is a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking, that the basis for the action for eviction is conduct that related to the commission of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking by a person who was the invited guest of the tenant, and that the tenant has done one of the following: 
a.  Sought an injunction enjoining the person from appearing on the premises. 
b.  Upon receiving notice under Wis. Stat. § 704.17, provided a written statement to the landlord indicating that the person will no longer be an invited guest of the tenant and has not subsequently invited the person to be a guest of the tenant. 
(f)  Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national origin. Nor shall anything in this subchapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(g)  Nothing in this chapter shall limit the applicability of any reasonable local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling, structure, unit, or property. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.010), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-25. - Retaliation or retaliatory discrimination prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to retaliate or discriminate against any person on account of having inquired into or having claimed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.065), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-26. - Administration; powers and duties. 
(a)  The purposes and provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Fair Housing Officer, or his/her designee and enforcement and prosecutions handled by the City Attorney. 
(b)  In administering this chapter, the Fair Housing Officer shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Adopt, amend, and modify any and all administrative policies and procedures as may, from time to time, be necessary, useful, helpful, or desirable in the administration and/or enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Appoint such number and types of employees, agents, and other staff as may, from time to time, be necessary, useful, helpful, or desirable to promote the purpose of this chapter and/or the administration and/or enforcement of this chapter, and, from time to time, to prescribe their duties. 
(3)  Receive and initiate complaints alleging violation of this chapter and to attempt to eliminate or remedy any violation. 
(4)  Investigate complaints alleging any prohibited discrimination and/or such other violation(s) of any provision of this chapter and/or appoint one or more investigators to gather facts, evidence, and information, and otherwise investigate complaints. 
(5)  Determine probable cause or appoint an independent hearing examiner to do so. Dismiss complaints without probable cause. Pursue resolution of complaints with probable cause. 
(6)  Refer complaints to the Equal Rights Division (ERD) of the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development, the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or the U.S. Department of Justice. 
(7)  Seek settlement agreements and/ or appoint, one or more mediators who shall seek a settlement agreeable to both the complainant and the respondent by means of informal conferences or other meetings or means. 
(8)  Refer settlement agreements to the City Attorney for approval as to form. 
(9)  Refer non-settled complaints to the City Attorney for additional action. 
(10)  Request that the City Attorney enforce settlement agreements or take other appropriate or desirable action. 
(c)  The Hearing Examiner may, in addition to all others conferred by law, have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Review the complaint and all other evidentiary and investigatory material made available to him/her. 
(2)  Interview the complainant and respondent, without limitation as to frequency or reasonable manner. 
(3)  Conduct one or more formal and/or informal hearings which may be continued from time to time, and to subpoena the complainant(s), respondent(s), and any and all other persons to testify therein and to command the production and examination of any and all documents and other evidence directly and/or indirectly pertaining to the complaint and/or the alleged violation of any provision of this chapter; administer oaths, take and record and/or arrange for the recording of testimony; and apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce any and all subpoenas and orders. 
(4)  Within 120 days of being retained by the City and being assigned a discrimination case for determination, render and serve upon the respondent, complainant, and Fair Housing Officer, a written determination of whether probable cause exists to believe that one or more provisions of this chapter was, may be, or is being violated by one or more named persons and the facts supporting such determination. 
(5)  Issue recommendations and/or other reports, from time to time, to the mediator, the Fair Housing Officer, and City Attorney, as are necessary, helpful, useful, or desirable to promote the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
(6)  Refer to the City Attorney requests and recommendations to take necessary and/or desirable legal and/or equitable relief and/or appropriate or desirable action. 
(d)  In mediating disputes, the Mediator may, in addition to all others conferred by law, have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Review the complaint and all other investigatory and evidentiary materials and facts pertaining to that complaint. 
(2)  Compel attendance by the respondent and the complainant at up to three separate and/or joint mediation sessions each. 
(3)  Persuade, mediate, conciliate, resolve, and/or settle the dispute, propose one or more settlements and/or settlement agreements, and prepare same for their signature. 
(4)  File and serve signed settlement agreements as required by this chapter. 
(5)  Declare an impasse in the mediation and refer those complaints for which a settlement agreement has not been reached to the City Attorney for review and prosecution. 
(6)  Make such written and verbal recommendations and reports to the City Attorney, the Fair Housing Officer, or such others as may be necessary, useful, desirable, or appropriate to promote the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
(e)  In prosecuting and enforcing the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the settlement agreements and prosecution of any violation of any provision of this chapter by any person(s), the City Attorney shall be empowered, in addition to each and every other authorization, empowerment, and discretion otherwise conferred by law, with each and every power and authorization in law and equity specifically conferred by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.070), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-27. - Complaint procedure—Filing. 
(a)  Complaint. Each and every complaint alleging any discriminatory practice prohibited by this chapter or violation of any other provision of this chapter shall be in writing, signed by the complainant(s), and filed by the complainant with the Fair Housing Officer no later than one year, exclusive of the date of the alleged discrimination or other alleged violation, after the complainant knew or should have known that the alleged discrimination or other violation occurred. The City shall have no jurisdiction or other authority to act upon any complaint not filed within one year. The complaint shall contain the following: 
(1)  The complete name, address, and contact information of the complainant(s). It is the duty of the complainant to notify the Fair Housing Officer within 30 days of any change hereto. 
(2)  The complete name and address of the respondent(s), if available. 
(3)  The characteristic, or protected class, the alleged discrimination or discriminatory practice to alleged to be based upon. 
(4)  A full and complete statement describing the essential facts of the allegation of discrimination, discriminatory practice, or other violation of any provision of this chapter, including relevant dates, times and places of alleged discrimination and any witnesses to the alleged discrimination or discriminatory practice. 
(5)  A complaint may be withdrawn or amended in the following circumstances: 
a.  A complaint, or any part thereof, may be withdrawn or amended in writing by the complainant(s) at any time, with the exception noted in (c) below. 
b.  A complaint may also be withdrawn by the Fair Housing Officer in the event that the Fair Housing Officer, after due diligence, cannot locate the complainant. Notice of such withdrawal shall be served upon the respondent and shall act as an adjudication and determination upon the merits. 
c.  A complaint may be amended subsequent to its filing, provided that, if a hearing to determine probably cause has been set and notice issued by the Fair Housing Officer or Hearing Examiner, a complaint may not be amended later than ten days prior to the date of such a hearing unless express written permission is granted for such later amendment by the Fair Housing Officer or Hearing Examiner. Notice of such express permission and a copy of such later amendment(s) shall be provided to the respondent prior to said hearing. 
(b)  [Filing.] Upon the filing of a lawful, timely, and otherwise proper complaint, the Fair Housing Officer shall serve, by certified mail or otherwise as allowed by law, a true and correct copy of same upon the respondent. 
(c)  Removal to Circuit Court. Upon service of the complaint on both parties, any party to the action may remove the complaint to Circuit Court at any time by following the proper procedures for filing. Upon removal to Circuit Court, the City will take no further action on the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.080), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-28. - Complaint procedure—Investigation. 
(a)  Investigations. The Fair Housing Officer or an investigator designated, appointed and retained by the Fair Housing Officer shall promptly investigate all duly and timely filed complaints and shall prepare a written report of all facts, statements, and other evidence of whatsoever kind and nature discovered as a result of such investigation. 
(b)  All discrimination complaints involving the City of Janesville or Janesville Housing Authority shall be referred to the Equal Rights Division (ERD) of the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development or the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), whichever may have jurisdiction over the complaint and the City shall take no action, but shall promptly refer the complaint to the ERD, EEOC or HUD for appropriate actions provided by law. The complainant and respondent shall be informed of all such referrals. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.090), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-29. - Complaint procedure—Determination of probable cause. 
(a)  Determination of probable cause. The Fair Housing Officer or a designated Hearing Examiner shall review the complaint and the facts and reports of the investigation and such other information as he or she may otherwise develop or uncover through subpoena, hearing(s), or otherwise, and render a written determination as to whether there is probable cause to believe that one or more provisions of this chapter have, may be, or are being violated by one or more named persons together with the facts supporting such determination. 
(b)  The Fair Housing Officer or designated Hearing Examiner, as a part of his or her review of the case, may conduct or cause to be conducted one or more hearings at which the respondent, complainant, and others may be compelled to testify by subpoena. The Hearing Examiner may also compel the production of any and all other papers, records, information, testimony, and evidence of whatsoever kind or nature directly and/or indirectly pertaining to the complaint and/or any allegation contained therein or which the investigation may have revealed. In the event a witness either fails or refuses to obey a subpoena issued by the Hearing Examiner, the Hearing Examiner may order attendance or the production of records and/or seek such relief through a court of competent jurisdiction as may be provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.100), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-30. - Mediation and conciliation; notice of failure; complainant requests prosecution. 
(a)  In the event that there is a determination of probable cause that one or more provisions of this chapter have, may be, or are being violated by one or more named persons together with the facts supporting such determination, the Fair Housing Officer shall, within 30 days of the rendering of such determination, seek a resolution or appoint a Mediator who shall attempt, by means including but not limited to, conference, mediation, conciliation, and/or persuasion, eliminate the alleged discriminatory practice and resolve the remaining issues between the complaint and respondent arising under this chapter or other law. 
(b)  All settlement agreements shall be in writing, filed with the Fair Housing Officer, and otherwise as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  In the event that, in the sole opinion of the Fair Housing Officer or Mediator, efforts at settlement have failed to eliminate the discriminatory practice or other violation alleged by the complainant or efforts at a voluntary mutual resolution of the issues by the complainant and respondent have failed, the Mediator shall promptly issue or cause to be issued a Notice of the Failure to Reach Agreement and serve same upon the complainant, respondent, and Fair Housing Officer. 
(d)  The complainant shall then have not more than 180 days after service of the notice of failure to reach agreement within which to request, in writing filed with the Fair Housing Officer, that the City Attorney review the complaint for the purpose of commencing an ordinance violation forfeiture action against the respondent. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.110), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-31. - Violations; appeals. 
(a)  Within 30 days following the decision, the complainant or respondent may appeal by certiorari to the Circuit Court of Rock County by filing a petition for review. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.115), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-32. - Violations; remedies; penalties. 
(a)  In addition to all other legal and equitable remedies available under this chapter and otherwise at law, the City Attorney may apply for, and any court of competent jurisdiction may issue and order, any and all legal and equitable remedies, orders, and judgments necessary, proper, desirable, or applicable to effectuate the purposes and intent of this chapter, including, but not limited to, enforcement of the settlement agreement, cease and desist orders, injunctive, and/or affirmative action(s) of whatever kind or nature by the respondent. 
(b)  For a first violation within a five year period, in addition to any and all other legal and equitable remedies available under this chapter and otherwise at law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any lawful order issued here under shall forfeit and pay not less than $100.00 nor more than $10,000.00. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  For a second violation within a five year period, in addition to any and all other legal and equitable remedies available under this chapter and otherwise at law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any lawful order issued here under shall forfeit and pay not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $25,000.00. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  For a third and subsequent violation within a seven year period, in addition to any and all other legal and equitable remedies available under this chapter and otherwise at law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any lawful order issued hereunder shall forfeit and pay not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $50,000.00 each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.120), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-33. - Liberal construction; severability. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in order to promote the purposes and provisions contained herein. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are severable and if any provision, sentence, clause, section, or part thereof is held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such illegality, invalidity, unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts of the chapter, or their application to other persons or circumstances. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this chapter would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or inapplicable provision, sentence, clause, section, or part thereof had not been included therein, and if the person or circumstances to which the chapter, or any part thereof, is inapplicable and has been specifically exempted therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.130), 12-9-2019)  
Sec. 18-34. - Cumulative effect. 
This Code is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue. 
(Ord. No. 2019-774, § I(16.04.140), 12-9-2019) 
State Law reference— Local fair housing ordinances, Wis. Stat. § 66.1011; open housing, Wis. Stat. § 160.50.  
Secs. 18-35—18-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOUSING REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-51. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the minimum housing standards code for dwellings and multifamily dwellings, and is referred to in this article as the "Housing Regulations". 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.010)  
Sec. 18-52. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Housing Regulations is to abate environmental pollution caused by deterioration and substandard dwellings, and to protect the occupant's and public's health, safety, and welfare in buildings, and on premises used for dwelling purposes as hereinafter provided by: 
(1)  Establishing minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, cooking, heating and sanitation; for the safety from fire; for safe and sanitary maintenance in all dwellings and multifamily dwellings now in existence, and for perseverance of housing stock and neighborhood appearance. 
(2)  Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators, and occupants of dwellings and multifamily dwellings. 
(3)  Providing for administration, enforcement, and penalties. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.020)  
Sec. 18-53. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(b)  Where terms are not defined in this section and are defined in the Building Code, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them as in the Building Code. Where terms are not defined under the provisions of this article or under the provisions of the Building Code, they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context herein may imply. 
(c)  Whenever the terms "multifamily dwelling," "residence building," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming unit" or "premises" are used in this Housing Regulations, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
Approved, as applied to a material, device or method of construction, means approved by the building official under the provisions of the Housing Regulations, or approved by other authority designated by law to give approval in the matter in question. 
Basement means a portion of the building partly underground, but having less than half its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. (See Cellar.) 
Building Official means the Building Division Director or the Housing Services Director, or their duly authorized representative. 
Cellar means the portion of the building partly underground, having half or more than half of its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
Dormitory means a building arranged or used for lodging for six but not more than 20 individuals, and having common toilet and bathroom facilities. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities. 
Exterior property areas means the open space on the premises, and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping, or any other approved pest elimination methods. 
Family means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption living as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, including foster children, domestic servants, and not more than four roomers. (Section 42-134) in accordance with HUD 24 CFR 5.403. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Gross floor area means the total area of all habitable space in a building or structure. 
Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space arranged for living, eating, and sleeping purposes (not including bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways, and other accessory floor spaces). 
Hotel means a building arranged or used for sheltering, sleeping, or feeding, for compensation, of more than 20 individuals. 
Infestation means the presence, within or contiguous to a multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse, rooming unit, or premises, of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests. 
Multifamily dwelling means a building containing more than two dwelling units. 
Occupant means any person (including the owner or operator) living and sleeping in a dwelling unit, or having actual possession of the dwelling or rooming unit. 
One-family dwelling means a building containing one dwelling unit with not more than four lodgers or boarders in addition to a family. 
Openable area means that part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation, and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care, or control of a multifamily dwelling or roominghouse, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner means the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate herein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a building, or the duly authorized agent thereof. 
Person means an individual, form, corporation, association or partnership. 
Plumbing or plumbing fixtures means water heating facilities, water pipes, gas pipes, garbage and disposal units, waste lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, or other similarly supplied fixtures, together with all connections of water, gas, sewer, or vent lines. 
Premises means a lot, plot, or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures hereon. 
Residence building means a building in which sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities as a unit are provided, except those buildings classified as institutions under the Building Code. 
Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used, or intended to be used, for living and sleeping but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
Roominghouse, lodginghouse, and boardinghouse mean any residence building, or any part thereof, containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to more than four persons who are not members of the family. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term "rubbish" includes the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust, and other similar material. 
Specified time means a reasonable time period deemed appropriate by the building official to correct the violation. 
Supplied means installed, furnished, or provided by the owner or operator. 
Two-family dwelling is a building containing two dwelling units intended to house one family in each unit. 
Ventilation means the process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 
Mechanical ventilation means ventilation by power-driven devices. 
Natural ventilation means ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks without wind-driven devices. 
Workmanlike state of maintenance or repair, as used in the Housing Regulations, means that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner. 
Yard means an open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building extending along the entire length of a street, or rear or interior lot line. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.030; Ord. No. 82-303 § 1, 1982)  
Sec. 18-54. - Applicability. 
The provisions of the Housing Regulations shall apply to all premises and structures used for human habitation which are substandard with respect to structure, protection against fire hazard, equipment or maintenance, inadequate provisions for light and air, lack of proper heating, unsanitary conditions, and as otherwise may be deemed to constitute a menace to the safety, health, or welfare of their occupants and the public, except as provided in Section 18-59. The existence of such conditions, factors or characteristics adversely affect public safety, health or welfare, and lead to the continuation, extension, and aggravation of urban blight. Adequate protection of the public, therefore, requires the establishment and enforcement of these minimum housing standards. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.040) 
Editor's note— This motion to adopt this amendment includes the City Council's express direction to not apply this article retroactively to dumpsters, fences or paving driveways, except for current violations effective on November 13, 2000.  
Sec. 18-55. - Adoption of Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
(a)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 323 (Heating, ventilating and air conditioning), is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by such Code, regulation or law incorporated hereby by reference is required or prohibited by this article. This section adopts such other Wisconsin Administrative Code as may supersede, supplant or in any way modify, change or add to the Wisconsin Administrative Code as adopted above. 
(b)  Adoption of The International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 or current edition, as from time to time amended or renumbered, is hereby adopted as the Minimum Property Standards Code for all structures and properties in the City of Janesville, Wisconsin. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.045)  
Sec. 18-56. - Movable habitation units; housing regulations compliance. 
All movable units used for human habitation, and the areas, grounds or parcels on which they are located, as provided in Article III of Chapter 20, or such other codes, laws or ordinances of the municipality applicable thereto, shall comply with the requirements of this Housing Regulations, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.050)  
Sec. 18-57. - Premises used for residential purposes; housing regulations compliance. 
Every portion of a building or premises used or intended to be used for residential purposes shall comply with the provisions of the Housing Regulations when compliance has been duly determined to be necessary for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants or the public, irrespective of when such building has been constructed, altered or repaired. Those housing facilities such as hotels and motels serving transient guests only, rest homes, convalescent homes and nursing homes, which housing facilities are controlled by state statutes, are excepted herefrom. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.060)  
Sec. 18-58. - Effect of conflicting ordinances. 
Except as provided in Section 18-59, in any case where a provision of the Housing Regulations is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance or code of this municipality existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which the Housing Regulations is derived, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and health of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of the Housing Regulations is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of this municipality existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which the Housing Regulations is derived, which established a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and health of the people, the provisions of the Housing Regulations shall prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with the Housing Regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.070)  
Sec. 18-59. - Existing buildings; requirements. 
The Housing Regulations establishes minimum requirements for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation, and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration, or use of buildings, equipment, or facilities, except as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.080)  
Sec. 18-60. - Effect on existing remedies. 
Nothing in the Housing Regulations shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the municipality or its officers for demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe, or unsanitary. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.090)  
Sec. 18-61. - Enforcement—Authority; duties; generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Building Official, as defined in Section 18-51, to enforce the provisions of the Housing Regulations as provided in this article. 
(b)  When the Building Official determines that there may be a violation of any provision of this article or a situation which affects the health or safety of the general public, or the occupants of a building, the Building Official shall proceed to take necessary action as provided for in this sections through Section 18-72. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.100; Ord. No. 82-303, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 18-62. - Enforcement—Authority; inspection duties. 
(a)  Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith, under the provisions of the Housing Regulations, shall be the responsibility of the Building Official or his or her designee. Wherever, in the opinion of the Building Official, it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any conditions by any other department, he or she shall arrange for this to be done in such manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders. No order for correction of any violation under the Housing Regulations shall be issued without the approval of the Building Official. It shall be the responsibility of the Building Official, before issuing any such order, to determine that it has the concurrence of other departments or officials of the government concerned with any matter involved in the case in question. 
(b)  When the Building Official determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of any provision of this article may exist or that conditions exist which adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants or the public, he or she may make or cause to be made inspections to determine the conditions of dwellings, multifamily dwellings, dwelling units, roominghouses, rooming units and premises in order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public under the provisions of the Housing Regulations. The Building Official is authorized to enter any dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse, rooming unit or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his or her duties under the Housing Regulations. The owner, operator or occupant of every dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse, rooming unit, premises, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Building Official free access thereto, and to all parts thereof, and to the premises on which it is located at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection. All of the enforcement provisions of the Housing Regulations are subject to the constitutional laws of the United States and the state, and all rights of individuals as defined therein. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.110; Ord. No. 82-303, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 18-63. - Enforcement methods. 
In enforcing the Housing Regulations, the Building Official or any other person authorized to enforce it may do so by condemnation, vacation of building, order to correct violation, abatement, citation procedure, forfeiture action, injunctive relief, or any combination of those remedies. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.130; Ord. No. 82-303, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 18-64. - Vacation of unfit dwellings; procedure. 
(a)  Whenever the Building Official finds that any dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse, rooming unit or premises constitutes a hazard to the safety, health or welfare of the occupants or to the public because it lacks maintenance; or is in disrepair, unsanitary, vermin-infested or rodent-infested; or lacks sanitary facilities or equipment; or otherwise fails to comply with the minimum provisions of the Housing Regulations, but has not yet reached such state of complete disrepair as to be condemned as a dangerous structure as provided in Section 10-241, he or she may declare such building as unfit for human habitation, and order it to be vacated. 
(b)  The order to vacate shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the premises sufficient for identification; 
(2)  An order that the building be vacated by a specified time, and that the building, when vacated, must remain vacant until the provisions of the order are complied with and the order to vacate is withdrawn; 
(3)  Specification of the condition requiring vacation and the City ordinance, regulation or state law which is being violated, and order that the same be corrected, and the chapter and section of the Code under which such order is being issued; 
(4)  A statement of the penalty for defacing or removing the copy of the order; 
(5)  The name of the Building Official ordering vacation and the name of the department issuing the order; 
(6)  The date of service and posting of the order. 
(c)  A copy of the order shall be posted on the premises, and shall be served on the owner and occupants as provided in Section 18-67. 
(d)  When the Building Official is satisfied that the order to correct the hazard or condition has been complied with, he or she shall withdraw the order to vacate, notify the owner in writing, and remove the posted copy. 
(e)  The Building Official shall furnish a copy of all orders to vacate, and notices of withdrawal thereof, to any other official concerned therewith. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the owner of a building to notify the occupants of the withdrawal of any order to vacate issued pursuant to this section. Any damage, loss or injury to either the owner or occupants of a building, structure or premises ordered to be vacated shall not be the responsibility of the City, unless directly caused by the City's negligence. Any damage, loss or injury to either the owner or occupants of a building, structure or premises ordered to be vacated shall be the responsibility of the person who caused the problem requiring vacation or who allowed the problem to exist. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.150; Ord. No. 82-303, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 18-65. - Order to correct violations—Requirements. 
(a)  Where a violation of the Housing Regulations exists which, in the opinion of the Building Official, does not require condemnation or vacation, he or she may order the owner or occupant to correct the violation. 
(b)  The order to correct shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the premises sufficient for identification; 
(2)  An order to correct the violation; 
(3)  Specification of the condition requiring repair or correction, the City ordinance, regulation or state law which is being violated, and the chapter and section of the Code under which such order is being issued; 
(4)  A specified time period in which the condition is to be corrected; 
(5)  The name of the Building Official ordering correction and the name of the department issuing the order; and 
(6)  The date of service of the order. 
(c)  A copy of the order shall be served as provided in Section 18-66 on the owner or occupant being ordered to correct the violation. For informational purposes, a copy of the order shall be sent by regular mail to any owner not being ordered to correct and not being served. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.160; Ord. No. 82-303, § 3(part), 1982; Ord. No. 83-329, § 3, 1983)  
Sec. 18-66. - Order to correct violations—Posting and serving procedures. 
An order required by this article to be served shall be served as follows by delivery to the address via First Class Mail. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.170; Ord. No. 82-303, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 18-67. - Order to correct violations; failure to do so. 
In the event that any order is not promptly complied with, the building official may request the City Attorney to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity against the owner, operator, possessor or other person responsible for the violation, ordering him or her to: 
(1)  Restrain, correct or remove the violation, or refrain from any further execution of work; 
(2)  Restrain or correct the erection, installation, or alteration of such building in violation of the Housing Regulations; 
(3)  Remove work in violation; 
(4)  Prevent the occupancy or use of the building, structure, or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with, the provisions of the Housing Regulations, or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit, or certificate was issued; or 
(5)  Pay forfeiture pursuant to the penalty provisions of the Housing Regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.190; Ord. No. 82-303, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 18-68. - Re-inspection fee. 
A re-inspection fee shall be charged by the City against and paid by the property owner for every violation that is not corrected by the re-inspection date. An additional re-inspection fee shall be charged by the City for each subsequent re-inspection per violation until full compliance is achieved. The re-inspection fee and additional re-inspection fee shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.195)  
Sec. 18-69. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person who wishes to appeal an order to correct or an order to vacate may appeal such denial to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Notice of appeal must be filed with the official from whom the appeal is taken and with the Zoning Board of Appeals in writing within 30 days of the denial of the permit. Action by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be in accordance with Section 42-246 and the rules of procedure of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.200; Ord. No. 82-303, § 3(part), 1982)  
Sec. 18-70. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any provision of the Housing Regulations or any order issued under the provisions of the Housing Regulations shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25.00, nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof shall be committed to the Rock County Jail for a term of not less than five days nor more than 60 days. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate the violations as expeditiously as possible. 
(c)  Each and every day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  The City, in addition to the above penalties, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation, and/or the City Council may revoke any license or permit. 
(e)  If, in any action, a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight, or dereliction of duty on the part of the Building Official constitute a defense. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.210; Ord. No. 82-303, § 3(part), 1982)  
Secs. 18-71—18-102. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 18-103. - Generally. 
The provisions of Sections 18-104 through 18-121 shall govern the minimum conditions of property and buildings to be used for human occupancy. Every building or structure occupied by humans, and the premises on which it stands, shall comply with the conditions prescribed in Sections 18-104 through 18-121 as they may apply thereto. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.220)  
Sec. 18-104. - Exterior property area—Requirements, generally. 
No person shall occupy as owner/occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling unit or premises, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the requirements in Sections 18-105 through 18-109. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.230)  
Sec. 18-105. - Exterior property area—Sanitation. 
Every occupant shall maintain all exterior property areas in a clean and sanitary condition free from accumulations of debris, junk, rubbish or garbage. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.240)  
Sec. 18-106. - Exterior property area—Grading and drainage. 
All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any building or structure located thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.250)  
Sec. 18-107. - Exterior property area—Insect and rodent harborage. 
Every owner and/or occupant of a dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of rodents, vermin, or other pests in all exterior areas of the premises; except that the occupant shall be responsible for such extermination in the exterior areas of the premises in a single-family dwelling. Whenever infestation exists in the shared or public parts of the premises of other than a single-family dwelling, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.260)  
Sec. 18-108. - Exterior property area—Accessory structures. 
All accessory structures, including detached garages, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.270)  
Sec. 18-109. - Exterior property area—Driveways and parking areas. 
All driveways and parking areas shall be maintained in such condition so as to prevent washing of material onto the sidewalk and street. Such areas shall be sufficient in size to park vehicles so as not to be in the sidewalk area. Driveways and parking areas: No vehicle parking is allowed on front or corner side lawns. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.280)  
Sec. 18-110. - Exterior structure—Requirements, generally. 
No person shall occupy as owner/occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling or rooming unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the requirements in Sections 18-111 through 18-114. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.290)  
Sec. 18-111. - Exterior structure—Foundation, wall and roof. 
(a)  Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair, and shall be kept in such condition as to exclude rodents. 
(b)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry the safe design and operating dead and live loads and shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, so as not to be detrimental to public safety and welfare. 
(c)  Exterior walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotted boards or timbers, and any conditions which admit rain or excessive dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. All exterior surface materials, including wood, composition, painted masonry, or metal siding, shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be properly surface coated by paint or other approved protective coating applied in a workmanlike manner when required to prevent deterioration and shall be free from peeling and chips. 
(d)  Roofs and drainage. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and not have defects which might admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the building. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a nuisance to owners or occupants of adjacent premises, or that creates a public nuisance. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.300)  
Sec. 18-112. - Exterior structure—Stairs, porches and railings. 
Stairs and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety as provided in the Building Code, and shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Every outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected as required by the Building Code, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(2)  Every outside stair of more than three risers shall have a handrail. Every handrail and balustrade shall be firmly fastened, and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.310)  
Sec. 18-113. - Exterior structure—Windows, doors and hatchways. 
(a)  Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway shall be substantially tight, and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. 
(b)  Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass windowpanes, or an approved substitute which is without open cracks or holes. 
(c)  Every exterior door, door hinge, and door latch shall be maintained in good condition. 
(d)  Every exterior door, when closed, shall fit reasonably well within its frame. 
(e)  Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible, and to substantially exclude wind from entering the building. 
(f)  Every exit door shall be capable of being easily opened from the inside. 
(g)  Every dwelling unit shall have two safe unobstructed exits as required by the laws of the state and the ordinances of the City. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.320)  
Sec. 18-114. - Exterior structure—Screening. 
Guards and screens shall be supplied for protection against rodents and insects in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every basement or cellar window, when open for ventilation, shall be supplied with a screen, or such other device as will effectively prevent the entrance of rodents. 
(2)  From June 1 to October 15 of each year, every door, window, or other outside opening used in fulfilling ventilation requirements under this article shall be supplied with a screen of not less than 16 mesh per inch. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.330)  
Sec. 18-115. - Interior structure—Requirements, generally. 
No person shall occupy as owner/occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse, rooming unit, or portion thereof, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the requirements in Sections 18-116 through 18-121. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.340)  
Sec. 18-116. - Interior structure—Freedom from dampness. 
Cellars, basements, and crawl spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure, as required by the Building Code. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.350)  
Sec. 18-117. - Interior structure—Structural members. 
The supporting structural members shall be maintained and structurally sound, showing no evidence of deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.360)  
Sec. 18-118. - Interior structure—Stairs and railings. 
(a)  All interior stairs shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair by replacing treads and risers that are broken or rotted. Every inside stair shall be constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of supporting a load as required by the applicable building codes. 
(b)  Every stairwell and every flight of stairs which is more than three risers high shall have handrails or railings located in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code. Every handrail or railing shall be firmly fastened, and must be maintained in good condition. Properly balustraded railings, capable of bearing normally imposed loads as required by the Building Code, shall be placed on the open portions of stairs, balconies, landings, and stairwells. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.370)  
Sec. 18-119. - Interior structure—Bathroom and kitchen floors. 
Every bathroom and kitchen floor in each rental dwelling unit shall have the entire floor surface covered with vinyl floor covering, ceramic tile or other approved material. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.380)  
Sec. 18-120. - Interior structure—Sanitation. 
The interior shall be maintained by the occupant and/or owner in a clean and sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Rubbish, garbage, and other refuse shall be properly kept inside temporary storage facilities as required under Section 18-148. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.390)  
Sec. 18-121. - Interior structure—Insect and rodent harborage. 
(a)  The buildings shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation, and where insects or rodents are found they shall be promptly exterminated by acceptable processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
(b)  The owner of the building shall be responsible for such extermination within the building that is infested. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.400)  
Secs. 18-122—18-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 18-141. - Generally. 
No person shall occupy as owner/occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling unit or rooming unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the requirements in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.410)  
Sec. 18-142. - Sanitary facilities—Equipment; installation and maintenance. 
(a)  All required equipment, and all building space, and parts of every dwelling and multifamily dwelling shall be constructed and maintained so as to properly and safely perform their intended function in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code. 
(b)  All housing facilities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the occupant so as not to breed insects and rodents, or produce dangerous or offensive gases or odors. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.420)  
Sec. 18-143. - Sanitary facilities—Supplied. 
The following minimum sanitary facilities shall be supplied and maintained in a sanitary, and safe working condition. Every dwelling unit shall contain: 
(1)  Within its walls, a room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy and which is equipped with a water closet; 
(2)  A lavatory; 
(3)  A room which affords privacy to a person in said room, and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower; 
(4)  A kitchen sink apart from the lavatory required under Subsection (2) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.430)  
Sec. 18-144. - Plumbing fixtures and systems. 
In buildings and structures used for human habitation, all plumbing fixtures required by this article and all water lines, vents, and drains shall be properly connected to either a public water and sewer system or to an approved water and sewer system. Such plumbing fixtures and systems shall be properly installed, connected and maintained in good working order, and shall be capable of performing the function for which they are designed. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.440)  
Sec. 18-145. - Water heating facilities. 
Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with water heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner, properly maintained, and properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required to be supplied with hot water under Section 18-144. Water heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower, and laundry facility, or other similar units, at a temperature of 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.450)  
Sec. 18-146. - Heating facilities. 
Every dwelling and multifamily dwelling shall have heating facilities, and the owner of the heating facilities shall be required to see that they are properly installed, connected, safely maintained, in good working condition, capable of performing the function for which it was designed in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code, and capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms located therein, to a temperature of at least 67 degrees Fahrenheit with an outside temperature of ten degrees below zero. Where the owner is responsible for maintaining heat, the owner shall maintain such temperature in all habitable rooms including bathrooms and toilet rooms when rented, when outside temperature is not lower than ten degrees below zero. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.460)  
Sec. 18-147. - Electrical systems. 
Where it is found, in the opinion of the Building Official, that the electrical system in a building constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the building by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets or defective fixtures, improper wiring, or deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, he or she shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard, and comply with Housing Regulations requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.470)  
Sec. 18-148. - Garbage and trash storage facilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of the occupant to supply an adequate number of approved containers with covers to hold the accumulation of garbage and trash. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.480)  
Sec. 18-149. - Bathroom or water closet restrictions. 
No bathroom or water closet compartment which is accessory to a dwelling unit shall open directly into, or shall be used in conjunction with, a food store, barbershop or beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's examination or treatment rooms, or similar room used for public purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.490)  
Sec. 18-150. - Light and ventilation. 
No person shall occupy as owner/occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse or rooming unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the light and ventilation requirements in Sections 18-151 through 18-156. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.500)  
Sec. 18-151. - Light requirements—Habitable rooms. 
Every habitable room shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room, except in kitchens or basements when artificial light and mechanical ventilation is provided. Whenever exterior walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room, and such obstructions are located less than three feet from the window, and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court, and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.510)  
Sec. 18-152. - Light requirements—Nonhabitable work space. 
Every laundry, furnace room, and all similar nonhabitable work spaces located in a dwelling or multifamily dwelling should have one supplied electric light fixture available at all times. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.520)  
Sec. 18-153. - Light requirements—Halls and stairways. 
Every hall and inside stairway in every dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall have a minimum of 1.0 watts per square foot. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.530)  
Sec. 18-154. - Electrical outlets required. 
Every habitable room of a dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote outlets, one of which may be a ceiling-type or wall-type electric light fixture. Every hall, bathroom, laundry room, or furnace room shall contain at least one electric light fixture. In every bathroom and laundry room there shall be provided at least one electrical outlet. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.540)  
Sec. 18-155. - Ventilation, habitable rooms. 
Every habitable room shall have at least one window which can be easily opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 25 percent of the minimum window area size required in Section 18-151, except where mechanical ventilation is provided. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.550)  
Sec. 18-156. - Ventilation and light in bathrooms and water closets. 
Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms as required by Sections 18-151 and 18-154, except that no window shall be required in bathrooms or water closet compartments equipped with an approved ventilation system. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.560)  
Sec. 18-157. - Fire prevention requirements. 
No person shall occupy as owner/occupant, or shall let to another for occupancy, any dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse, rooming unit, lodginghouse or lodging unit which does not comply with the applicable provisions of the fire prevention ordinances, or the building ordinances, and the requirements of Sections 18-157 and 18-158 for safety from fire. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.570)  
Sec. 18-158. - Flammable liquids storage prohibited. 
No dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit shall be located within a building containing any establishment handling, dispensing, or storing flammable liquids with a flash point of 110 degrees Fahrenheit or lower. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.580)  
Sec. 18-159. - Food preparation appliances. 
When appliances such as a stove and refrigerator are furnished by the owner, all appliances shall be maintained in proper working condition so as to be free from fire and health hazards. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.590)  
Secs. 18-160—18-186. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ROOMINGHOUSES 
 
Sec. 18-187. - Applicable regulations. 
Every occupant who operates a roominghouse, or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any roominghouse, shall comply with the provisions of every section of the Housing Regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.600)  
Sec. 18-188. - License—Application; fee. 
(a)  No person shall operate a roominghouse with accommodations available or intended for five or more roomers unless he or she holds a valid roominghouse license issued by the City Clerk in the name of the operator, and for the specific dwelling unit. The operator shall apply to the office of the Building Official for a permit for a license, which shall be issued by the City Clerk upon compliance by the operator, to the satisfaction of the Building Official, with the applicable provisions of this article. This license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the roominghouse at all times. No such license shall be transferable. Every person holding such a license shall give notice in writing to the office of the City Clerk and the Building Official within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in, or control of any roominghouse. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such roominghouse. 
(b)  The annual fee for said license shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and shall run from July 1 to June 30. There shall be no proration of said fee for any shorter term. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.610; Ord. No. 2017-705, § VIII, 11-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 2018-742, § IX, 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 18-189. - License—Appeal on denial. 
Any person whose application for a permit to obtain a license to operate a roominghouse has been denied may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter under the procedure provided by Section 18-71. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.620)  
Sec. 18-190. - Notice of violations; correction or suspension procedure. 
Whenever, upon inspection of any roominghouse, the Building Official finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this article, the Building Official shall give notice in writing to the operator of such roominghouse that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined by the Building Official, the operator's roominghouse license will be suspended. At the end of such period, the Building Official shall reinspect such roominghouse. If he or she finds that such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he or she shall give notice in writing to the operator that the latter's license has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such operator shall immediately cease operation of such roominghouse, and no person shall occupy for sleeping or living purposes any rooming unit therein. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.630)  
Sec. 18-191. - License suspension; appeal. 
Any person whose license to operate a roominghouse has been suspended, or who has received notice from the Building Official that his or her license is to be suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his or her roominghouse are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Zoning Board of Appeals, under the procedure provided by Section 42-246. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.640)  
Sec. 18-192. - Water closet, hand lavatory, and bath facilities. 
At least one water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower properly connected to an approved water and sewer system, and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a roominghouse, wherever said facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located within the residence building served, affording privacy from the habitable rooms, and shall be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway, and shall be not more than one story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar, unless the rooming unit is in the cellar. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.650)  
Sec. 18-193. - Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. 
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.660)  
Sec. 18-194. - Bed linen and towels. 
The operator of every roominghouse shall change supplied linen and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.670)  
Sec. 18-195. - Shades and draperies. 
Every window of every rooming unit shall be supplied with shades, drawn drapes, or other devices or material which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the occupant of the rooming unit. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.680)  
Sec. 18-196. - Sanitary maintenance. 
The operator of every roominghouse shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the roominghouse. He or she shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the roominghouse is contained is leased or occupied by the operator. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.690)  
Secs. 18-197—18-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANTS 
 
Sec. 18-216. - Generally. 
Occupants of dwellings, multifamily dwellings, and dwelling units, and owners or operators of roominghouses shall be responsible for maintenance thereof as provided in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.700)  
Sec. 18-217. - Sanitary condition. 
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep that part of the dwelling unit, and premises thereof which he or she occupies, controls, or uses, in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.710)  
Sec. 18-218. - Rubbish disposal. 
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all his or her rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in rubbish containers. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.720)  
Sec. 18-219. - Garbage disposal. 
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of his or her garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities, or by placing it in tight garbage storage containers as required by Section 30-8. These containers are to be supplied as provided in Section 18-148. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.730)  
Sec. 18-220. - Plumbing fixtures; use and operation. 
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep the plumbing fixtures therein clean and sanitary, and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and operation. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.740)  
Secs. 18-221—18-248. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RAZING OF BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 18-249. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building Official means the Building Director or his or her designee. 
Major buildings means a building or structure having occupiable space of over 20,000 square feet commercial/industrial that had a principal commercial/industrial use as its most recent use allowed by law, which principal use has ceased. 
Minor buildings means a building or structure having occupiable space of under 20,000 square feet that had a principal residential/commercial/industrial use as its most recent use allowed by law, which principle use has ceased. 
Razing of buildings means demolishing and removing the building and restoring the site to a dust-free and erosion-free condition. 
(Code 1976, § 15.08.010)  
Sec. 18-250. - Permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No person, firm, or corporation shall raze or cause to be razed any building, structure, or part thereof without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official. 
(b)  Permit application. The owner of the building to be razed shall sign the permit application. In the alternative, an agent for the owner may sign the permit application upon providing written authorization verifying the permission of the owner to apply for the permit. The Building Official may require additional information and other state or local permits as required by law, rule, or regulation. 
(c)  Fees. Permit fees shall be established from time to time by the City Council. 
(d)  Permit conditions. All permits shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A Notice of Demolition DNR form #4500-113 must be completed and provided to the Building Official for all commercial buildings or residential buildings of five or more dwelling units if asbestos is being removed prior to demolition. An asbestos containing material (ACM) inspection will be completed by a certified asbestos inspector separate from and prior to work under a demolition permit. All asbestos containing materials which require removal prior to razing will be removed from the building by a certified asbestos abatement contractor separate from and prior to the start of work under a demolition permit. Proof of DNR approval must be submitted prior to issuance of a demolition permit. 
(2)  Every person filing an application for a permit for the demolition of a major building or structure shall file with the Building Official such application a detailed plan indicating the manner in which the building or structure is to be demolished, the time schedule for all phases of the demolition work, a disposal plan for debris. The plan shall also address noise, dust, debris transport, hours of work, and protection of excavated or hazardous areas and disposal areas. 
(3)  The razing of a building shall be completed within 60 days after the date the permit was issued. The Building Official may, at his or her discretion, extend the permit for cause. Cause shall mean the inability of the permittee to act due to circumstances beyond permittee's reasonable control upon the exercise of due diligence. 
(4)  Work done under a demolition permit is subject to inspection by the Building Official who shall have the authority to order corrective work. Failure to follow the orders of the Building Official, or to complete the raze in accordance with this Code, shall give the Building Official authority to seek restitution from any required bond. If no bond, the cost thereof shall be assessed against the property as a special charge and added to the next tax roll against such property. 
(5)  Whenever a building or structure has been razed, the foundation thereof, if any, shall be leveled to at least one foot below grade. The basement and other openings shall be filled to grade with sand, limestone, or other fill approved by the Building Official. No combustible material may be used for the fill material. The excavation must be filled to grade within a period of 60 days from the date the permit to raze had been issued, unless within that time actual new construction has been commenced on the site. If such excavation has not been filled, construction commenced, or an extension granted by the Building Official within the 60-day period of time, it shall be the duty of the Building Official to have the excavation filled and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the property as a special charge and added to the next tax roll against such property. 
(6)  Remaining slabs and private sidewalks shall be removed from the site by the permittee prior to final approval. 
(7)  Whenever a building or structure has been razed, the site shall be graded with a minimum of six inches of topsoil, with seed and mulch or sod applied to cover the entire disturbed area. 
(e)  Major buildings. Additional condition of issuance by the Building Official of the permit for major buildings: 
(1)  The applicant/permittee shall post with the City Clerk-Treasurer a surety bond payable to the City of Janesville in a form approved by the City Attorney in the amount of the actual cost of the permitted work. Such bond shall guarantee that all work is performed in accordance with this Code and other state and local laws, rules, and regulations, hold the City harmless from any costs and expenses arising from the permitted work, and secure timely performance of the work. The City may reasonably require a bond of a greater amount, on a case-by-case basis, where deemed necessary, to protect the City. In extraordinary circumstances, the City Council may allow for an alternate form of security in an amount deemed reasonably necessary and sufficient. The bond shall be made payable to the City of Janesville upon demand unless all work is timely completed by the permittee. 
(2)  The permittee shall have the responsibility at all times to obtain, pay for, and maintain policies of insurance in the following minimum amounts, naming the City of Janesville as an additional and/or co-insured for all entities or natural persons doing work upon the property, building, and/or structure, or associated with the work under the permit, and shall maintain on file with the City Clerk-Treasurer current certificate of insurance for same: 
a.  Commercial general liability: 
1.  General aggregate: $2,000,000.00. 
2.  Each occurrence $1,000,000.00. 
b.  Automobile liability (owned, non-owned, leased): 
1.  Bodily injury: $1,000,000.00 each occurrence. 
2.  Property damage: $1,000,000.00 each occurrence. 
c.  Pollution legal liability: $5,000,000.00 each loss where asbestos removal, environmental process, abatement, remediation, or dumping/disposal in a federal or state regulated facility is required. 
d.  Workers' compensation: Statutory limits. 
e.  Umbrella liability: $2,000,000.00 over the primary Commercial General Liability and Automobile Liability insurance coverages listed above. 
(3)  Every person filing an application for a permit for the demolition of a major building or structure shall file with the Building Official such application a detailed plan indicating the manner in which the building or structure is to be demolished, the time schedule for all phases of the demolition work, a disposal plan for debris. The plan shall also address noise, dust, debris transport, hours of work, and protection of excavated or hazardous areas and disposal areas. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.020)  
Sec. 18-251. - Operating requirements. 
The following general operating requirements shall apply to all permittees or those working for a permittee subject to terms of the permit in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Demolition contractor shall notify all utilities for proper disconnections. 
(2)  The owner of each adjacent building shall be legally notified of the proposed wrecking so that proper precautionary and protective measures can be arranged and made, and that proper arrangements have been made by the wrecker or adjacent owner of by both parties to treat the resulting exposed portion of each adjacent building aesthetically so that such exposed portion will not present an eyesore to the public spectacle. 
(3)  Demolition contractor is responsible for permanent compliant capping and inspection of all sewer and water laterals as determined by the Building Official. 
(4)  Any underground storage tanks shall be removed in accordance with Fire Department Regulations and other applicable regulations. 
(5)  Any well must be capped and abandoned with DNR approval. The DNR abandonment form must be submitted to the water utility. 
(6)  Demolition contractor is responsible for payment of repairs for any excavation in the right-of-way for this project. 
(7)  Demolition contractor shall replace all public sidewalk, curb, gutter, street, or utility damaged during the demolition. 
(8)  The building and premises shall, at all times, be maintained in as clean, neat, and sanitary of a condition as such premises will reasonably permit, in the sole opinion of the Building Official and/or his or her designee. 
(9)  No basement or excavation hole will remain exposed overnight without proper barricading or fencing. 
(10)  Work done under this permit is subject to inspection and approved by the Building Official and/or his or her designee. 
(11)  No scrap salvage or debris which is temporarily stored on the premises shall be allowed to rest or protrude over any public street, walkway, terrace, other public property, or curb, or become scattered about or blown off the premises, or become a nuisance or hazard of any kind. 
(12)  All demolition work shall be watered down during the demolition. 
(13)  In cases where a building or structure to be razed lies in a business or industrial zone and is not more than five feet from a sidewalk, all necessary precautions such as barricades, railings, wall, light, etc., shall be taken to safeguard and protect any persons or property on or adjacent to such sidewalks. All existing and adjoining public and private property shall be protected from damage incidental to the razing operations. 
(14)  The permit holder shall dispose of building and structure debris in a licensed landfill, except for salvaged materials. 
(15)  The permit holder must meet standards, pursuant of Article I of Chapter 30, as from time to time amended and/or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.030)  
Sec. 18-252. - Inspections. 
Permit holders and property owners shall permit authorized representatives of any department official, or employee of the City having enforcement powers to inspect, from time to time and at any time, the premises permitted and those proposed to be permitted, with or without advance notice, as often as may be required to permit said departments, the Building Official, and/or his or her designee to perform his or her and/or their duties to facilitate compliance with the permittee's requirements under this article, without first obtaining a special inspection warrant. The unreasonable or unexcused failure and/or refusal by any person to permit such inspection shall be grounds for permit denial, suspension, revocation, enforcement, the imposition of fee penalties, the imposition of other penalties, the issuance and execution of a special inspection warrant, and/or such other relief as provided in law and equity, all such remedies being cumulative and not exclusive in favor of the City, its Building Official, and/or his or her designee. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.040)  
Sec. 18-253. - Enforcement. 
The Building Director and/or his or her designee shall have the primary responsibility to enforce this article. Enforcement authority is as set forth in Article VII of Chapter 10. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.050)  
Sec. 18-254. - Penalty; relief. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit prior to commencement of work will result in a penalty of $100.00 or double the permit fee, whichever is greater, but in no event shall the penalty exceed $2,000.00. Such penalty shall be paid in addition to the customary permit fee. 
(b)  A re-inspection fee shall be charged by the City against and paid by the property owner if the violation is not corrected by the re-inspection date. The re-inspection fee will be charged for each subsequent re-inspection until full compliance is achieved. Re-inspection fees that are not timely paid shall be entered upon the tax roll as a special charge against the lot or parcel of land, pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0627, as from time to time amended or renumbered. The re-inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(c)  Additional penalties, remedies, and relief for violations hereof are as set forth in Article VII of Chapter 10, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(d)  All double and other permit fees, re-inspection fees, relief, remedies, penalties, and enforcement set forth in this article, in Article VII of Chapter 10, and/or at law or equity are cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Code 1976, § 16.08.060)  
Chapter 20 - MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER CAMPS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE PARKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authorizing of city to license and regulate manufactured and mobile home communities, Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. 
 
Sec. 20-19. - State statutes adopted. 
The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(1) to (8), and definitions therein, are adopted by reference. 
(Code 1976, § 5.60.010)  
Sec. 20-20. - Nonexemptions; parking fees. 
There is imposed on each occupied, nonexempt mobile home located in the City a monthly parking fee as determined in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(3). Said fees shall be paid to the City Treasurer on or before the tenth day of the month for which such fees are due. 
(Code 1976, § 5.60.020)  
Sec. 20-21. - License; required; application; fee; expiration date; statutory Code compliance; preliminary and final plans; processing fee. 
It is unlawful for any person to establish or operate, upon property owned or controlled by him or her said person within the City, a mobile home park without having first secured a license therefor from the City Clerk. The application for such annual license shall be accompanied by a fee for each space in the existing or proposed park. The application license fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. The license year shall be from July 1 to June 30. The license shall expire each year on June 30. There is no proration of a license fee for a period less than one year. Such parks shall comply with Wisconsin Administrative Code H 77, which is adopted by reference. The applications for preliminary and final plans must be accompanied by a processing fee, each. The processing fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5.60.030)  
Sec. 20-22. - Nonexemptions—Inform City Clerk and Assessor of additional homes; form. 
Licenses of mobile home parks and owners of land on which are parked any occupied nonexempt mobile homes shall furnish information to the City Clerk and City Assessor on such homes added to their park or land within five days after arrival of such home on forms furnished by the City Clerk in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(3)(c) and (e). 
(Code 1976, § 5.60.040)  
Sec. 20-23. - Nonexemptions—Parked outside of mobile home park; fees remitted when; licensee's responsibility to collect fees. 
Occupants or owners of nonexempt mobile homes parked outside of a mobile home park shall remit such fees directly to the City Treasurer as provided in Section 20-20. It shall be the full and complete responsibility of the licensee of a mobile home park to collect such fees from each occupied, nonexempt mobile home therein and to remit such fees to the City Treasurer as provided in Section 20-20. 
(Code 1976, § 5.60.050)  
Sec. 20-24. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 together with the costs of prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment of such forfeiture and costs, but not less than five days nor exceeding 30 days; provided that the maximum forfeiture for violation of Section 20-22 shall be $25.00 or five days. 
(Code 1976, § 5.60.070)  
Secs. 20-25—20-53. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME COURTS AND TRAVEL TRAILER CAMPS 
 
Sec. 20-54. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare by establishing minimum standards and requirements governing the construction, operation, maintenance, and regulation of mobile home courts and travel trailer camps within the City. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.010)  
Sec. 20-55. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means detached structures and buildings such as tool sheds, garages, and/or storage buildings. 
Building Official means the official designated by the City Manager to enforce and administer this chapter, or his or her duly authorized representative. 
Camp means a travel trailer camp. 
Court means a mobile home court. 
Hard surface means concrete or asphalt concrete, or similar material acceptable to the City Engineer. 
Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a court or camp under the provisions of this article. 
Mobile home means a detached single-family dwelling unit that can be transported after fabrication for long-term occupancy, and containing the same plumbing and electrical connections as immobile housing. 
Mobile home court means any plot of ground upon which self-contained mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
Mobile home lot means a parcel of land designated for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home. 
Mobile home stand means that part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures, or additions. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation. 
Service building means a building housing toilet and bathing facilities for men and women, and may also include laundry facilities and other facilities as required by this article. 
Travel trailer means a vehicular portable structure designated as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use. Such travel trailer shall not exceed eight feet in width. The definition of the term "travel trailer" includes motor homes. 
Travel trailer camp means any plot of ground upon which two or more travel trailers are occupied for temporary dwelling regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.020)  
Sec. 20-56. - Article conformance. 
Every mobile home court and every travel trailer camp built or added to after December 1, 1972, or the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, whichever is earliest, shall conform to and be governed by the provisions of this article. Every mobile home court developed and governed by this chapter shall first be zoned as a planned development district. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.030)  
Sec. 20-57. - Classification. 
(a)  Classification shall be of two types: 
(1)  Mobile home courts; and 
(2)  Travel trailer camps. 
(b)  It is unlawful to permit a mobile home or travel trailer to be located in a court or camp unless it is placed in a designated stand in a licensed court or camp. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.040)  
Sec. 20-58. - Parking lot requirements. 
(a)  Only one mobile home or travel trailer shall be placed on a lot, except that an unoccupied travel trailer may be parked behind the setback line of the owner's yard to the rear of the principal building, unless otherwise approved in the planned development district plan. 
(b)  Each mobile home and travel trailer lot shall abut upon a roadway within an approved court or camp. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.050)  
Sec. 20-59. - Nonresidential uses. 
No part of any court or camp shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses as are required for the direct servicing and well-being of court or camp residents, and for the management and maintenance of the court or camp as approved by the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.060)  
Sec. 20-60. - Signs permitted; exceptions; regulation compliance. 
(a)  No signs shall be permitted except the following: 
(1)  One non-flashing identification sign stating only the name of the court or camp, and the services available may be permitted, provided the sign does not project into the public way. 
(2)  Any necessary regulatory signs such as street name signs, and entrance and exit signs, etc., may be permitted. 
(b)  Signs and their installation shall comply with all other applicable codes and regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.070)  
Sec. 20-61. - License—Required; granted when; requirements. 
(a)  No person shall construct, expand, or operate a mobile home court or travel trailer camp within the City, unless he or she holds a valid license issued annually by the City Clerk. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling a mobile home court in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article may apply for and receive an annual license for his or her existing court or camp by complying with Section 20-68. 
(c)  The City Clerk shall issue an initial license only after the following actions have taken place: 
(1)  The land has been zoned as a planned development district allowing mobile homes and travel trailers; 
(2)  Final development plans which meet the standards of Sections 20-70 and 20-96 through 20-100 have been approved by the City Council, and recorded with the county register of deeds; 
(3)  The applicant completes an application form and submits it to the City Clerk, together with the required license fee; and 
(4)  The City Council approves the license. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.080)  
Sec. 20-62. - License—Fees and expiration date. 
(a)  The fees and expiration date for mobile home court and travel trailer camp license (according to Wis. Stats. § 66.058) shall be as follows: on a date and in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(b)  Expiration. All such licenses are to expire on June 30 of each year, and shall be renewed annually. There shall be no proration of fees. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.090)  
Sec. 20-63. - Initial license; application; fee. 
Application for an initial license shall be made to the City Clerk on an initial license application form. Such application form shall be for the preliminary development plan, the general development plan, the planned development district, and the initial license. Fees are required prior to taking action on each of the approval steps listed in Sections 20-64 through 20-67. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.100)  
Sec. 20-64. - Preliminary development plan; application approval procedure. 
The applicant shall apply for preliminary development plan approval and rezoning to a planned development district to the secretary of the Plan Commission. Such applicant shall submit six copies of the preliminary development accompanied with a review fee. The review fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time. Such preliminary development plan shall be drawn on a topographic map with a scale of at least one inch equal to 200 feet, showing four-foot contours, the area, location and proposed layout of lots, roadways, buffer strips and park areas. Approval by the Plan Commission shall be in concept only which will enable the applicant to prepare the general development plan. The applicant shall have the option of obtaining from the City Council approval in concept of the preliminary development plan after approval is given by the Land Commission. If no favorable approval is given by the City Council, the applicant shall revise the plan accordingly, and resubmit the plan to the Plan Commission. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.110)  
Sec. 20-65. - General development plan—Review fee; information required; hearing. 
(a)  Upon approval by the Plan Commission of the preliminary development plan, the applicant shall submit to the Plan Commission a review fee, and six copies of the general development plan, which shall include: 
(1)  Three prints of a certified survey of the subdivision plat of the property showing existing features of the property; 
(2)  A complete plan of the court drawn to a scale of not less than 80 feet per inch; 
(3)  The number, location, and dimensions of all mobile home or travel trailer lots; 
(4)  The location and width of roadways, walkways, easements, setback lines, planting strips and recreation areas; 
(5)  The location of automobile parking areas and service buildings, if provided; 
(6)  The location and size of utility service lines for water, storm and sanitary sewers, electrical, telephone, fuel, and, if provided, cable television service; 
(7)  Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the court or camp, including a typical detailed sketch of a mobile home or travel trailer lot. 
(b)  The review fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(c)  Upon submission of a general development plan to the Plan Commission, the Commission shall set a public hearing on the general development plan and planned development district, and after hearing any interested party, any staff report, recommendation or information, the Plan Commission shall make a recommendation and report to the City Council concerning such general development plan after taking into consideration the following: 
(1)  That the uses, values, and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood, for purposes already permitted, shall be in no foreseeable manner substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance or operation of the intended court or camp; 
(2)  That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and other necessary site improvements have been or are being provided; 
(3)  That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public street. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.120)  
Sec. 20-66. - General development plan—Adoption; regulation compliance; issuance. 
(a)  After receiving the general development plan, and the recommendation and report from the Plan Commission, the City Council may adopt an ordinance after a public hearing, zoning the land covered by the general development plan as a planned development district, and thereafter grant the initial license. 
(b)  The City Council shall review the general development plan considering the factors outlined in Section 20-65. Any ordinance passed under this section zoning any land as a planned development district shall refer to the general development plan submitted by the applicant, may contain any specific terms, conditions or limitations concerning the land zoned by the ordinance, and shall not be published until the requirements of Section 20-67 have been complied with. Such permit shall not be issued until the requirements of Section 20-67 have been fulfilled, after which the City Clerk is authorized to issue an initial license after the required fee is submitted as required in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.130)  
Sec. 20-67. - Land and easements to the City. 
Upon passage of an ordinance by the City Council, as set out in Section 20-66(a), the owners of the land shall cause to be recorded with the county register of deeds a certified survey or plat (according to Wis. Stats. ch. 236) of the gross land area, deeding to the City those lands and easements called for in the plans submitted to the City Plan Commission, and containing a statement that the land is to be developed pursuant to a planned development district ordinance passed by the City Council. Upon proof of such recording being submitted to the City Clerk, the Clerk shall issue the initial license allowing said owners or their successors to develop said land according to the ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 20-66(a), and the general development plan. Construction, pursuant to such permit, must commence within one year of the date of the license or the license shall become null and void. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.140)  
Sec. 20-68. - License—Annual; application; fee. 
The applicant shall make application to the City, and the annual license shall be approved by the City Council. The application for such annual license shall be accompanied by a fee of in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time for each lot or space in the existing or proposed park. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.150)  
Sec. 20-69. - License—Transfer; fee. 
A transfer of license application shall be applied for and approved by the City Council in the same manner as for a renewal license. The fee for such transfer license shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.160)  
Sec. 20-70. - Licensee; duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the license holder to file with the City Clerk a monthly report containing the following information on a form sheet: 
(1)  Name of mobile home court, name and address of owner, agent or operator; 
(2)  A tabulation of mobile home court occupancy, listing lot designation, occupants' names, monthly tax, and date of departure or arrival. 
(b)  Within five days of the arrival of each new mobile home occupant, the operator shall submit, in duplicate, to the City Assessor, Form 130-2 of the Wisconsin Department of Revenue, entitled "Statement of Monthly Parking Permit Fee—Mobile Home." 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.170)  
Sec. 20-71. - Court and camp size. 
Court and camp size shall be as follows: 
	Minimum Acreage 	Maximum Density of Court 
Mobile home courts 	15 acres 	7.0 units per gross land acre 
Travel trailer camps 	10 acres 	9.0 units per gross land acre 
 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.180)  
Sec. 20-72. - Minimum number of mobile home lots. 
There shall be a minimum of 50 mobile home lots completed and ready for occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.190)  
Sec. 20-73. - Length of mobile home occupancy. 
No lot shall be rented for residential use of a mobile home in any such mobile home court, except for periods of 30 days or more. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.200)  
Sec. 20-74. - Code standards; mobile home compliance. 
No mobile home shall be admitted to any mobile home court unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of American Standards Association Code Provision A-119.1—1963; American Standards for Installation in Mobile Homes of Electrical, Heating, and Plumbing Systems; M.H.M.A. (Mobile Homes Manufacturer's Association) Mobile Home Standards for Plumbing, Heating and Electrical Systems. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.210)  
Sec. 20-75. - Minimum lot width and setback standards. 
Minimum lot width and setback standards shall be as follows: 
Setback Standards 	Mobile Home Courts 
	Mobile Home 	Accessory
Structures 	Travel Trailers 
Front setback 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	5 ft. 
Side setback 	8 ft. 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 
Rear setback 	8 ft. 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 
Corner street side yard 	8 ft. 	8 ft. 	5 ft. 
Yard abutting open areas 	8 ft. 	8 ft. 	— 
From any public street 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	— 
Minimum lot width (except irregularly shaped lots may be approved with lesser frontage where necessary) 	50 ft. 	— 	30 ft. 
Minimum lot area 	5,000 sq. ft. 	— 	— 
 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.220)  
Sec. 20-76. - Parking requirements. 
(a)  At least two off-street hard-surfaced parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home lot. The size of each space must be at least nine feet by 20 feet. 
(b)  At least one off-street parking space shall be provided on or for each travel trailer lot. 
(c)  Street parking on both sides of the street shall be permitted if the roadway width is at least 36 feet. Street parking shall be permitted on one designated side only if the roadway width is at least 30 feet. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.230)  
Sec. 20-77. - Screening requirements. 
There shall be provided a screening buffer strip along the boundary of the mobile home court or travel trailer camp where it abuts a residence district. Such screening shall be at least five feet in width and five feet in height. Such strip shall be a densely planted hedge or shrubbery so as to effectively cause a visual barrier, and still allow a breeze to pass. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.240)  
Sec. 20-78. - Recreation requirements. 
Recreation facilities such as playgrounds, swimming pools, or tot lots shall be provided to meet the needs of the clientele the court is designed to serve. Not less than ten percent of the total across-court area shall be devoted to recreational facilities and open space. Recreational facilities shall be convenient to the project center. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.250)  
Sec. 20-79. - Tenant storage. 
(a)  One storage to a mobile home will be permitted on a mobile home lot, provided that the storage building does not exceed 80 square feet and does not exceed eight feet in height. Such storage building shall be fully enclosed and located on the mobile home lot. 
(b)  A storage building may be 81 to 120 square feet, provided the mobile home court owner or management approves and delivers written permission along with a building permit application to the Public Works, Building Division. Said accessory building may be no taller than the roof peak height of the mobile home being served or 12 feet, whichever is less. The structure's interior sidewall may not exceed eight feet in height. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.260)  
Sec. 20-80. - Fuel supply. 
All fuel shall be distributed to individual lots by an underground distribution system from a common underground fuel storage facility installed in conformity with the rules and regulations of the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations of Wisconsin. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.270)  
Sec. 20-81. - Additions and alterations; permit required. 
A permit issued by the Building Official shall be required before any construction on a mobile home lot, or any structural addition or alteration to the exterior of a mobile home. No permit is required for addition of stops, awnings, skirting, windows, doors, or tenant storage structures as defined in Section 20-79. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.280)  
Sec. 20-82. - Size of mobile home expansion. 
No addition to a mobile home shall be greater than the area in square feet of the existing mobile home. No addition or alteration to the mobile home shall exceed, in height, the height of the existing mobile home, and shall be a factory-built addition. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.290)  
Sec. 20-83. - Mobile home to conform to setbacks. 
Any addition to a mobile home shall be deemed a part of the mobile home, and shall have the same setbacks as the existing mobile home. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.300)  
Sec. 20-84. - Skirting required. 
Vented skirting of mobile homes is required. Areas enclosed by such skirting shall be maintained so as not to provide a harborage for rodents, or create a fire hazard. It is recommended that insulation be provided inside the skirting to prevent the freezing of pipes. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.310)  
Sec. 20-85. - Utilities; generally. 
Utilities shall be installed underground, and shall meet the requirements of City ordinances, and state statutes and codes. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.320)  
Sec. 20-86. - Electrical requirements. 
(a)  Each mobile home and travel trailer lot shall be connected to the court or camp electrical wiring system by underground cable, and by approved receptacle, disconnecting means, and overcurrent protective equipment. The minimum service per each mobile home lot shall be 120/240 volts alternating current, 100 amperes. 
(b)  Adequate lights shall be provided in mobile home courts and travel trailer camps to illuminate streets, driveways, and walkways, for the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. A minimum of one footcandle shall be provided for safe pedestrian and vehicle movement. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.330)  
Sec. 20-87. - Sewer service requirements. 
(a)  All mobile home courts shall be served by a public sewer. Each mobile home lot shall be equipped with at least a three-inch sewer connection so located as to provide a suitable connection from the home with a continuous grade, not subject to surface drainage. 
(b)  Travel trailer courts shall provide facilities for the disposal of sanitary wastes as set forth in state administrative standards. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.340)  
Sec. 20-88. - Water supply. 
(a)  City water shall be provided by a separate lateral at each mobile home lot. 
(b)  Travel trailers shall be served by the City water system where possible. Provisions shall be made to supply water within 50 feet of each travel trailer lot. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.350)  
Sec. 20-89. - Fire hydrant placement. 
Fire hydrants shall be located within 500 feet of any mobile home or service building. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.360)  
Sec. 20-90. - Mobile home stand, patio and tie-down requirements. 
(a)  A mobile home stand shall be a continuous four-inch concrete single slab, or an approved alternate to support the mobile home. 
(b)  The mobile home stand shall be provided with six anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete dead man eyelets embedded in concrete foundations, or arrowhead anchors, or other devices securing the mobile home. Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at least at each corner of the mobile home stand, and at the middle of each side, and each shall be able to sustain a minimum tensile strength of 2,800 pounds. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.370)  
Sec. 20-91. - Roadways. 
Roadways shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All roadways created by a mobile home court shall be hard surfaced as specified by the City Engineer. 
(2)  The minimum pavement width of roadways shall be 30 feet. The minimum pavement diameter of cul-de-sacs shall be 40 feet. 
(3)  The alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography, to safe movement of types of traffic anticipated, and to satisfactory control of surface water and groundwater. 
(4)  The names of roadways within the court shall not duplicate the names of streets within the City, or its extra-territorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.380)  
Sec. 20-92. - Lot markers. 
The limits of each mobile home and travel trailer lot shall be clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stakes, markers, or other suitable means. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.390)  
Sec. 20-93. - Fences and hedges. 
Fences and hedges may be permitted in a mobile home court or travel trailer camp, provided they do not exceed a height of three feet in the front yard or corner side yard, and six feet in height in all other yards. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.400)  
Sec. 20-94. - Garbage and rubbish disposal. 
Garbage and rubbish shall be stored in flytight, watertight, approved containers, effectively screened from view in a manner approved by the City. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.410)  
Sec. 20-95. - Service building for travel trailer camps required. 
There shall be at least one service building in any travel trailer camp to provide sanitation and laundry facilities. The requirements for service buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Service buildings, easily accessible to all travel trailer lots, shall be made or permanent construction in accordance with City and state codes. The service building shall be well ventilated with screened openings. The building shall maintain a minimum temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit whenever the camp is open for business. 
(2)  Plumbing and electrical facilities in service buildings shall be as set forth in the state administrative standards. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.420)  
Sec. 20-96. - Restrictions on mobile home occupancy. 
No mobile home shall be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is properly placed on a mobile home lot in a mobile home court and connected to water, sewer, electrical and other utilities, and complies with all provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.430)  
Sec. 20-97. - Emergency order declared; procedure. 
Whenever the Code Official finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety, and, or welfare, he or she may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency, and requiring that such action be taken as he or she may deem necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the license. Said order shall be in writing, shall be notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, and shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, or be subject to Section 20-100. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.440)  
Sec. 20-98. - Enforcement authority. 
It shall be the responsibility of the Building Official to enforce the provisions of this chapter by authorizing and directing inspections to be made of all mobile home courts and travel trailer camps. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.450)  
Sec. 20-99. - Violations—Notice. 
Whenever the Building Official determines that violations of pertinent regulations exist, he or she shall notify the licensee or permittee of such alleged violations. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the violations, enumerated; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires, but not to exceed 90 days. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.460)  
Sec. 20-100. - Violations—License revocation. 
Upon failure to comply with the violation notice provided for in Section 20-99, or upon complaint by any citizen of the City, the license for such court or camp is subject to revocation by the City Council, as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(1) to (8), unless the alleged violation is corrected within the period specified by the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 16.12.470) 

Chapter 22 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to prohibit nauseous, offensive or unwholesome businesses, Wis. Stats. § 66.0415; human health hazards, generally. Wis. Stats. § 254.55 et seq.; power of municipality to abate and remove any human health hazard, Wis. Stats. § 254.58; nuisances, generally, Wis. Stats. § 823.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Filth and unwholesome substances prohibited; premises to be kept sanitary; owner or occupant's responsibility. 
No person shall place on premises under their control or leave exposed on such premises any carcass, carrion, vegetable or putrescent and unwholesome substance; no person shall place, have or permit on such premises any accumulation or existence of filth such as to endanger the health of any person. All premises within the City shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and free from all filth or source, or probable source, of disease. The owner and occupant of any premises shall be jointly and severally liable for the enforcement of this regulation and for any violation thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 8.60.010)  
Sec. 22-2. - Inspections for violations. 
The City Manager, the Chief of Police, any member of the Police Department, Neighborhood and Community Services Director, Housing Services Director, Building Director, and/or the Property Maintenance Inspector or any of their designees shall have authority to enter in and upon and to inspect any and all premises within the City at reasonable hours to ascertain whether any person or persons have violated any provisions of this chapter, consistent with federal and state laws. 
(Code 1976, § 8.60.030)  
Sec. 22-3. - Re-inspection fee. 
A re-inspection fee shall be charged by the City against and paid by the property owner if the violation is not corrected by the re-inspection date. Each subsequent re-inspection will also be charged until full compliance is achieved. The re-inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 8.60.032)  
Sec. 22-4. - Abatement of disease-producing premises. 
If the Property Maintenance Inspector, in his or her judgment, determines that any violation of Section 22-1 constitutes a source or probable source of disease, he or she shall have authority to order the owner or occupant of the premises to remove and abate such nuisance within such time as he or she determines to be reasonable under the circumstances. If such owner or occupant neglects or refuses to comply with such order, the Property Maintenance Inspector shall order the removal and abatement of the nuisance and the cost thereof shall be charged to the property and shall be entered on the next tax roll, together with interest thereon as provided by law as a special tax against the property, and furthermore, the person or persons so neglecting or refusing to obey such order shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 22-12. 
(Code 1976, § 8.60.040)  
Sec. 22-5. - Rubbish, trash and debris—Prohibited; premises to be cleaned when. 
(a)  The accumulation of interior furniture and accessories, refrigerators, washing machines, stoves, wood, brick, cement blocks, or other unsightly debris such as may tend to depreciate property values in the area or create an attractive nuisance or hazard, or other nuisance shall not be allowed on any lot or parcel of land within the City limits except as allowed by permit, under Article II of Chapter 12, or except where such materials are properly housed and out of public view. 
(b)  When the person in charge of any property is in violation of this section, the Neighborhood and Community Services Director, Housing Services Director, Building Director, or the Property Maintenance Inspector shall have the authority to order the premises cleaned, placed in order, and made sightly within a reasonable length of time, as specified in the order. 
(Code 1976, § 8.60.050)  
Sec. 22-6. - Rubbish, trash and debris—Additional regulations. 
The regulations of Section 22-5 shall be in addition to the provisions of Sections 16-191, 22-4, Article XIII of Chapter 12, and Section 18-65. 
(Code 1976, § 8.60.070)  
Sec. 22-7. - Particulate matter restrictions. 
No person, firm or corporation shall construct, maintain or operate any business, plant or equipment so as to cause, permit or allow dust, coal dust, sand, cement, or other material or articles to be blown or carried into the air in such a manner so as to create a nuisance at any time to any other person, resident, business or industry located in the City. 
(Code 1976, § 8.60.100)  
Sec. 22-8. - Carnival regulations. 
(a)  No carnival, except those consisting exclusively of rides and/or games of skill only and/or of refreshment stands, shall be allowed within the City. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall set up, operate or maintain any carnival prohibited by Subsection (a) of this section. This section shall in no way authorize any exhibits, entertainments, games, shows, or any stands of any kind prohibited by statute or ordinance. 
(c)  No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain in connection with a carnival of any kind any mechanical device creating noise or music or amplifying the human voice in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance under all the circumstances, times of operation, and location of the setup. 
(Code 1976, § 8.60.110)  
Sec. 22-9. - Graffiti; prohibition. 
The existence of graffiti on any real property within the City, without express permission of the owner, is declared to be a public nuisance as it affects public health, safety and welfare. Graffiti shall be removed by the property owner or by the City at the property owner's expense. The Neighborhood and Community Services Director, Housing Services Director, Building Director, Property Maintenance Inspector or any of their designees, shall order graffiti removed by the property owner within a time certain. Upon the failure of the property owner to comply with the order issued by the department, the Director may cause the graffiti to be removed. A statement of the costs shall be filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer, and any and all costs thereof shall be charged against the property, shall be a lien upon the real estate, and shall be assessed and collected as a special charge. 
(Code 1976, § 8.60.130)  
Sec. 22-10. - Storage of firewood and any other wood outdoors on private property. 
Any stack of firewood or other cut timbers must be stored at least six inches off the ground and no more than six feet high on all properties within the City. The stack must be not less than two feet from lot lines and not less than 25 feet from the street. No more than three cords of wood, per lot, may be stored at any time. This section is intended to reduce the potential for creating a fire hazard and avoid attracting pests. 
(Code 1976, § 8.60.140)  
Sec. 22-11. - Application of nuisance regulations to all properties in the City. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all properties, including, but not limited to, residential, residential rental, business, office, commercial and industrial in the City unless specific exception is granted in another section or chapter of the Code of General Ordinances. 
(b)  It is the City Council's express direction to not apply this section retroactively to dumpsters, fences or paving driveways, except for current violations effective November 13, 2000. 
(Code 1976, § 8.60.160)  
Sec. 22-12. - Violations; remedies; injunctive and other relief. 
(a)  Violations of any of the provisions set forth in Article I of this chapter shall be immediately, fully and timely remedied, removed, terminated and/or abated by the property owners or by the City at the property owner's expense, once a property owner is ordered by the City to eliminate the violation within a certain time. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender to immediately cease, terminate, eliminate, remove and abate each violation and nuisance but in no event longer than the time set forth in any City order. 
(c)  Any person who violates any of the above provisions of this chapter shall forfeit and pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for each offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned in the county jail not less than five days nor more than 60 days and/or such failure shall be addressed as provided or allowed by law and/or ordered by the court. 
(d)  Each and every day that a violation occurs, continues and/or remains present constitutes a separate offense. 
(e)  The City, in addition to the imposition of the penalties found in this chapter, as from time to time amended or renumbered, may institute and the court may grant and order injunction, mandamus, abatement and/or any and all other appropriate legal and/or equitable relief, judgment, order, award, action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate, terminate, cease and/or remove the violation and/or nuisance. 
(f)  If an inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists within the City and that there is great and immediate danger to the public safety, the Neighborhood and Community Services Director, Housing Services Director, Building Director, Property Maintenance Inspector or any of their designees may direct the proper officer to immediately order and cause the same to be abated. 
(g)  If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private property but that the nature of such nuisance is not so as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public safety, he or she shall serve a written notice and order on the offender and/or property owner causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance to abate, cease and/or remove the same within a specified time period. If such nuisance is not fully terminated and/or removed or abated within the time period specified in the order, the proper officer shall cause the nuisance to be abated or removed by the City. If the nuisance described in the notice reoccurs within 12 months, no further notice need be provided and the proper officer shall cause the nuisance to be removed as provided in Subsection (e) of this section. 
(h)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, any forfeiture or other penalty for the violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may seek and the court may impose and/or provide injunctive and other equitable and/or legal relief in favor of the City and against the violator and/or the property owner. 
(i)  All legal and equitable rights and remedies afforded the City under this chapter and otherwise at law or in equity are cumulative and not exclusive. 
(j)  In addition to any forfeiture, prosecution, equitable and/or other relief imposed and/or afforded concurrently under this chapter or otherwise at law, the City may also concurrently recover the costs, fees and expenses of all re-inspections for City incurred nuisance and of all abatement, termination and removal activities against the offender and/or the property owner, and upon the offender's and/or property owner's failure to pay such costs, fees and expenses the same may be placed and recovered by the City as a special charge against the property. 
(k)  Any offender or property owner against whom enforcement is sought by the City and/or against whom an order or notice to correct is issued by the City under this chapter may appeal the order, notice, summary nuisance abatement, costs, fees or expenses arising from and/or imposed by this chapter against the offender and/or property owner directly to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 calendar days of the issuance of such order, notice and/or happening of such event. The appeal shall be in writing, signed by the offender and/or property owner, shall be filed with the City Clerk's office, and shall state with particularity the nature of the order, notice, charge, and/or cost, the nature of the relief sought and the reason for the requested relief. No appeal shall be valid, heard or acted upon unless the person appealing from at the time of filing his or her written appeal pays to the City the filing fee required for appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals set forth in Section 42-46. The Administrative right of appeal shall not apply to any legal or equitable enforcement of relief action commenced by the City in Circuit Court, such being solely and exclusively the domain and jurisdiction of the circuit court where the rules of civil procedure shall govern in all instances. 
(Code 1976, § 8.60.170)  
Secs. 22-13—22-44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AIR POLLUTION 
 
Sec. 22-45. - Smoke emissions declared nuisance; exceptions. 
(a)  The emission or discharge into the open air, within the City limits, of any dense smoke or soot of a degree of density of No. 3 on the Ringlemann Chart, or greater, from any chimney, stack or furnace, is a public nuisance, and the same is prohibited, except as provided in Subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  It is provided that nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the emitting of such smoke for a period of not to exceed a total of eight minutes in any one hour; except that it will be permissible, when cleaning a fire box or furnace, to emit smoke of a density equal to No. 3 of the Ringlemann Chart, or greater, for not more than 12 consecutive minutes once in any 12-hour period. When building a new fire, such smoke may be emitted for a period of 30 consecutive minutes, except that no single unit shall be permitted this 30-minute exemption more than once in any 24-hour period. 
(c)  No person, firm, or corporation shall emit, or cause to permit to be emitted into the open air dense smoke in violation of this section. 
(d)  The Ringlemann Chart, as adopted by the Bureau of Mines of the United States Government, is adopted as a measure of smoke density. 
(Code 1976, § 8.04.010)  
Sec. 22-46. - Testing procedures; corrective programs; health Commissioner participation. 
The Commissioner of Health, or the official designated by the City Council to carry out those responsibilities, shall be empowered to inaugurate testing procedures necessary to determine local air pollution problem areas, and to activate programs designed to effectively diminish or correct the violation, and to effectuate all state and federal programs and cooperate and participate in such federal and state programs as may be enacted. 
(Code 1976, § 8.04.020)  
Sec. 22-47. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of Sections 22-45 and 22-46 shall pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for each offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned in the county jail not less than five days nor more than 60 days. Each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 8.04.030)  
Sec. 22-48. - Offensive odors—Prohibited; declared nuisance. 
No person, firm or corporation shall, within the City limits or within one mile of its boundaries, conduct any industrial activity or business or maintain any conditions which create an offensive odor as defined in Section 22-49. Any further such activity, condition or business is strictly prohibited and a public nuisance. 
(Code 1976, § 8.04.040)  
Sec. 22-49. - Offensive odor—Defined. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Offensive odor, as used in this article, means an odor which is: 
(1)  Offensive, repugnant or nauseous to human beings; 
(2)  In an area within the City zoned as R-l or R-2, of such a strength that when diluted by seven parts of odor-free air to one part odorous air, the odor is still detectable; in all other areas covered by this article an odor of such strength that, when it is diluted by 15 parts odor-free air to one part of odorous air, the odor is still detectable; 
(3)  Detectable as set out in Subsection (a) of this section no closer to the source of the odor than the property line of; 
(4)  Detectable as set out in Subsection (b) of this section on two different occasions at least 15 minutes apart on the same day. 
(Code 1976, § 8.04.050)  
Sec. 22-50. - Offensive odor—Measurement device. 
The scentometer or an equivalent instrument shall be considered an acceptable device for the measurement of the strength of odor as set out in Section 22-49(2). 
(Code 1976, § 8.04.060)  
Sec. 22-51. - Violation; defense. 
The establishment by any person, firm or corporation of the following facts shall operate as a defense to any prosecution for violation of Sections 22-48 through 22-50: That there existed on the alleged date of violation fewer than 25 residential units within one-half mile of the source of the odor. 
(Code 1976, § 8.04.070)  
Sec. 22-52. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or participates in a violation of Sections 22-48 through 22-51 shall forfeit to the City a sum of money in the amount of not less than $25.00 nor more than $300.00 plus the costs of prosecution, and shall suffer, in default of such payment, imprisonment in the county jail for not less than five days nor more than 60 days, unless the forfeiture and costs are paid sooner. It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate the violation as expeditiously as possible. Each day that such violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 8.04.080)  
Secs. 22-53—22-77. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ANTI-LITTER REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 22-78. - Littering unlawful when; violation; penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful to throw, drop, or deposit any cans, bottles, paper, or any other trash, debris, or waste matter upon any street, sidewalk, park, or in any swimming beach, pond, stream, river, or upon any private property without the permission of the owner or occupant of the property. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense. In default of the payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days in the county jail. 
(Code 1976, § 8.08.010; Ord. No. 75-446, § 1, 1975)  
Sec. 22-79. - Prohibitions; exception. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by his or her agent, employee or servant, to cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit in any manner in or upon any public way or other public place in the City, or any river, canal, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin within the jurisdiction of the City, any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste article, thing or substance whatsoever, whether liquid or solid. Nor shall any person, firm or corporation cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit any of the aforementioned items anywhere within the jurisdiction of the City in such manner that it may be carried or deposited in whole or in part, by the action of the sun, wind, rain or snow, into any of the aforementioned places. Tree leaves are excepted from this section. 
(Code 1976, § 8.08.020)  
Sec. 22-80. - Vehicle hauling litter to be covered; exceptions. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by his or her agent, employee or servant, to use any vehicle to haul any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste article or thing or substance, whether liquid or solid, unless such vehicles covered to prevent any part of its load from spilling or dropping at all times while such vehicle is in motion on any street or alley in the municipality. The vehicle shall be covered at all times, except while actually being loaded or unloaded; provided, however, that the requirements in this section for covering such vehicles shall not apply to vehicles carrying brush cuttings, tree trimmings, branches, logs, and similar waste materials, if such matter is securely lashed to such vehicle to prevent spilling or dropping. 
(Code 1976, § 8.08.030)  
Sec. 22-81. - Covered containers required when. 
All retail, wholesale, manufacturing or any other business operation located within an area zoned as a limited shopping No. 1, limited shopping No. 2, business, or industrial district must provide covered containers tightly secured for the depositing of rubbish or other waste outside a building. The covering for the container must be secured to prevent a wind of 35 miles per hour or under from dislodging the cover from such container. 
(Code 1976, § 8.08.040)  
Sec. 22-82. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of Sections 22-79 through 22-81 shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense. In default of the payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not less than five days nor more than 30 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1976, § 8.08.050)  
Secs. 22-83—22-107. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BURIALS 
 
Sec. 22-108. - Generally. 
No dead body of a person shall be buried or permanently kept in any vault or other receptacle for the dead within the City, except in such cemeteries as are now in use and are regularly incorporated cemetery associations or in such cemeteries as shall be regularly incorporated in the future. 
(Code 1976, § 8.16.010)  
Sec. 22-109. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not to exceed $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for each offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days. Each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 8.16.020)  
Secs. 22-110—22-131. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DUTCH ELM, EMERALD ASH BORER AND OTHER DISEASED, INFESTED, INFECTED, DAMAGED AND/OR UNSAFE TREES 
 
Sec. 22-132. - Findings; public policy; proactive plan. 
(a)  Diseased, infected, infested, damaged, and unsafe trees within the City of Janesville are a public concern. 
(b)  The health of the trees in the City is threatened by shade tree pests, and the loss or ill health of trees growing upon public and private property substantially depreciates the value of property within the City and impairs the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. 
(c)  The provisions set forth in this article are adopted as an effort to control and prevent the spread of these shade tree pests. 
(d)  Proactive actions are an inherent opportunity and privilege of local government to act before crises overwhelms. It is hereby determined by the City Council of the City to be in the best interests and benefit of the City, its taxpayers, residents, public, and public and private property to take immediate, proactive steps concerning any and all elm, ash, and other diseased, infected, infested, or damaged trees of whatever kind or nature so as to minimize the harmful, damaging, and negative direct and indirect effects caused by such trees, conditions, events, and foreseeable probable and ultimately actual eventualities. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.001; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-133. - Declared a public nuisance. 
(a)  The City Council, having previously determined that the health of elm trees and now that of ash trees, and potentially other trees within the City have been, is, are, and potentially may be threatened by, and/or suffer one or more serious fatal diseases, infections, infestations, damage, and/or conditions, declare that diseased, infected, and/or unsafe elm, ash, and other trees, and parts thereof, constitute a serious and imminent public health, welfare, and safety hazard, and that such diseased, infested, damaged, unsafe, and/or dangerous trees, and parts thereof, are public nuisances. Included in, but not limited to, such determinations, scope, and applicability of this article are: 
(1)  Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected with the Dutch elm disease fungus or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichh.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh); 
(2)  Any living or standing ash tree or part thereof Fraxinus, a genus of flowering plants in the olive and lilac family, Oleaceae, containing approximately 45 to 65 species of usually medium to large trees, mostly deciduous though a few subtropical species are evergreen, infected with or which harbors the emerald ash borer; 
(3)  Any dead, infected, or diseased elm, ash, or other tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood, or other material from which the bark and/or other tree parts have not been removed and burned, or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle or emerald ash borer, or other insect, as applicable, destroying insecticide. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. The City shall have control of all street trees, shrubs, and other plantings now or hereafter in any street, park, public right-of-way or easement, or other public place within the City limits, and shall have the power to plant, care for, maintain, remove, and replace such trees, shrubs, and other plantings. The City shall have control to remove such trees, shrubs, and other plantings on any private place within the City limits. 
(c)  Declaration of a shade tree pest. The City Council, by this article, declares any and all vertebrates or invertebrate animals, plant pathogens, or plants in the community threatening to cause significant damage to a shade tree or community forest to be a pest and prescribe control measures to effectively eradicate, control, and/or manage the shade tree pests, including, but not limited to, necessary timelines and responsibilities for private property owners and public powers necessary and convenient for the public good order, health, welfare, peace, and safety. All of these powers and reasons are incorporated herein as if fully set forth verbatim. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.010; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-134. - Nuisance; prohibited. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall permit any public nuisance, as defined in Section 22-133 and/or otherwise in this article, to remain on any premises owned, leased, rented, otherwise possessed, or controlled by such person within the City. The public nuisance may be remediated, removed, and/or abated as provided in this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot or parcel of land in the City to possess, permit, or maintain on any such lot or parcel of land any ash, elm, or other species of tree, or parts thereof, which is a public nuisance. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every real property owner to promptly remove and properly dispose of any such trees, and parts thereof, constituting a public nuisance and/or as otherwise prohibited by any provision of this article, and/or as determined or directed by the City Forester. 
(d)  Every property owner, at all times, shall fully and timely comply with all other related county, state, and federal tree laws and regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.020; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-135. - Entering upon private property; testing; removal of tree samples. 
In order to carry out the public health, welfare, and safety purposes, goals, and plans of this article and to implement the enforcement thereof, the City Forester, and/or any person acting in behalf of the City Forester, is hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon any public or private lot or parcel of land in the City at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting any ash, elm, and other trees and/or parts thereof, situated thereon, for purposes of tree inspection, testing, sampling, sample removal, remediation, removal, abatement, and all other activities permitted by this article. No additional consent from the property owner and/or possession is necessary. No person may hinder, obstruct, or prevent the City Forester or any person acting on behalf of the City Forester from entering upon, reasonably remaining, testing, sampling, or engaging in other permitted activities set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.030; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-136. - Remediation, removal, and abatement. 
In abating the public nuisance under this article, the organism, condition, plant, tree, wood, or material identified as injurious to the health of shade trees shall be removed or effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of the shade tree pest. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.040; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-137. - Reporting discovery of shade tree pest. 
Any owner, tenant, lessee, possessor, or occupier of land or property, or any person engaged in tree trimming or removal, who knows or becomes aware of the existence of a public nuisance caused by a shade tree pest, infection, disease, or damage shall report the same to the City Forester. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.050; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-138. - Board of Park Commissioners' duties; exercised by Council. 
Any and all duties and powers provided by law to any commission, board, committee, officer, or official by Wisconsin law are hereby vested in and may be exercised by the City Council of the City. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.060; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-139. - City Forester; to inspect when. 
(a)  The City may retain the services of one or more persons and/or other entities to act in the capacity of the City Forester. 
(b)  The City Forester, and person acting on behalf of the City Forester, shall inspect or cause to be inspected all outdoor public and private premises and places within the City at least twice each year commencing forthwith to determine whether any public nuisance, as defined in Section 22-133 and/or otherwise in this article, exists thereon, and shall also inspect or cause to be inspected any elm, ash, and/or other tree reported or suspected to be infected with the Dutch elm disease, emerald ash borer, or other disease or insect, or which is suspected to be dangerous, unsafe, a hazard, or a public nuisance. Such inspection shall include bark bearing material, branches, logs, and other tree parts. 
(c)  The City Forester, and all person acting on behalf of the City Forester, shall document each inspection by location, tree, date, time, place, inspector, all findings and determinations, and all removal and other abatement actions taken, ordered, or directed. 
(d)  The City Forester and all person acting on behalf of the City Forester is/are authorized to enforce or cause to be enforced the provisions of this chapter, the tasks incident to this chapter, and incident such any program adopted by the Council. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.070; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-140. - Nuisance—Abatement. 
(a)  If the City Forester determines with ordinary certainty that any public nuisance, as defined in Section 22-133 exists in or upon any public street, alley, park, or other public place, including the terrace strip between curb and lot line within the City, and/or upon any private property or premises, and that the removal shall be in the public interest, the City Forester and/or others acting on behalf of the City Forester shall cause it to be removed in an expeditious manner, burned, or otherwise properly disposed, and/or otherwise fully abate public nuisance in such manner as the City Forester determines to be in the public interest of health, welfare, and safety. 
(b)  The cost of such removal and other abatement activities shall be paid by the property owner, regardless of tenancy or possession, and shall be a lien upon such real property until paid and/or disposed as otherwise provided by law, no further action of the City Council being necessary in this regard. The owner of the property upon which a nuisance has been remediated, removed, or abated by the City Forester shall be personally liable to the City for the cost and expense to the City of the abatement, including, but not limited to, contracted services and administrative costs. As soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare an invoice for the costs as they arise and mail it to the owner. Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall invoice the property owner prior to placing any unpaid amounts upon the tax rolls for collection or recovery as a special charge for municipal public services. 
(c)  The City Forester, and others acting on his or her behalf, may, but is not required to, provide notice, directive, and/or order to the affected property owner, possessor, or other person prior to taking or ordering removal, abatement, remediation, and/or other actions permitted under this article. 
(d)  The City Forester may permit the property owner to attempt remediation, removal, and/or abatement action separate from those determined, required, and/or ordered by the City Forester or others acting on his or her behalf, upon such terms, conditions, requirements, standards, time frame, directives, conditions, inspections, costs, fees, and permits as the City Forester and/or others acting on behalf of the City Forester may from time to time determine, require, or order. If the agreed upon private remediation, abatement, removal, or other control measures, conditions, or requirements are not timely, fully, or otherwise satisfied with by the property owner, the City Forester or designated person shall have the authority to enter the property and carry out abatement in accordance with the requirements of the City Forester. 
(e)  Each property owner shall timely and fully comply with any and all directive, requirement, and/or orders of the City Forester and others acting on behalf of the City Forester. Failure, neglect, and/or refusal by any owner to do so shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. Each day's failure, neglect, and/or refusal to comply shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(f)  All remediation, removal, and abatement activities by a property owner and/or possessor shall be the sole cost and expense of the property owner and/or possessor. 
(g)  The City shall not be responsible for, nor shall the City award or pay to any person, any monies or other reimbursement for the destruction, diminution, or loss value of the tree, wood, or parts thereof removed, remediated, damaged, or abated, or any other incidental costs or amounts, such as decline in the fair market value of the property as a result of the City's directives, requirements, determinations, or orders. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.080; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-141. - Nuisance—Appeal hearing; Council decision. 
Notwithstanding any other ordinance or statute to the contrary, only an affected property owner, upon whose real property the affected tree is rooted, may appeal any decision, determination, direction, requirement, and/or order (action) of the City Forester or other persons acting on behalf of the City Forester may appeal such action, and then only to the City Council. Such appeal must be filed within ten days of the action, shall be in writing, signed by the property owner, and shall state with particularity the details of the situation, the relief sought, and the reasons for the relief sought. The City Clerk shall schedule a hearing on such appeal before the City Council. A majority vote of all elected members of the Council shall govern. Tie votes shall constitute affirmation of the City Forester's Action. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.090; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-142. - Laboratory analysis. 
The City Forester, at any time and in his or her sole determination and discretion, may subject specimens of any tree wood, or part thereof to competent laboratory analysis. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.100; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-143. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Dormancy subsection repealed 10-22-2012.  
Sec. 22-144. - Removal as funds are available. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, removal, remediation, and/or abatement by the City and/or City Forester and others acting on behalf of the City Forester and/or City of such nuisance trees, wood, or parts thereof need only be done as far as practically possible within the limits of funds actually appropriated and/or borrowed for such purpose by the City Council, and actually available. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.120; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-145. - Spraying, generally. 
The City may chemically treat elm, ash, and other nuisance trees within the City with one or more elm, ash, and other concentrate and/or substances, which tree are located upon the terrace strip between the curb and lot line, upon public property, and upon private property, as well. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.130; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-146. - Stump removal procedure and service charge; no removal of diseased or infected tree or parts. 
(a)  The property owner shall remove or cause to be removed the tree stump, the cost of which shall be paid by the property owner. 
(b)  The property owner shall not be required to remove such stump after the bark has been removed and the stump treated, or the property owner may remove the stump after the bark has been removed and the stump treated without reference to the City. The property owner shall, at his or her own sole cost and expense, remove, haul away, and dispose of the removed tree stump, and parts thereof. If the owner and/or property possessor fails, neglects, and/or refuses to timely do so, the City may do so or cause that such work be performed by others, and invoice the property owner for the same, recovering non-payment as a lien and special charge against the affected real property in the manner provided by law for recovery by placement upon the property tax roll. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.140; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-147. - Interference with City Forester and others acting on behalf of the City Forester prohibited. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall prevent, delay, obstruct, prevent, or interfere with the City Forester or any of his or her agents, employees, or others acting on behalf of the City Forester while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.150; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-148. - Severability. 
Should any part or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part held to be invalid. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.160; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Sec. 22-149. - Violation; penalty; relief. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit and pay to the City not less than $100.00 nor more than $10,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(b)  Each day's continuance, default, failure, neglect, or refusal by a property owner to fully and timely comply with any provision of this article and/or any directive, requirement, determination, or order of the City Forester or anyone acting on behalf of the City Forester constitutes a separate violation. 
(c)  In default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, the violator shall be subject to the remedies provided by law. 
(d)  Any other provisions, payments, invoicing, liens, and costs recovery set forth in this article are in addition to and not in lieu of enforcement and/or this subsection, and vice versa. 
(e)  All remedies and relief in this article and at all are cumulative and not exclusive. 
(f)  The failure or neglect of any officer or employee of the City to perform any official duty imposed by this article shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation. 
(g)  In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any person, firm, or corporation fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any provision set forth in this article or order of the City Forester or any person acting on behalf of the City Forester, the City Attorney, City Manager, or City Council may institute appropriate proceedings at law and/or at equity to restrain, correct, or abate the violation. 
(Code 1976, § 8.20.170; Ord. No. 2018-714, § I, 3-26-2018 )  
Secs. 22-150—22-166. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INCIDENT RESPONSE REIMBURSEMENT 
 
Sec. 22-167. - Prohibited discharges. 
No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or cause to be discharged, leaked, leached or spilled upon any public or private street, alley, public or private property, or onto the groundwaters, surface waters, subsurface waters, or aquifers, or within the City, except those areas specifically licensed for waste disposal or landfill activities and to receive such materials, any explosive, flammable or combustible solid liquid or gas, as defined in Sections 101.(14) and 104(a)(2) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) or 40 CRF 261.3, 49 CFR 171.8, or 49 CFR 172.101 and appendices, as from time to time amended. 
(Code 1976, § 8.38.010)  
Sec. 22-168. - Containment, cleanup and restoration. 
Any person, firm or corporation in violation of the above section, upon direction of the Fire Chief or his or her authorized representative, shall begin immediate actions to contain, cleanup and remove to an approved repository the offending material and restore the site to its original condition, with the offending persons, firms and corporations being jointly and severally responsible for any and all costs, fees, and expenses directly and/or indirectly arising and/or incurred from such discharge, leak, leach, or spill, and the containment, cleanup, removal, and storage thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 8.38.020)  
Sec. 22-169. - City may take remedial action. 
In the event any person, firm or corporation fails to engage the necessary men and equipment to comply with or to complete the requirements of this section, the Fire Chief or his or her authorized representative may order or arrange for the required actions to be taken by public or private resources and jointly or severally recover from the responsible parties any and all costs, fees, and expenses thus directly and/or indirectly incurred. 
(Code 1976, § 8.38.030)  
Sec. 22-170. - Emergency services response. 
(a)  Emergency services response includes, but is not limited to, fire service, emergency medical service, law enforcement. 
(b)  Every person, firm, or corporation who possesses or controls a hazardous substance which is discharged or who causes the discharge of a hazardous substance shall be responsible for reimbursement to the responding agencies for all direct and indirect expenses, costs, and fees incurred in carrying out their duties under this article. 
(c)  Such direct and indirect expenses, costs, and fees include, but are not limited to, storage, deposit, manpower, replacement of equipment damaged by the hazardous material, cleaning, decontamination and maintenance of the equipment specific to the incident, costs incurred in the procurement and use of specialized equipment specific to the incident, specific laboratory expenses incurred in the recognition and identification of hazardous substances in the evaluation of response, decontamination, clean up and medical surveillance, incurred costs in future medical surveillance of response personnel as required by the responding agencies medical advisor, and direct damage to public and private property. 
(Code 1976, § 8.38.040)  
Sec. 22-171. - Site access. 
Access to any site, public or private, where a prohibited discharge is indicated or suspected, shall be provided to the Fire Chief and his or her authorized representative, including, but not limited to, other City officers, officials, employees, and their authorized agents and representatives both public and private for all purposes in the ascertaining, clean-up, removal, transport, storage, and other remedies. 
(Code 1976, § 8.38.050)  
Sec. 22-172. - Public protection. 
Should any prohibited discharge occur that, in the sole discretion of the Fire Chief or his or her authorized representative, imminently threatens or may tend to threaten the life, safety or health of the public or property at, near, or around the hazardous situation or discharge, the Fire Chief or his or her authorized representative on the scene of the emergency may order an evacuation of the area and take such other action as is necessary or appropriate to ensure the health, welfare, and safety of persons and property. 
(Code 1976, § 8.38.060)  
Sec. 22-173. - Civil liability. 
In addition to forfeiture and injunctive liability arising from violation of any provision of this or any other article of this Code, each and every person, firm or corporation so in violation shall be jointly and severally liable to the City of Janesville for any and all costs, fees, expenses, damages, and losses directly and/or indirectly arising from and/or incurred by the City. 
(Code 1976, § 8.38.070)  
Sec. 22-174. - Sanitary sewerage discharges; exemption. 
The provisions of this article do not apply to discharges to the City sanitary sewerage systems which are governed by state law and other ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 8.38.080)  
Sec. 22-175. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation in violation of this section shall forfeit amounts and be jointly and severally subject to the other penalties and injunctive relief set forth in Section 16-136. 
(Code 1976, § 8.38.090)  
Secs. 22-176—22-203. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - NOXIOUS WEEDS, GARDENING, NATURAL LANDSCAPING AND COMPOSTING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-739 , § II, adopted January 14, 2019, amended the title of ch. 8.56 to read as herein setout. Former ch. 8.56 was entitled Noxious Weeds and Natural Landscaping. 
 
Sec. 22-204. - Abatement. 
(a)  No person shall permit the growth of noxious weeds on any property in the City which is owned, occupied, rented, leased or controlled by that person. In addition to the state statute definition for noxious weeds (Wis. Stats. § 66.0407) and Invasive Species (Wis. Stats. § 23.22) noxious weeds shall include, but is not limited to, the following list of species: 
(1)  Buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica). 
(2)  Bull Thistle (Cirsium vulgare). 
(3)  Burdock (Arctium minus). 
(4)  Canada Thistle (Cirsium arvense). 
(5)  Dame's Rocket (Hesperis matronalis). 
(6)  Field Bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis). 
(7)  Garlic Mustard (Alliaria petiolata). 
(8)  Goatsbeard (Tragopogon pratensis). 
(9)  Leafy Spurge (Euphorbia esula). 
(10)  Marijuana (Cannabis sativa). 
(11)  Musk Thistle (Carduus nutans). 
(12)  Nettle (Urtica dioica). 
(13)  Oxeye Daisy (Chrysanthemum leucanthemum). 
(14)  Pigweed (Chenopodium album). 
(15)  Purple Loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria). 
(16)  Quackgrass (Agropyron repens). 
(17)  Ragweed (Ambrosia spp.). 
(18)  Snapdragon (Chaenorhinum minus). 
(19)  Sow Thistle (Sonchus oleraceus). 
(20)  Sweet Clover (Melilotus officinalis). 
(21)  Wild Morning Glory (Convolvulus arvensis). 
(22)  Wild Mustard (Synapis arvensis). 
(23)  Yellow Rocket (Barbarea vulgaris). 
(24)  Yellow Dock (Rumex crispus). 
(b)  In addition, all other weeds and grasses over 12 inches in height are defined as noxious weeds except agricultural crops for harvest and natural vegetations planted in compliance with Section 22-207. 
(Code 1976, § 8.56.010; Ord. No. 2019-749, § II(8.56.010), 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-205. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garden plant means a variety of plants purposefully grown for human consumption or enjoyment, including flowers, herbs, vegetables and fruits. Note: Maize (corn) is not considered a garden plant for residential lots in the City of Janesville. 
Managed means planned and designed control, direction, and maintenance of the growth of natural vegetation and the detention and infiltration of stormwater runoff in a natural landscape and/or garden area. 
Natural landscaping means any landscaping technique in a yard or on a development site that preserves or uses primarily native vegetation in a design intended to exhibit the character and spirit of nature by arrangement of the plants and drainage patterns similar to the arrangements of natural prairie, woodland, or wetland plant communities and drainage. 
Noxious weed means especially difficult to manage weeds. The term "weeds" means plants growing where they are not wanted. These typically are invasive species that may be difficult to control, or may be health hazard to humans or stock animals or wildlife, or may be otherwise detrimental to an environment. They also include those weeds enumerated in Section 22-204. 
Rain garden means shallow depressions (three to 12 inches deep) planted with native wildflowers and other plants that soak up rainwater or melted snow from rooftops, driveways and lawns. Water is captured in a garden and slowly filters into the ground rather than the storm sewer. 
Turf grass means grass commonly used in regularly-cut lawns or play areas, such as, but not limited to, bluegrass, fescue, and ryegrass blends. 
Yard perimeter clearance means the area of front, side, and rear setback as measured from the property line. 
(Code 1976, § 8.56.020; Ord. No. 2019-749, § II(8.56.020), 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-206. - Requirements for gardening. 
(a)  Yard perimeter clearance. All gardens must be located outside the yard perimeter clearance. The yard clearance shall be a minimum of two feet from front, rear, and side property lines. No clearance is required where garden areas abut a fence or similar barrier separating it from adjoining residential areas. 
(b)  Neglect. Gardens shall remain managed and free of noxious weeds. 
(c)  Restrictions. 
(1)  The planting of maize (corn) is prohibited in the front setback and corner side building setback areas, as defined in Chapter 42 for residential lots. 
(2)  All gardens located in the front setback or corner side setback of a corner lot must comply with the regulations for vision of traffic set forth in Section 42-357. 
(3)  Plantings which have a screening effect may not be taller than 30 inches in height when located within the front and corner side setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 2019-749, § II(8.56.025), 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-207. - Requirements for natural landscaping. 
(a)  Purpose. It shall be lawful to grow native and beneficial plants, including, but not limited to, ferns, grasses, forbs, aquatic plants, trees and shrubs in a landscape when these plants were not obtained in violation of local, state, or federal laws. The growth of native grasses or sedges within a natural landscaping area including yards, retention/detention areas, and rain gardens on private property shall be maintained in good order and free of noxious weeds. 
(b)  Requirements for natural landscaping. 
(1)  Yard neglect. Natural landscaping on residential properties shall remain clearly managed and free of noxious weeds. Yards shall be maintained so as to not cause a disturbance to adjoining residential properties or public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Rain gardens. Rain gardens must be located ten feet or more from any building foundation to ensure infiltrating water does not seep into the foundation. Rain gardens may not be constructed in areas identified as utility rights-of-way or septic drain fields. Rain gardens also must be set back five feet from all property lines and may not divert water into neighboring properties. 
(3)  Borders. All naturally landscaped areas shall have a definable edge consisting of mown turf lawn, hedge, fence, low native plants, stone or woodchip path, or other obvious border that indicate that the natural portion of the yard is a planned and maintained area and to prevent large native plants from extending into neighboring properties. 
(4)  Prairie burns. 
a.  No natural lawn or natural landscape owner, possessor, or other person exercising dominion or control over the real property or natural lawn may conduct a prairie burn or other burn without the prior express written authorization of the City Fire Chief and/or his or her authorized designee. 
b.  All prairie and other burns shall be conducted only at such dates and times, in such manner, and according to such directions and limitations as may be, from time to time, required by the City Fire Chief and/or his or her designee. 
c.  In no event shall the burning of organic material other than natural lawn vegetation be permitted. 
(5)  Vacant properties. Natural lawns and natural landscaping shall not be permitted on vacant land. 
(Code 1976, § 8.56.030; Ord. No. 2019-749, § II(8.56.030), 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-208. - Residential compost requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the recycling and beneficial reuse of yard waste and organic material through composting and to establish minimum standards for proper maintenance of compost piles and bins. 
(b)  Composting requirements. The generator of compostable materials shall be responsible for maintaining compost piles and bins under his or her control as follows: 
(1)  No compost bin shall exceed 125 cubic feet in volume and five feet in height. 
(2)  All compost piles and bins shall be so maintained as to prevent the attraction or harborage of rodents and pests. 
(3)  All compost piles and bins shall be so maintained as to prevent the creation of odors that would constitute a public nuisance. 
(4)  No compost pile or bin shall be located in any yard except a rear yard. All compost piles or bins shall be located not less than five feet from a property line or 20 feet from a neighboring principal structure. 
(5)  No compost bin shall contain any of the following: 
a.  Lake weeds, diseased plants. 
b.  Cooked food scraps, except coffee grounds and tea leaves. 
c.  Fish, meat, poultry, dairy products, oily foods, grease, foods containing animal fats, bones, dog or cat waste. 
d.  Large items or items that will impede the composting process. Examples of these items include large branches and logs, charcoal briquettes, and sawdust from treated wood. The following material may be placed in a compost bin: grass clippings, dry leaves, straw, dry hay, woodchips and sawdust from untreated wood, shredded paper, egg and nut shells, hair and animal fur; raw vegetables and raw fruits suitable for composting; and/or commercial compost additives. 
(Code 1976, § 8.56.035; Ord. No. 2018-739, § III, 1-14-2019 ; Ord. No. 2019-749, § II(8.56.035), 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-209. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the cost of prosecution. If default of payment of such forfeiture and the costs of prosecution, the violator, in addition to any other remedies provided by law for such defaults, may be committed to the Rock County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are satisfied. 
(b)  Each and every day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate the violations as expeditiously as possible. 
(d)  The City, in addition to the above penalties, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation, and/or the City Council may revoke any license or permit. 
(e)  In addition to and not necessarily in lieu of the forfeiture, penalties and other relief set forth in this article, upon seven days' written notice to the property owner and/or possessor, in the event that the subject property is not brought into and/or kept in conformity with the regulations and requirements set forth in this article, the City may go upon the property to bring it into conformity, in which event the full cost of such remediation shall be charged by the City against the property as a special charge or assessment, and if not timely paid shall be collected as a delinquent tax. 
(Code 1976, § 8.56.040; Ord. No. 2019-749, § II(8.56.040), 5-28-2019)  
Secs. 22-210—22-226. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - VACANT BUILDING REGISTRATION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 22-227. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  The City Council finds that there are now, and may in the future be, vacant buildings that are inadequately maintained so as to create or contribute to blight, depress market values of surrounding properties, require additional governmental services, and endanger public health and safety. 
(b)  This article is enacted to facilitate the identification, registration, inspection, and standard maintenance of vacant buildings in order to: 
(1)  Preserve and promote public health, safety, prosperity, and general welfare; 
(2)  Abate and prevent public and private nuisances and potential fire hazards; 
(3)  Promote neighborhood stability and occupancy by preserving the condition and appearance of properties; and 
(4)  Maintain property values and assessments. 
(c)  The purpose of the article is to establish a vacant building registration program including measures reasonably necessary for regulating the maintenance of vacant residential and commercial properties by parties asserting a collateral or other legal or equitable interest in the property. 
(Code 1976, § 8.62.010)  
Sec. 22-228. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building/structure means a building that is less than or equal to 120 square feet, is incidental and subordinate to the principal building, serves the principal building exclusively, and is detached from but located on the same lot with such principal building. 
Agent means a person, firm or other entity that is responsible to a bank, lender, other financial institution or individual, for securing, maintaining, foreclosing upon or selling any residential property as the result of loan default or mortgage foreclosure proceedings whether or not the proceedings are judicial or initiated as the result of a power of sale clause in the mortgage document. In this section, agency does not include a servicing company. Except, however, an attorney shall not be deemed to be an agent if that attorney is retained solely to represent a bank, lender or other financial institution in connection with a foreclosure proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Building means any structure used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind; and when separated by a fire-wall, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building. 
Code of General Ordinances means the Code of General Ordinances for the City of Janesville, Wisconsin, which includes the Vacant Building Registration Program. 
Code official means the Neighborhood and Community Services Director, or any duly authorized designee. 
Department means the Department of Neighborhood and Community Services, or any duly authorized designee of the Director. 
Financial institution means any individual, firm, corporation or entity other than a lender or duly constituted bank that asserts a collateral interest in residential real property as the result of an assignment, sale or transfer of a mortgage or similar instrument. 
Foreclosure means the process by which a mortgage is enforced against a parcel of real property through sale or offering for sale to satisfy the debt of the mortgagee. 
Good repair means free from blighting and hazardous conditions, clean and sanitary, and in a safe condition. 
Lot means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Mortgage means a recorded lien or interest in real property to secure payment of a loan. 
Occupied means when a business is open to the public, when a business or manufacturing activity is performed therein, when people reside therein, or when any personal property is moved therein. Any building or structure shall be deemed to be occupied if one or more persons actually conducts a lawful business or residents in all or any part of the building as the licensed business-occupant, or as the legal or equitable owner/occupant or tenant on a permanent, non-transient basis, or any combination of the same. For purposes of this article, evidence offered to prove that a building is so occupied may include, but shall not be limited to, the regular receipt of delivery of regular mail through the U.S. Postal Service; proof of continual telephone, electric gas, heating, water, and sewer. 
Owner means any individual, limited liability company member, co-partnership, association, corporation, company, fiduciary, or any other person or legal entity having a legal or equitable title or interest in real property. The term "owner" includes a mortgagee which has obtained a judgment of foreclosure against a property. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon. 
Property means any unimproved or improved real property or portion thereof, situated in the City and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition. 
Residential means any property or portion thereof, situated in the City, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall include all buildings and structures located on such property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as residential whether or not it is legally permitted and/or zoned for such use. 
Responsible person means a natural person who is the owner, operator, or manager of any structure or premises and is responsible for the property's maintenance and management. 
Secured means a building that has a permanent door or window in each appropriate building opening that is secured to prevent unauthorized entry and has all its door and window components intact and unbroken. 
Servicing company means an individual, firm or entity that, as a regular part of its business, provides services to the owner or holder of one or more mortgage liens which services may include collection of payments, creation and administration of escrow and insurance accounts, assessment of late-payment charges, managing loss mitigation, and securing and managing foreclosed properties on behalf of the holder of a mortgage lien or the holder's attorney or agent. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground. 
Unsecured means any building that does not meet the definition of the term "secured." 
Vacant means a building which lacks habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises, or at which substantially all lawful business or construction operation or residential occupancy is at a level of at least 95 percent vacant. 
Violation means a lawful order has been issued by the City or a department thereof and the conditions forming the basis for the order have not been fully abated. 
Weeds means plants growing where they are not wanted. These typically are invasive species that may be difficult to control, or may be a health hazard to humans or stock animals or wildlife, or may be otherwise detrimental to an environment. They also include weeds enumerated in Section 22-204. 
(Code 1976, § 8.62.020)  
Sec. 22-229. - Applicability 
(a)  General. The provisions of this section shall apply to residential and commercial buildings vacant for 90 consecutive days. All buildings with a valid City of Janesville building or demolition permit shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Conflict. In any case where a provision of this section is found to be in conflict with a provision of the Zoning Code or any other provisions of the Code of General Ordinances, the provision which established the higher standard for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare shall prevail. 
(c)  Application of other ordinances. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to authorize the use of a structure or premises contrary to any other provision of the Code of Ordinances. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of state law and the Code of General Ordinances. Nothing in this section shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the Zoning Code or Building Code. 
(d)  Existing remedies. The provisions in this section shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the City, or its officers or agencies, under state laws or this Code of Ordinances, including the Zoning Code, relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary, or the abatement of public nuisances. 
(e)  Historic buildings. The provisions of this section shall apply to structures designated by the federal government, state or City as historic buildings. Any work to said structure shall also comply with all applicable code requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 8.62.030)  
Sec. 22-230. - Enforcement, authority, inspection duties. 
(a)  The Neighborhood and Community Services Director, Housing Services Director or any of their designees shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this section and to exercise the powers and duties specified in this section. 
(b)  Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith, under the provisions of this Code, shall be the responsibility of the Code Official or designee. Wherever, in the opinion of the Code Official, it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any conditions by any other department, he or she shall arrange for this to be done in such manner that the owners or agents of the property shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders. No order for correction for any violation under the Housing Regulations shall be issued without the approval of the Code Official. 
(c)  When the Code Official or designee determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of any provision of this article may exist or that conditions exist which adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, he or she may make or cause to be made inspections to determine the conditions of properties in order to safeguard the safety, health, and welfare of the public under the provisions of the Housing Regulations. The Code Official is authorized to enter any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his or her duties under the Housing Regulations. The owner or agent of every property shall give the Code Official free access to the premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection. 
(d)  Issuance of orders to correct. Upon inspection, an authorized official or his or her designee shall issue orders to repair for work needed. 
(e)  Re-inspections. Re-inspections may be conducted after the deadline for repair as stated in the order. Re-inspections are subject to applicable re-inspection fees. 
(f)  Notices and orders. An authorized official may issue notices and orders to owners or responsible persons to obtain compliance with this section. 
(Code 1976, § 8.62.040)  
Sec. 22-231. - Requirement of vacant building registration and fee schedule. 
(a)  The owner of vacant property whether vacant and secure, or vacant and unsecured, shall register with the City no later than the earliest of: 
(1)  Ninety days after the premises becomes vacant; 
(2)  Thirty days after transfer of ownership; or 
(3)  Thirty days after a bank, lender, or other financial institution shall, directly or through an agent or servicing company, initiate foreclosure proceedings by filing a summons and complaint in Rock County Circuit Court upon residential real property. 
(b)  The owner shall submit a registration fee pursuant to this section and register the property with the Neighborhood and Community Services Department on a form provided by the City that includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  A statement of physical inspection of the premises, including one or more photographs of the property accurately portraying current condition of the exterior premises. 
(2)  The name and addresses of all known lien holders and or parties with a legal or equitable ownership interest such as bank, lender, or financial institution including address, phone number, and/or email address. 
(3)  The name of the agent designated to act on the behalf of the owner to accept legal processes and notices and to authorize repairs as required including address, phone number, and/or email address. The agent shall reside within a 60-mile radius of the property, and shall be 21 years of age or older. 
(4)  The date that foreclosure proceedings were commenced and the docket number of the foreclosure action, a description of the external condition of the property and accessory structures on the property, if any. 
(c)  The owner of the vacant premises shall be responsible for the payment of a nonrefundable registration fee, for a residential property, or for a commercial property. If a vacant premises is owned by the City or its instrumentalities, it shall not be subject to the requirements of this section. The nonrefundable registration fees for residential property or commercial property shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(d)  Any new owner shall register or re-register the vacant premises with the City within 30 days of any transfer of an ownership interest in vacant premises. The new owner shall comply with any approved plan and timetable submitted by the previous owner until any proposed changes are submitted and meet the approval of the City. 
(e)  Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable provisions of the City of Janesville's ordinances, including this article; nor does it preclude any of the actions the City is authorized to take pursuant to this article or otherwise under the City of Janesville's Ordinance or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(f)  The owner shall be required to renew the registration of each residential or commercial property for successive six-month periods as long as the building remains vacant. The nonrefundable initial registration renewal fee for a residential property and for a commercial property shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. These fees shall increase increments established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code for each successive six-month renewal with a maximum fee as established by the City Council until the building is no longer required to register under the program. 
(g)  The funds generated from the Vacant Building Registration Program will be utilized for the administrative cost of identifying, inspecting, securing, and managing properties that are abandoned and/or vacant. 
(Code 1976, § 8.62.050)  
Sec. 22-232. - Exceptions. 
(a)  A property that meets the conditions under Section 22-231 shall be registered under the vacant building registration program unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A property that is undergoing an active renovation or rehabilitation, and where a permit for same has been secured from the Building and Development Services Division. 
(2)  A property that is either actively being offered for sale or lease or is actively being offered for rent. 
(3)  A property that is the primary residence of a member of the armed forces on active duty. 
(4)  A property that has been used by the owner as a vacation home; or on a seasonal basis for a period of at least three months within the previous nine months and the owner intends to resume residing at the property; or a property that is routinely occupied by a Janesville resident except during certain seasons of the year (e.g., snowbird). 
(5)  A property that is currently part of an estate sale that is in probate and is not subject to bankruptcy. 
(6)  Residential condominium, multifamily rental, and commercial buildings that are more than five percent occupied. Less than five percent occupied is considered vacant. 
(7)  A property that is a vacant lot without a structure. 
(b)  Property owned by governmental bodies is exempt from the requirements of the vacant building registration program. 
(Code 1976, § 8.62.060)  
Sec. 22-233. - Owner responsibilities. 
All vacant structures and premises thereof shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
(Code 1976, § 8.62.070)  
Sec. 22-234. - Vacant buildings require exterior inspection. 
Any building that has become vacant will be subject to an exterior inspection. The owner of the building shall comply with all requirements of this article and Chapter 18. 
(Code 1976, § 8.62.080)  
Sec. 22-235. - Penalties. 
Any owner failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  The penalty for violating any provision set forth in this article shall be a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution. 
(2)  In addition to any other remedies herein or at law and/or equity, the City may seek injunctive relief to enjoin and/or abate such violation and/or its continuance. 
(3)  In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, failure to pay any fees for registration, renewal, or failure to allow inspection shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. 
(Code 1976, § 8.62.090)  
Secs. 22-236—22-263. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - STABLES SANITATION 
 
Sec. 22-264. - Manure—Receptacles; accumulation prohibited. 
All stables and other buildings wherein stock is kept shall be provided with flytight bins or other tightly closed receptacles for manure, of such dimensions as to contain all accumulations of manure, which shall be removed sufficiently often and in such manner as to prevent it from becoming a nuisance. No manure shall be allowed to accumulate on the floor or on adjacent grounds. 
(Code 1976, § 8.68.010)  
Sec. 22-265. - Manure—Deposit and use restrictions. 
No manure shall be dumped or left on any street, alley, sidewalk, open area, or lot in any inhabited section, or be used to grade in whole or in part any sidewalk, street, open area or lot in said section, unless the manure is completely covered with at least four inches of dirt, except that manure may be used as fertilizer on any lawn or garden if properly spread. 
(Code 1976, § 8.68.020)  
Sec. 22-266. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for each offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned in the county jail not less than five days nor more than 60 days. Each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 8.68.030)  
Secs. 22-267—22-295. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - TOXIC PIPES 
 
Sec. 22-296. - Notification requirement. 
Suppliers, wholesalers and retailers are required to inform the prospective purchaser, prior to the purchase, that plumbing constructed with acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene plastic pipe will sustain combustion and is toxic when burning, and the consequent safety hazards inherent in such acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene pipe. All of such plastic pipe sold shall be clearly labeled with such appropriate warning affixed thereto. 
(Code 1976, § 8.72.010)  
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to prohibit conduct similar to state criminal statutes, Wis. Stats. § 66.0107; local regulation of firearms, Wis. Stats. § 66.0409; public safety offenses, Wis. Stats. ch. 941; offenses involving property rights, Wis. Stats. ch. 943; crimes against government and its administration, Wis. Stats. ch. 946; crimes against public peace and order, Wis. Stats. ch. 947. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 24-1—24-18. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIRE DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Fire regulations, generally, Wis. Stats. § 941.10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 24-19. - Emergency vehicles—Right-of-way allowed when. 
Fire Department personnel with their fire or emergency apparatus of every kind, when going to or on duty at a fire, or when responding to any other emergency, and the operators thereof are sounding audible signals by siren, shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles. The operator of any vehicle, whether motor or otherwise, upon the approach of such fire or emergency apparatus shall immediately operate the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, clear of any intersection of highways, and shall stop and remain in such position unless otherwise directed by a traffic officer, until such authorized emergency vehicle shall have passed. 
(Prior Code, § 6.06(1)(a); Code 1976, § 9.03.010)  
Sec. 24-20. - Emergency vehicles—Subject to standard traffic regulations when. 
Except when actually responding to a fire alarm, or other emergency call, or when on duty at a fire, the apparatus and vehicles of the Fire Department shall have no special right-of-way or special privileges of any kind, but shall be subject to all traffic regulations the same as other vehicles. 
(Prior Code, § 6.06(1)(b); Code 1976, § 9.03.020)  
Sec. 24-21. - Driving over fire hose forbidden. 
No person shall ride any bicycle or motorcycle, or drive any automobile, wagon or other vehicle of any kind, over any fire hose which may be in use by the Fire Department in any street or public highway in the City. No person shall trample on such hose or cause or permit any horse or other beast of burden, which may be in his or her charge, to trample on such hose when in use by the Fire Department. 
(Prior Code, § 6.06(2); Code 1976, § 9.03.030)  
Sec. 24-22. - False alarm and interference with equipment forbidden. 
No person shall knowingly turn in or otherwise give a false alarm of fire or interfere with any of the poles, wires, alarm boxes, keys to alarm boxes or other apparatus appertaining to the fire alarm system, or make or cause to be made any key to any alarm box or other part of such system, or mutilate or destroy any notice affixed to any part of the same. 
(Prior Code, § 6.06(3); Code 1976, § 9.03.040)  
Sec. 24-23. - Vicinity limits; turning off electrical and gas during a fire. 
The Chief or other officer in command may prescribe certain limits in the vicinity of any fire within which any persons, excepting firefighters and police officers, and those admitted by order of any officer of the Fire Department, shall not be permitted to come, and shall have the power to cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from fire, or to prevent the spreading of fire, or to protect the adjoining property. The Chief or other officer in command shall also have the power to cause the removal of all wires and the turning off of all electricity and/or gas where the same interferes with the work of the Fire Department during the progress of a fire. 
(Prior Code, § 6.06(4); Code 1976, § 9.03.050)  
Sec. 24-24. - Bystanders subject to Fire Department authorities; duties; failure to obey orders. 
Every person who may be present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the Chief or other officer in command, and it shall be the duty of every such person to render such assistance as may be ordered by the officer in charge. Any person refusing to obey any such order, after the official status of the officer is made known to him, shall be punished as provided in Section 24-28. 
(Prior Code, § 6.06(5); Code 1976, § 9.03.060)  
Sec. 24-25. - Authority for Fire Department to enter adjacent property; interference unlawful. 
It is lawful for any firefighter, while acting under the order or direction of the Chief or other officer in command, to enter upon the premises adjacent to, or in the vicinity of any building or other property then on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire. In case any person hinders, resists or obstructs any firefighter in the discharge of his or her duty as is provided in this section, the person so offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting a firefighter in the discharge of their duty. 
(Prior Code, § 6.06(6); Code 1976, § 9.03.070)  
Sec. 24-26. - Removal or injury of equipment forbidden. 
No person, except as duly authorized by the Chief or other officer in charge, shall take or remove from any fire station any of the property or equipment of the department. No person shall maliciously injure or destroy any property of the department. No part of the fire apparatus or emergency apparatus operated by the Fire Department shall be taken outside of the City, except for fire or emergency purposes in accordance with plans and schedules established by the City Manager and Chief of the Fire Department. 
(Prior Code, § 6.06(7); Code 1976, § 9.03.080)  
Sec. 24-27. - Loitering about fire station forbidden. 
No person who is not a member of the Fire Department shall loiter in any fire station, or about the doors thereof, or upon the sidewalks in front of such station, without the consent of the Chief or other officer then in command at such station. 
(Prior Code, § 6.06(8); Code 1976, § 9.03.090)  
Sec. 24-28. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division shall pay to the City a forfeiture not exceeding $50.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense and each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In default of the payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 30 days. 
(Prior Code, § 6.12; Code 1976, § 9.03.100)  
Secs. 24-29—24-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ADVERTISING ON GOVERNMENT BUSES 
 
Sec. 24-60. - Limitations. 
No bus owned by, or operated for, or on behalf of, a governmental unit whose jurisdiction geographically is not greater than Rock County, Wisconsin, shall carry, show or present any advertising for or concerning any of the following subjects: 
(1)  Candidates for City Council or school board; 
(2)  Referendum on which only City or school district electors will vote. 
(Prior Code, § 23.19; Code 1976, § 9.06.010; Ord. No. 74-427, § 1, 1974)  
Sec. 24-61. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions in this division shall forfeit and pay to the City, a penalty not exceeding $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense and each day during which any such violation continues is deemed a separate offense. In default of payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 30 days. 
(Prior Code, § 23.17; Code 1976, § 9.06.020)  
Secs. 24-62—24-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 24-81—24-103. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ACCOMMODATION AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sec. 24-104. - Declaration of policy; purpose and intent. 
(a)  A vibrant, productive and economically successful City is made possible by the talents, contributions and well-being of its diverse residents. It is the policy of the City of Janesville that equal rights of all those who live and work in the City are assured, and that equal rights and equal opportunity within the context of the larger commercial and social fabric of the Janesville community are promoted. 
(b)  The practice of providing equal opportunity in employment and public accommodations to persons without regard to actual or perceived race, color, creed, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex/gender, disability, arrest/conviction record, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity and/or gender expression, results of genetic testing, honesty testing, pregnancy or childbirth, military service, or an individual's affiliation with or perceived affiliation with any of these protected categories, is a desirable goal of the City of Janesville and a matter of legitimate concern to its government. Discrimination against any of Janesville's residents or visitors endangers the rights and privileges of all and deprives the community of the fullest productive capacity of those of its members so discriminated against and denies to them the sufficiency of earnings necessary for maintaining the standard of living consistent with their abilities and talents. 
(c)  Provision for adequate safeguards against discrimination is a proper and necessary function of City government. To protect the health, safety and general welfare of all inhabitants of the City, and all persons employed and living within the City, it is declared to be the public policy of this City to foster and enforce to the fullest extent of the law equal opportunity, employment, and public accommodations without regard to actual or perceived race, color, creed, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex/gender, disability, arrest/conviction record, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity and/or gender expression, results of genetic testing, honesty testing, pregnancy or childbirth, military service, or an individual's affiliation with or perceived affiliation with any of these protected categories. To fully effectuate this policy of promoting nondiscrimination, the City shall endeavor to eliminate all discrimination that may occur within employment and accommodation within the City of Janesville. 
(d)  Where applicable, this article shall be interpreted and applied consistently with the provisions of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, 42 USC section 3601 et seq., 24 CFR 100 et seq., and Wis. Stats. §§ 66.1011, 106.50 and 111.31, and any successor provisions of state and federal law. 
(Code 1976, § 9.07.010)  
Sec. 24-105. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Age means being age 40 years or older. 
Ancestry means the country, nation, tribe or other identifiable group from which one descends. 
Arrest/conviction record means information indicating a person was questioned, arrested, charged or convicted of a felony or misdemeanor. An employer may reject an applicant or fire an employee whose conviction is substantially related to the job. 
Color means color of skin. 
Disability means, with respect to a person, any of the following: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of the person's major life activities. 
(2)  A record of having an impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment. 
(3)  The term "disability" does not include current, illegal use of or addition to a controlled substance. The behavioral manifestations of a mental disability may be taken into consideration in determining whether or not the applicant is qualified. 
Discriminate, discrimination or discriminatory means any act, policy, advertisement or practice which, regardless of intent, has the effect of subjecting any person to differential treatment as a result of that person's actual or perceived race, color, creed, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex/gender, disability, arrest/conviction record, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity and/or gender expression, results of genetic testing, honesty testing, pregnancy or childbirth, and military service. Discrimination also includes any differential treatment because of one's association with a person or group of people identified herein. 
Employee means any individual employed or seeking employment from an employer. 
Employer means any person who, for compensation, regularly employs five or more individuals, not including the employer's parents, spouse or children. For purposes of this division an "employer" is also any person acting on behalf of an employer, directly or indirectly, or any employment agency. 
Gender identity and/or gender expression means a person's gender-related self-identity, appearance, expression or behavior, regardless of the person's assigned sex at birth. 
Marital status means the status of being married, single, divorced, separated or widowed. 
Military service means service in the U.S. Armed Forces, the state defense force, the national guard of any state, or any other reserve component of the U.S. Armed Forces. 
National origin means generally a member of a nation by origin, birth or naturalization or having common origins. 
Person means any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or other organization, association or group of persons however arranged. 
Place of public accommodation includes all establishments within the City of Janesville which offers goods, services, accommodations and entertainment to the public. A place of public accommodation does not include any institution or club which by its nature is distinctly private. 
Race means generally a member of a group united or classified together on the basis of common history, nationality or geography. 
Religion or creed means a system of religious beliefs including moral or ethical beliefs about right and wrong that are sincerely held with the strength of traditional religious views. 
Sex/gender means being female or male. 
Sexual orientation means a person's actual or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality, asexuality, or bisexuality. 
(Code 1976, § 9.07.020)  
Sec. 24-106. - Prohibited acts of discrimination; employment. 
(a)  With regard to employment, it shall be unlawful for any employers or labor organizations, to engage in any of the following acts, wholly or partially for a discriminatory reason: 
(1)  To discriminate against any individual, with respect to failure to hire, refusal to hire, discharge, compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, including promotion; however, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require any employer to provide benefits, such as insurance, to individuals not employed by the employer; 
(2)  To limit, segregate, or classify employees in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any employee of employment opportunities, or which would otherwise tend to adversely affect his or her status as an employee; or 
(3)  To fail or refuse to refer for employment, or to give negative information to a potential employer of any individual, in such a manner that would deprive or limit an individual's employment opportunities or that would otherwise adversely affect an individual's status as an applicant or prospective employee. 
(b)  Employers shall post in a conspicuous place upon its premises, a poster prepared and made available by the City, relating to the prohibition regarding discrimination based upon gender identity or gender expression. 
(Code 1976, § 9.07.030)  
Sec. 24-107. - Prohibited acts of discrimination; business establishment or public accommodations. 
It shall be unlawful for a business establishment or place of public accommodation to deny, directly or indirectly, any person the full enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations wholly or partially for a discriminatory reason. 
(Code 1976, § 9.07.040)  
Sec. 24-108. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The City of Janesville shall not exercise jurisdiction over any complaint that sets forth or states any facts or allegations that are subject matter within the jurisdiction of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to, the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the State of Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development, regardless of whether the complainant has chosen to file with that said agency or not. When a complaint or inquiry is presented to the City Manager or to designated staff, and it appears that the City does not have jurisdiction as indicated above, the complainant shall be referred to the appropriate state or federal enforcement agencies. 
(b)  It shall not be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer to observe the conditions of a bona fide seniority system or a bona fide employee benefit system based on age such as a retirement, pension or insurance plan which is not a subterfuge or pretext to evade the purposes of this division. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to prohibit selection or rejection based solely upon a bona fide occupational qualification, a bona fide physical requirement, or, as to a religious or denominational institution, based upon a preference for applicants of the same religion or denomination. 
(Code 1976, § 9.07.050)  
Sec. 24-109. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured under this division may file a written complaint with the City Manager (or designee), setting forth therein the details, including location of property, names, dates, witnesses, and other factual matters. All such complaints shall be signed by the complainant. Such complaints shall be filed within one year after the alleged violation of this division. 
(b)  The City Manager may receive, hear and determine complaints as provided herein. The City Manager may adopt rules, policies and regulations, and involve City staff as the City Manager deems appropriate, consistent with this division and the laws of the state to carry out the policy and provisions of this division and the powers and duties of the City Manager. 
(c)  The City Manager may informally recommend solutions to the parties to the complaint to address the situation. 
(d)  A timely-filed complaint shall be referred immediately to the City Attorney. 
(Code 1976, § 9.07.060)  
Sec. 24-110. - Penalty; forfeiture. 
(a)  Any person found in violation of this division shall, for the first violation, forfeit not less than $500.00 nor more than $5,000.00, plus the cost of the action. 
(b)  Each day upon which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  For each successive violation within five years of having been adjudged to be in violation of this division, the person shall forfeit not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $10,000.00. 
(Code 1976, § 9.07.070)  
Sec. 24-111. - Private actions. 
In addition to the remedies set forth in this division, an aggrieved person may commence a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain appropriate relief with respect to violations set forth in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 9.07.080)  
Secs. 24-112—24-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OBSTRUCTING OR RESISTING AN OFFICER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning obstructing or resisting an officer see Wis. Stats. § 946.41 as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
 
Sec. 24-136. - Generally. 
No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct an officer while such officer is doing any act in an official capacity and with lawful authority. 
(Code 1976, § 9.08.010)  
Sec. 24-137. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Obstructs means and includes, without limitation, knowingly giving false information to the officer or knowingly placing physical evidence with intent to mislead the officer in the performance of his or her duty including the service of any summons or civil process. 
Officer means a peace officer or other public officer or public employee having the authority by virtue of the officer's or employee's office or employment to take another into custody. 
(Code 1976, § 9.08.020)  
Sec. 24-138. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision set forth in this division shall forfeit and pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 and no more than $1,000.00. 
(b)  To each such forfeiture the Court shall add and impose against the violator all customary court costs, fees, penalties, and assessments. 
(c)  Upon default in payment of an imposed forfeiture and costs, such convicted person may be imprisoned for not more than 60 days in the Rock County Jail and/or the court may impose other penalties and remedies as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 9.08.030)  
Secs. 24-139—24-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DISORDERLY HOUSES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning keeping a place of prostitution, see Wis. Stats. §§ 944.34 and 944.35. 
 
Sec. 24-161. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating this division shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not to exceed $50.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense and in default of the payment of the fine or forfeiture shall be imprisoned in the county jail not more than 30 days. In all cases, each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 20.11(part); Code 1976, § 9.15.020)  
Secs. 24-162—24-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - GAMBLING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning gambling, see Wis. Stats. ch. 945. 
 
Sec. 24-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gambling device may be a gambling machine or in addition, playing cards or dice, or similar articles when the same are used in making a bet, or playing a game or contest for money or other similar prize or award or for merchandise. Devices, including, but not limited to, amusement devices, which test skill and which do not solely rely on chance, some of which are referred to and/or known as redemption games, are exempt from the provisions of this division. Video poker, video blackjack, and similar video games of chance shall not be considered redemption games or devices, nor games, contests, events or tests of skill. 
Gambling machine. 
(1)  A gambling machine is a contrivance which, for a consideration, affords the player an opportunity to obtain something of value, the award of which is determined by chance, even though accompanied by some skill and whether or not the prize is automatically paid by the machine. Video poker, video blackjack, and similar video games of chance are included within this definition. 
(2)  The term "gambling machine" does not include any of the following: 
a.  A device used in conducting a bingo occasion or raffle under Wis. Stats. ch. 563, used in conducting a lottery under Wis. Stats. ch. 565, or used in conducting a race under Wis. Stats. ch. 562. 
b.  Any amusement device if it rewards the player exclusively with one or more nonredeemable free replays for achieving certain scores and does not change the ratio or record the number of the free replays so awarded. 
c.  An amusement device involving skill, if it rewards the player exclusively with merchandise contained within the amusement device proper and limited to prizes, toys and novelties, each having a wholesale value which is not more than seven times the cost charged to play the amusement device once or $5.00, whichever is less. In this subdivision, the term "skill" means, within an opportunity provided for all players fairly to obtain prizes or rewards of merchandise, a player's precision, dexterity or ability to use his or her knowledge which enables him or her to obtain more frequent rewards or prizes than does another less precise, dexterous or knowledgeable player. 
Gambling place. 
(1)  The term "gambling place" means any building or tent, or vehicle (whether self-propelled or not), or any room within any of them, one of whose uses is any of the following: making and settling bets; receiving, holding, recording or forwarding bets or offers to bet; conducting lotteries; playing gambling machines or using gambling machines or devices for money, merchandise or a prize of some kind or description. 
(2)  The term "gambling place" does not include a place where bingo or a raffle is conducted under Wis. Stats. ch. 563, where a lottery is conducted under Wis. Stats. ch. 565 or where a race is conducted under Wis. Stats. ch. 562 and does not include a gambling vessel that is in the process of construction, delivery, conversion or repair by a shipbuilding business that complies with Wis. Stats. § 945.095. 
(3)  Evidence that the place has a general reputation as a gambling place or that, at or about the time in question, it was frequently visited by persons known to be professional gamblers or known as frequenters of gambling places is admissible on the issue of whether it is a gambling place. 
(4)  Any gambling place is a public nuisance and may be proceeded against under Wis. Stats. ch. 823. 
Lottery. 
(1)  The term "lottery" is an enterprise wherein, for a consideration, the participants are given an opportunity to win a prize, the award of which is determined by chance, even though accompanied by some skill. The term "consideration," as used in this subsection, means anything which is a commercial or financial advantage to the promoter or a disadvantage to any participant. 
(2)  The term "lottery" does not include bingo or a raffle conducted under Wis. Stats. ch. 563, a savings promotion program under Wis. Stats. §§ 186.114, 214.595, 215.137, or 221.0329 or a program sponsored by a federally chartered financial institution, or in which a federally chartered financial institution participates, that meets all requirements for a savings promotion program under Wis. Stats. §§ 186.114, 214.595, 215.137, or 221.0329, pari-mutuel wagering conducted under Wis. Stats. ch. 562 or the state lottery or any multijurisdictional lottery conducted under Wis. Stats. ch. 565. 
(3)  a.  In this subsection, the term "consideration" means anything which is a commercial or financial advantage to the promoter or a disadvantage to any participant, but does not include any advantage to the promoter or disadvantage to any participant caused when any participant learns from newspapers, magazines and other periodicals, radio or television where to send the participant's name and address to the promoter. 
b.  In any game, drawing, contest, sweepstakes, or other promotion, none of the following constitutes consideration under this subsection: 
1.  Listening to or watching a television or radio program. 
2.  Filling out a coupon or entry form that is received through the mail or published in a newspaper or magazine, if facsimiles of the coupon or entry form or handwritten and other informal entries are acceptable or if no purchase is required. 
3.  Furnishing proof of purchase if the proof required does not consist of more than the container of any product as packaged by the manufacturer, or a part of the container, or a facsimile of either. 
4.  Sending the coupon or entry form and proof of purchase by mail to a designated address. 
5.  Filling out a coupon or entry form obtained and deposited on the premises of a bona fide trade fair or trade show defined as an exhibition by five or more competitors of goods, wares, or merchandise at a location other than a retail establishment or shopping center or other place where goods and services are customarily sold; but if an admission fee is charged to the exhibition, all facilities for obtaining and depositing coupons or entry forms shall be outside the area for which an admission fee is required. 
6.  Visiting a mercantile establishment or other place without being required to make a purchase or pay an admittance fee. 
7.  Using a chance promotion exempt under Wis. Stats. § 100.16(2). 
8.  An employee referring a person to the employee's employer to purchase goods or services from the employer, or identifying for the employer a person who may purchase goods or services from the employer, regardless of whether the employee who makes the referral or identification is compensated in any manner for the referral or identification. 
9.  A deposit of an amount of money in an account that results in an entry in a savings promotion program under Wis. Stats. §§ 186.114, 214.595, 215.137, or 221.0329 or a program sponsored by a federally chartered financial institution, or in which a federally chartered financial institution participates, that meets all requirements for a savings promotion program under Wis. Stats. §§ 186.114, 214.595, 215.137, or 221.0329. 
(Prior Code, § 20.02; Code 1976, § 9.18.010)  
Sec. 24-192. - Prohibition—Gambling places, devices and lotteries. 
No person shall keep, establish or maintain any gambling place, or keep or use any article, machine or device for gambling purposes, or permit any person to gamble, bet or play for money or gain with, or by means of any article or device or machine in any room or place under his or her control; nor shall any person conduct a lottery, or permit a lottery to be conducted on his or her premises or any premises under his or her control. 
(Prior Code, § 20.03; Code 1976, § 9.18.020)  
Sec. 24-193. - Prohibition—Exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall participate in any lottery, game of chance, dice game or similar game, or play any gambling machine or gambling device, or make any bet on any contest, or participate in any game of chance or game played for money or merchandise or other prize, except for prizes such as medals, ribbons, trophies and the like. 
(b)  The regulation in Subsection (a) of this section shall not prohibit professional athletes or other performers from being paid for playing or performing. 
(c)  The regulation in Subsection (a) of this section shall not prohibit the possession or use of games, contests, amusement devices, or other devices of skill, including, but not limited to, redemption games, redemption devices, and similar devices primarily involving skill. Video poker, video blackjack, and similar video games of chance shall not be considered redemption games or redemption devices, nor games, contests, events or tests of skill. 
(Prior Code, § 20.04; Code 1976, § 9.18.030)  
Sec. 24-194. - Seizure of prohibited items by police. 
The Chief of Police and all police officers of the City are authorized and required to seize and hold all such articles and devices as shown in title found by them, and report thereon and dispose of the same in accordance with the direction of the court. 
(Prior Code, § 20.05; Code 1976, § 9.18.040)  
Sec. 24-195. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating this division shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not to exceed $50.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense and in default of the payment of the fine or forfeiture shall be imprisoned in the county jail not more than 30 days. In all cases, each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 20.11(part); Code 1976, § 9.18.050)  
Secs. 24-196—24-213. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - INDECENT EXPOSURE, PUBLIC NUDITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning lewd and lascivious behavior, see Wis. Stats. § 944.20. 
 
Sec. 24-214. - Intent; definitions. 
(a)  The health, welfare, peace, tranquility, safety, good order police power legitimate governmental interest intent, goals and content neutral objectives of the City Council as set forth in Chapter 4, as from time to time amended or renumbered, are hereby reiterated, adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth verbatim. 
(b)  Unless specifically defined or used differently in this division, the terms set forth and defined in Chapter 4, as from time to time amended or renumbered, are hereby reiterated, adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth verbatim. 
(c)  Public place. 
(1)  The term "public place" means upon any public property owned by or open to the general public, such as a public park, beach, playground, school ground, street, highway, sidewalk, alley, greenbelt, and other public place held open to the general public, and all buildings and enclosed places thereon and whether or not an admission or other fee is charged, levied or collected; and private property only if the exposure or prohibited activity is occurring without the consent of the property owner or possessor. 
(2)  Exempt from the application of this division are private motel, hotel and boardinghouse sleep rooms, private residences and other places of private abode; and mothers breastfeeding their children. 
(Code 1976, § 9.21.010)  
Sec. 24-215. - Prohibition. 
No person, in a public place, as defined herein, may intentionally or knowingly engage in the actual: 
(1)  Showing or revealing of a human bare buttock, anus, perineum, anal region, anal or natal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, testicle, female genitals, vulva, or female nipple, female areola, whether or not in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, with less than a fully opaque covering; 
(2)  Showing or revealing of human male genitals in a discernibly erect or turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(3)  Act of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sado-masochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus. 
(Code 1976, § 9.21.020)  
Sec. 24-216. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for each offense. 
(b)  Each incident and each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  In default of the payment of such forfeiture, such person shall be subject to the remedies vested in the court for such non-payment. 
(d)  In addition to and not in lieu of the penalties and remedies set forth in this division, the City may seek, obtain and enforce one and/or more forms of injunctive and other equitable and/or legal relief against the offender for said violation. 
(Code 1976, § 9.21.030)  
Secs. 24-217—24-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - SPITTING 
 
Sec. 24-241. - Prohibition when. 
No person shall spit or expectorate upon any sidewalk or other public walk, or upon the floor or other portion of the interior of any theater, hall or public building. 
(Prior Code, § 7.15; Code 1976, § 9.27.010)  
Sec. 24-242. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division shall pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 and not exceeding $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense and each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In default of the payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not less than five days nor to exceed 60 days. 
(Prior Code, § 7.22; Code 1976, § 9.27.020)  
Secs. 24-243—24-262. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - DRUG HOUSES AND CRIMINAL GANG HOUSES, PROSTITUTION HOUSES AND GAMBLING HOUSES PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 24-263. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  The City Council hereby find that the protection of the peace, comfort, security, safety, order, tranquility and decency of the City's neighborhoods, residences and property, and the enforcement of criminal laws and City ordinances pertaining thereto, are of utmost priority, the best interest of the community and of benefit to the City's residents. Peaceful, safe and orderly neighborhoods are fostered by the continued cooperation by and amongst the City, its residents and citizens. 
(b)  The City Council hereby find that the existence of drug houses, criminal gang houses, prostitution houses and gambling houses adversely affect neighborhoods, harm the residents thereof, harm the City as a whole, destroy the peace, safety, tranquility, and good order of the neighborhood in which such houses are present and the City overall, directly lead to the physical and good order deterioration of such neighborhoods, constitute public nuisances, and need to be controlled and/or eliminated in the manner provided by state statutes. 
(c)  In order to better facilitate such ongoing cooperation and the mutual health, welfare, peace, safety, order and tranquility goals shared by the City Council, the City's residents, property owners, property possessors, and neighborhoods, the City Council hereby find that the City requires additional procedures, remedies and relief for such public nuisances than that currently set forth in this Code, find certain state statutes of benefit and applicable hereto, and hereby expressly adopt an ordinance in furtherance of the above-stated legitimate goals, public interests, and community desires. 
(Code 1976, § 9.30.010)  
Sec. 24-264. - Drug houses and criminal gang houses prohibited. 
No person may directly or indirectly own, have any legal or equitable interest in, possess, manage, maintain, conduct, use, habitate, permit, have a legal or equitable interest in, permit, and/or invite or attempt to invite others to visit any building, structure, improvement, real property, and/or personal property which is used as, and/or a part of, a drug house, criminal gang house, prostitution house, gambling house, dilapidated house, or other public nuisance, as those terms are defined and used in Wis. Stats. ch. 823, including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. § 823.113 et seq., as from time to time amended, renumbered or modified. 
(Code 1976, § 9.30.020)  
Sec. 24-265. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Criminal gang house, drug house, prostitution house, gambling house, other public nuisance, controlled substance, controlled substance analog, and the other words, terms and phrases used in this division, unless a different definition or use is expressly provided in this division, shall be defined and have the meaning set forth in Wis. Stats. ch. 823, as from time to time amended, renumbered or modified, including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. § 823.113 et seq., pertaining to drug houses and criminal gang houses. 
Person means each and every legal and equitable owner, lessor, lessee, possessor, manager, tenant, occupier, guest, invitee, receiver, and other natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, joint venture, or any other entity of whatsoever kind or nature. 
(Code 1976, § 9.30.030)  
Sec. 24-266. - State law adopted. 
(a)  The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 823, as from time to time amended, renumbered or modified, including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. § 823.113 et seq., pertaining to drug houses and criminal gang houses, are hereby incorporated by reference into this division as if fully set forth verbatim herein. 
(b)  Each and every act prohibited, and each and every definition, right, remedy, relief, forfeiture, and procedure set forth in such Wisconsin Statutes are prohibited and/or incorporated, as applicable, by this division. 
(Code 1976, § 9.30.040)  
Sec. 24-267. - Concurrent and separate jurisdiction, authorization and procedures. 
The City may proceed concomitantly or separately under this division and/or directly under the applicable Wisconsin Statutes, notwithstanding this division. The City may proceed directly under one or more provisions of the applicable Wisconsin Statutes without the necessity to commence any action or otherwise proceed under this division. The City may commence and prosecute violation of this division in order to recover the relief and/or penalties set forth in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 9.30.050)  
Sec. 24-268. - Municipal officials authorized to take action. 
Each and every City elected and appointed official, officer, employee and duly authorized representative or agent may take such action, from time to time, as he or she deems necessary, appropriate and/or desirable to effectuate the intent and purpose of this division and/or the applicable state statute, including, but not limited to, the commencement, enforcement and prosecution of actions for violation of this division or any of its provisions against any person and/or property. Such enforcement and prosecution may be on behalf of the City, in the name of the City Council, and without the need for any prior or other authorization by the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 9.30.060)  
Sec. 24-269. - Liberal construction. 
The provisions of this division shall be liberally construed in order to promote and effectuate the purposes, intent, and provisions contained herein. 
(Code 1976, § 9.30.070)  
Sec. 24-270. - Cumulative and not exclusive effect of remedies, relief or penalties. 
This division is cumulative in its legal affect and is not in lieu of, or exclusive of, any and all other legal and equitable rights or remedies under this division, other City ordinances, state statutes, state administrative codes, or common law. The election to use or seek the relief, remedies, forfeiture, damage and/or penalties under one or more procedures does not waive or estop, and does not act as a waiver or estoppel of, the City from concurrently or separately seeking and/or obtaining other relief, remedies, forfeiture, damage and/or penalties under one or more other provisions of this division, other City ordinance, state statutes, state administrative codes, or common law. 
(Code 1976, § 9.30.080)  
Sec. 24-271. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are severable and if any provision, sentence, clause, section or part thereof is held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, and/or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such illegality, invalidity, unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts of this chapter, or their application to or enforceability against any other person or circumstance. Such remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, and parts of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect, such being the express intent of the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 9.30.090)  
Sec. 24-272. - Violations; penalties; remedies; injunctive and other relief. 
The following penalties, remedies and relief for violations of any provision of this division are cumulative and not exclusive, may be jointly and severally sought by the City, and may be ordered and/or imposed, as applicable, by the courts: 
(1)  Any person who violates or causes to be violated any provision of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $10,000.00 for each violation, together with the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, such person shall be subject to such remedies for non-payment, from time to time, as is provided in law and/or equity, including, but not limited to, commitment in the Rock County Jail for not less than one day nor more than 60 days, for each violation. The monetary forfeiture set forth in this subsection may be, but need not be, prosecuted and sought by the City in addition to, and not necessary in lieu of, any concomitant and/or separate action to effectuate the forfeiture of the property to the City under this division and/or applicable state statutes. The City may seek and the court may impose varying amounts of monetary forfeiture based on the number of previous violations, the severity of the various incident, and the particular facts and circumstances pertaining to each incident and/or action. 
(2)  Each and every day that a violation occurs, continues and/or remains present constitutes a separate offense. 
(3)  The City, in addition to the above monetary penalty, may from time to time seek and obtain, and the court may order, temporary and/or permanent injunctive relief, abatement, and such other legal and/or equitable relief, remedies, judgments, and/or orders of the court against any person and/or property as the court may, from time to time, deem necessary, appropriate and/or desirable to effectuate the intent of this division and the public good, peace, order, welfare, and/or safety, including, but not limited to, forfeiture of the property to the City under this division and/or the applicable state statutes. 
(4)  In addition to the above penalties, relief and remedies, the City Council may suspend, revoke and/or non-renew any license and/or permit pertaining to such property, after conducting a public hearing thereon. 
(5)  In addition to the above penalties, relief and remedies, upon a conviction of a violation of any provision of this division, the court may suspend, revoke and/or non-renew any license and/or permit pertaining to such property. 
(6)  It shall be the responsibility of the convicted person to immediately abate each and every violation upon the property as expeditiously as possible, unless otherwise directed by the City or the court. 
(7)  This division is cumulative in its legal affect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal and equitable remedies under City ordinances, state statutes, state administrative codes, and common law, including, but not limited to, forfeiture of the property to the City under this division and/or the applicable state statutes. 
(8)  In addition to the above monetary forfeitures, and not in lieu thereof, the City may, at its sole discretion, proceed under one or more sections and/or provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 823, including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. § 823.113 et seq., and/or this division, pertaining to drug houses or criminal gang houses in seeking and obtaining the court permitted and/or ordered confiscation, forfeiture, sale of real and/or personal property, and such other legal and equitable relief as permitted under such applicable state laws, as from time to time amended, renumbered or modified. 
(9)  To the extent permitted by applicable state law, as from time to time amended, renumbered and/or modified, the costs of the remedies and relief obtained and/or incurred by the City under this division, state statutes and/or administrative codes may be billed against the owner of the property and, if not paid, assessed as a special charge with a lien placed against the property until paid in full with interest thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 9.30.100)  
Secs. 24-273—24-292. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - CHRONIC NUISANCE PREMISES 
 
Sec. 24-293. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief means the Chief of Police or his or her designee. 
Enforcement action means arrest, the issuance of a citation, the issuance of a written warning, issuance of a documented verbal warning, or the issuance of an order to correct. An arrest would count as the enforcement action if the original offense occurred at the premises and the arrestee is arrested later at another location. 
JGO means Janesville General Ordinances. 
Neighborhood and Community Services Director means the Neighborhood and Community Services Director or his or her designee. 
Nuisance activity means any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct occurring upon a premises: 
(1)  Police nuisance activity. 
a.  An act of harassment, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 947.013. 
b.  Disorderly conduct, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 947.01. 
c.  Battery, substantial battery, or aggravated battery, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 940.19. 
d.  Lewd and Lascivious Behavior, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 944.20. 
e.  Prostitution, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 944.30. 
f.  Theft, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 943.20. 
g.  Receiving Stolen Property, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 943.34. 
h.  Arson, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 943.02. 
i.  Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 961. 
j.  Gambling, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 945.02. 
k.  Trespassing, as defined in Wis. Stats. §§ 943.13 and 943.14. 
l.  Homicide, as defined in Wis. Stats. §§ 940.01 through 940.10. 
m.  Recklessly endangering safety, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 941.30. 
n.  Prohibited possession of a firearm, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 941.29. 
o.  Carrying a concealed weapon, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 941.23. 
p.  Probation or parole violations, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 940.302. 
q.  Human trafficking, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 940.302. 
r.  Obstructing or resisting an officer, as defined in Division 3, Article II of this chapter. 
s.  Disorderly houses, as defined in Division 4, Article II of this chapter. 
t.  Gambling as defined in Division 5, Article II of this chapter. 
u.  Indecent exposure and/or public urination, as defined in Division 6, Article II of this chapter. 
v.  Drug Houses and Criminal Gang Houses, Prostitution Houses and Gambling Houses, as defined in Division 8, Article II of this chapter. 
w.  Disorderly conduct, as defined in Division 3, Article III of this chapter. 
x.  Disturbing the peace by fighting, noise or other means, as defined in Division 4, Article III of this chapter. 
y.  Curfew violations, as defined in Division 6, Article III of this chapter. 
z.  Truancy, contributing to truancy, as defined in Division 7, Article III of this chapter. 
aa.  Purchase or possession of cigarette or tobacco products by children, as defined in Division 8 of Article III of this chapter. 
bb.  Property offenses, as defined in Division 4, Article IV of this chapter. 
cc.  Weapons offenses, as defined in Division 2 of Article VI of this chapter. 
dd.  Firearms offense, as defined in Division 3 of Article VI of this chapter. 
ee.  Animal violations of any kind, as defined in Articles I, II, III, IV, V, and VI of Chapter 8. 
ff.  Fireworks, as defined in Article VIII of Chapter 16. 
gg.  Underage alcohol activities, as defined in Chapter 6. 
hh.  Adult contributing, allowing, providing alcohol to underage persons activities, as defined in Chapter 6. 
ii.  Any conspiracy to commit, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 939.31, or attempt to commit, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 939.32, any of the criminal activities, behaviors, or conduct enumerated above; and/or conspiracy to commit, aiding, abetting, causing, allowing, permitting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such ordinance violation act or omission, as defined in Section 1-8. 
jj.  Unsafe burnings, as defined in Article VII of Chapter 16. 
(2)  Code nuisance activity. 
a.  Housing Regulations violations, as defined in Article III of Chapter 18. 
b.  Abandoned, unlicensed or nonoperable vehicle violations, as defined in Article XV of Chapter 38. 
c.  Nuisance violations, as defined in Article I of Chapter 22. 
d.  Zoning violations provided they are nuisance related and in a residential setting, as defined in Sections 42-251, 42-358, 42-363, and/or 42-464. 
Owner means the owner of the premises and his or her agents. 
Premises means an individual dwelling unit; any property or premises used for residential purposes whether or not owner-occupied; an individual business or commercial property; and associated common areas thereof. A multi-unit dwelling or complex will be considered one premises for the purposes of counting enforcement actions. This includes all individual residences and indoor and outdoor common areas associated with the multi-unit dwelling or complex. 
(Code 1976, § 9.32.010)  
Sec. 24-294. - Official warning and notice. 
(a)  Whenever the Chief determines that two or more police nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action have occurred at a premises on separate days during a 12-month period, only the Chief may notify the premises owner and tenant in writing by issuance of an official notice of nuisance activity. In reaching this determination, the Chief shall not count nuisance activities resulting in enforcement actions that were reported by the owner of the premises. Only the Chief may initiate and implement the procedure and enforcement for police nuisance activities under this division. 
(b)  Whenever the Neighborhood and Community Services Director determines that four or more code nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action have occurred at a premises on separate days during a 12-month period, only the Neighborhood and Community Services Director may notify the premises owner and tenant in writing. In reaching this determination, the Neighborhood and Community Services Director shall not count nuisance activities resulting in enforcement actions that were reported by the owner of the premises. Only the Neighborhood and Community Services Director may initiate and implement the procedure and enforcement for code nuisance actives under this division. 
(c)  The Chief and Neighborhood and Community Services Director may jointly agree to initiate, implement and enforce this division in the event that an aggregate of four or more combined police nuisance activities and code nuisance activities, in any combination thereof, resulting in enforcement action have occurred at a premises on separate days during a 12-month period. 
(d)  The notice shall contain the street address, including unit number if applicable, or legal description sufficient to identify the premises, a description of the nuisance activities and enforcement actions that have occurred at the premises; a statement indicating that the cost of future enforcement may be assessed as a special charge against the premises, and a notice as to the appeal rights of the owner. 
(e)  The written notice shall be delivered to the owner of the premises by one of the following methods in descending order of preference: personal service, certified mail, first class mail, posting and/or publication, such other means as provided by law for service of process in a civil action, in that order, as the Chief or Neighborhood and Community Services Director, as applicable, may determine appropriate under the particular facts and circumstances. 
(f)  The Chief or Neighborhood and Community Service Director can notify the premises owner and tenant in writing by issuance of the Official Notice of Nuisance Activity without having prior issued an official warning of nuisance activity. 
(Code 1976, § 9.32.020)  
Sec. 24-295. - Abatement plan. 
Any owner receiving an official notice of nuisance activity shall personally meet with the City Official, Chief or Neighborhood and Community Services Director, who issued the notice, or with his or her the applicable City Official's designee, within five days of receipt of such notice, or have the meeting scheduled. The Chief or Neighborhood and Community Services Director, as applicable, and the owner shall review the problems occurring upon the premises and/or property. Within ten days of this meeting, the owner shall submit to the Chief or Neighborhood and Community Services Director, as applicable, or his or her applicable City Official's designee, a detailed written abatement plan designed to forthwith and effectively end all the nuisance activity upon the premises. The plan shall also specify a name, address, and telephone number of a person living within 60 miles of the premises who can be contacted in the event of further police, fire, or inspection activities and/or contact. The owner of the premises shall maintain a current list of all tenants, occupants, residents, and sublessees authorized to occupy the buildings on such property. The owner of the premises will provide a sample copy of their lease agreement used for the premises. The owner of the premises will maintain a detailed inspection log of the premises. Upon verbal or written request to the owner, the lease agreement, tenant list, and inspection log shall be made available to the Chief or Neighborhood and Community Services Director within 48 hours. The owner shall comply with other reasonable requests made by the Chief or Neighborhood and Community Services Director. The abatement plan will be in effect for a 12-month period. If additional nuisance activity occurs on the premises, the abatement plan may be continued by the Chief or Neighborhood and Community Services Director, for an additional 12-month period. 
(Code 1976, § 9.32.030)  
Sec. 24-296. - Additional nuisance activity. 
Whenever the Chief or Neighborhood and Community Services Director, as applicable, determines that: 
(1)  Additional nuisance activity and/or enforcement action has/have occurred upon a premises for which the written notice has been issued under this division; 
(2)  This additional nuisance activity and/or enforcement action has/have occurred more than 15 days after the written notice was served; and 
(3)  Reasonable effort has not been made by the owner of the premises to abate the nuisance activity; then the Chief or Neighborhood and Community Services Director, as applicable, may issue a municipal ordinance citation to the owner of the premises for violation of Section 24-295. The Chief or Neighborhood and Community Services Director, as applicable, may also calculate all of the cost, fees and expenses arising from and/or pertaining to any and all such police and related City responses and enforcement, including, but not limited to, actual burdened labor, overtime, materials, vehicle use, and related administrative time and efforts for this and any subsequent nuisance activities and enforcement actions upon, for and/or pertaining to the premises. The Chief or Neighborhood and Community Services Director, as applicable, shall then cause all such costs, fees and expenses to be charged against the owner of the premises and the premises itself, and if unpaid, charged, assessed, levied and collected by the City as a special charge against the premises/property. 
(Code 1976, § 9.32.040)  
Sec. 24-297. - Appeal. 
(a)  Appeal by affected property owner. An affected owner of the premises may appeal the Chief of Police's or Neighborhood Services Director's, as applicable, determination and invoiced special charges arising from and imposed for the police and related costs, fees and expenses set forth in this division in the manner set forth in this subsection. 
(b)  The appeal shall be in writing, filed with the City Clerk, stating with specificity the grounds for the appeal and the relief requested. The appeal shall be filed within 90 days of the invoice from the City Clerk. 
(c)  The appeal shall be considered only if filed prior to the time that any unpaid special charges imposed against the premises/property under this division are turned over by the treasurer onto the tax roll. 
(d)  Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes (Wis. Stats. ch. 68) shall not apply to such an appeal nor shall any other provision of state law or City ordinance to the contrary. The appellate procedure set forth herein shall govern and be exclusive. 
(e)  Upon receipt of the written appeal, the Clerk shall set the matter for a public hearing for a regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days after the filing of the written appeal. 
(f)  The Clerk shall provide written notice to the appellant and to the Chief of Police or Neighborhood and Community Services Director, as applicable, of such City Council meeting hearing date, time and place. 
(g)  The parties may agree to continuances and stipulations as to procedure and substance, but in no event shall the hearing be continued beyond the time set forth in Subsection (c) of this section. 
(h)  The hearing shall be open to the public, recorded by a sound recording device and the recording preserved for seven years by the City Clerk. A party may request a court reporter but the requesting party shall pay all costs of the court reporter in advance regardless of the determination of the appeal. 
(i)  The appellant and the Chief of Police or Neighborhood and Community Services Director, as applicable, may each present witnesses who testify upon oath after being duly sworn-in by the City Clerk, the Deputy City Clerk or any other person authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(j)  After the hearing, the City Council in open session shall deliberate and then make a determination by recorded motion, second and vote with a majority of Councilmembers voting governing. 
(k)  The City Clerk-Treasurer shall adjust all invoices, tax and related City records in accord with the Council's determination. 
(Code 1976, § 9.32.050)  
Sec. 24-298. - Violations; penalties; remedies; injunctive and other relief. 
In addition to the special charges authorized and described above, the following penalties, remedies and other relief are cumulative and not exclusive, may be jointly and severally sought and/or employed by the City, and may be ordered and/or imposed, as applicable, by the courts: 
(1)  First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this division or any regulation, rule, or order made hereunder shall forfeit and pay to the City not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(2)  Subsequent offenses. Any person who shall violate any provision of this division or any regulation, rule, or order made hereunder within 24 months after committing a previous violation shall forfeit and pay to the City not less than $200.00 nor more than $5,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(3)  Each and every day that a violation occurs, continues and/or remains present constitutes a separate offense. 
(4)  The City, in addition to the above monetary penalty and special charges may from time to time seek and obtain, and the court may order, temporary and/or permanent injunctive relief, abatement, and such other legal and/or equitable relief, remedies, judgments, and/or orders of the court against any person and/or property as the court may, from time to time, deem necessary, appropriate and/or desirable to effectuate the intent of this division and the public good, peace, order, welfare, and/or safety. 
(5)  In addition to the above penalties, relief and remedies, the City Council may refuse to issue or not-renew any license or permit to the owner of the premises and/or the premises, after conducting a public hearing thereon. 
(6)  It shall be the responsibility of the convicted person to immediately abate each and every violation upon the premises property as expeditiously as possible, unless otherwise directed by the City or the court. 
(7)  This division is cumulative in its legal affect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal and equitable remedies under City ordinances, state statutes, state administrative codes, and common law, including, but not limited to, forfeiture of the property to the City under this division and/or the applicable state statutes. 
(Code 1976, § 9.32.060)  
Secs. 24-299—24-329. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - REGULATION OF SMOKING 
 
Sec. 24-330. - Intent and purpose. 
The City Council hereby find that: 
(1)  It is recognized and found that smoking of cigarettes and tobacco products is hazardous to an individual's health and may affect the health of nonsmokers when they are involuntarily in the presence of smoking. 
(2)  Numerous scientific studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution. 
(3)  Reliable scientific studies, including studies conducted by the Surgeon General of the United States, have shown that breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke is a significant health hazard to nonsmokers; particularly to children, elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease. 
(4)  Health hazards induced by breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke include lung cancer, respiratory infection, decreased respiratory function, decreased exercise tolerance, bronchoconstriction and bronchospasm. 
(5)  Reliable scientific studies assessed by the California Environmental Protection Agency have found that sidestream and secondhand tobacco smoke is a leading cause of premature death and disability among nonsmokers. 
(6)  Air pollution caused by smoking is an offensive annoyance and irritant. Smoking results in serious and significant physical discomfort to nonsmokers. 
(7)  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has stated that hookah smoking has many of the same health risks as tobacco smoking and can be a health risk by producing secondhand smoke. 
(8)  The American Lung Association has stated that marijuana smoke contains many of the same toxins, irritants, and carcinogens as tobacco smoke and secondhand marijuana smoke contains many of the same toxins as directly inhaled marijuana smoke. 
(9)  While electronic delivery devices are currently unregulated by the United States Food and Drug Administration, the use by and sale to children of electronic delivery devices containing nicotine (nicotine products) is prohibited by Wisconsin law and Janesville ordinance. 
(10)  Several other states, counties, and municipalities have already taken action to prohibit the use of electronic delivery devices in certain locations. 
(11)  The American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network advocates for smoke-free-laws, including electronic delivery devices and supposed nicotine-free electronic delivery devices, in all workplaces to protect workers and the public from the harmful effects of secondhand exposure and states that preliminary studies indicate that nonusers can be exposed to the same potentially harmful chemicals as users, including nicotine, ultrafine particles and volatile organic compounds, which could be especially problematic for children, pregnant women, and people with heart disease. 
(12)  A 2009 study by the United States Food and Drug Administration found cancer-causing substances in several of the electronic delivery devices tested and found nicotine in some electronic delivery devices that claimed to contain no nicotine. 
(13)  This division incorporates by reference, as if fully set forth herein, verbatim the factual findings in Section 24-617 relating to synthetic cannabinoid, a.k.a., synthetic marijuana. 
(14)  This division incorporates by reference, as if fully set forth herein, verbatim the factual findings of the states, counties, and municipalities that have investigated, documented, and/or made independent findings and conclusions concerning the health effects and concerns arising from and/or pertaining to smoking as defined in this division. 
(15)  This division is adopted for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the people of the City of Janesville, especially recognizing the rights of nonsmokers who constitute a majority of the population; educating citizens affected by this division; and assisting individuals and persons in charge in maintaining compliance. 
(Code 1976, § 8.74.010)  
Sec. 24-331. - Adoption of state laws; more stringent laws govern. 
(a)  Incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this division, as if fully set forth, verbatim are Wis. Stats. § 101.123 as from time to time amended or renumbered. Any and all acts required to be performed or prohibited by any statutes so incorporated by reference is/are required or prohibited by this division. Any future amendments, revisions, or modifications of the statutes incorporated by this division are also adopted and incorporated as a part of this division. 
(b)  The more stringent provision set forth in this division or that is set forth in the incorporated state law shall always take precedence and govern, notwithstanding any conflict, inconsistency or ambiguity to the contrary. The intent is to at all times render this division in full force and effect and in conformity with Wis. Stats. § 101.123 as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 8.74.020)  
Sec. 24-332. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assisted living facility means a community-based residential facility, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 50.01(1g), a residential care apartment complex, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 50.01(1d), or an adult family home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 50.01(1)(b), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
Childcare center has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 49.136(1)(ad), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
Correctional facility means any of the following: 
(1)  A state prison, as defined or named in Wis. Stats. § 302.01, except a correctional institution under Wis. Stats. §§ 301.046(1) or 301.048(4)(b), as from time to time amended or renumbered, if the institution is the prisoner's place of residence and no one is employed there to ensure the prisoner's incarceration. 
(2)  A juvenile detention facility, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 938.02(10r), or a juvenile correctional facility, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 938.02(10p), except a juvenile correctional facility authorized under Wis. Stats. §§ 938.533(3)(b), 938.538(4)(b), or 938.539(5), as from time to time amended or renumbered if the facility is a private residence in which the juvenile is placed and no one is employed there to ensure that the juvenile remains in custody. 
(3)  A jail, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 165.85(2)(bg), a Huber facility under Wis. Stats. § 303.09, a work camp under Wis. Stats. § 303.10, a reforestation camp under Wis. Stats. § 303.07, or a lockup facility under Wis. Stats. § 302.30, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
Educational facility means any building used principally for educational purposes in which a school is located or a course of instruction or training program is offered that has been approved or licensed by a state agency or board. 
Electronic delivery device means any product containing or delivering nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption that may be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. The term "electronic delivery device" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any other product name or descriptor. 
Employment means any trade, occupation, or process of manufacture or any method of carrying on such trade, occupation, or process of manufacture in which any person may be engaged. 
Enclosed place means an area with a roof and with walls which occupy more than 50 percent of the perimeter of the area defining the space. The walls can be temporary or permanent and with or without openings. A fence, whether solid or open, does not constitute a wall. 
Inpatient health care facility means a hospital, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 50.33(2), a county home established under Wis. Stats. § 49.70, a county infirmary established under Wis. Stats. § 49.72, a nursing home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 50.01(3), a hospice, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 50.90(1), a Wisconsin veterans home under Wis. Stats. § 45.50, as from time to time amended or renumbered, or a treatment facility. 
Lodging establishment means any of the following: 
(1)  A bed and breakfast establishment, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 97.01(1g), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(2)  A hotel, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 97.01(7), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(3)  A tourist roominghouse, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 97.01(15k), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
Person in charge means the person, or his or her agent, who ultimately controls, governs or directs the activities aboard a public conveyance or at a location where smoking is prohibited or regulated under this division. 
Place of employment means any enclosed place that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including an office, a work area, an elevator, an employee lounge, a restroom, a conference room, a meeting room, a classroom, a hallway, a stairway, a lobby, a common area, a vehicle, or an employee cafeteria. 
Private club means a facility used by an organization that limits its membership and is organized for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose. 
Public conveyance means a mass transit vehicle, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(28m), a school bus as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(56), as from time to time amended or renumbered, or any other device by which persons are transported, for hire, on a highway or by rail, water, air, or guidewire within the state, but does not include such a device while providing transportation in interstate commerce. 
Public place means any enclosed place that is open to the public, regardless of whether a fee is charged or a place to which the public has lawful access or may be invited. 
Restaurant means an establishment as defined in Wis. Stats. § 97.01(14g), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
Retail electronic delivery device store means any retail store for which one of the primary purposes is the sale on the premises of electronic delivery devices and accessories. 
Retail establishment means any store or shop in which retail sales is the principal business conducted. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail establishment that does not have a "Class B" intoxicating liquor license or a Class "B" fermented malt beverages license and that generates 75 percent or more of its gross annual income from the retail sale of tobacco products and accessories. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, including hookahs and marijuana, whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. The term "smoking" shall include the use of an electronic delivery device which creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this division. 
Sports arena means any stadium, pavilion, gymnasium, swimming pool, skating rink, bowling center, or other building where spectator sporting events are held. 
State institution means a mental health institute, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 51.01(12), a center for the developmentally disabled, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 51.01(3), or a secure mental health facility at which persons are committed under Wis. Stats. § 980.06 as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
Tavern means an establishment, other than a restaurant, that holds a "Class B" intoxicating liquor license or Class "B" fermented malt beverages license. 
Tobacco bar means a tavern that generates 15 percent or more of its annual gross income from the sale on the tavern premises, other than from a vending machine, of cigars and tobacco for pipes. 
Tobacco product means any form of tobacco prepared in a manner suitable for smoking but not including a cigarette. 
Treatment facility means a publicly or privately operated inpatient facility that provides treatment of alcoholic, drug dependent, mentally ill, or developmentally disabled persons. 
Type 1 juvenile correctional facility has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 938.02(19), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 8.74.030)  
Sec. 24-333. - Prohibition against smoking. 
(a)  Except as provided in Section 24-335, no person may smoke in any of the following enclosed places: 
(1)  Residence halls or dormitories owned or operated by a college or university or residence halls or dormitories of the University of Wisconsin Rock County regardless of who operates or owns them. 
(2)  Childcare centers. 
(3)  Educational facilities. 
(4)  Inpatient health care facilities. 
(5)  Theaters. 
(6)  Correctional facilities. 
(7)  State institutions. 
(8)  Restaurants. 
(9)  Taverns. 
(10)  Private clubs. 
(11)  Retail establishments. 
(12)  Areas of multiple-unit residential properties. 
(13)  Lodging establishments. 
(14)  State, county, city, village, or town buildings. 
(15)  All enclosed places, other than those listed in Subsections (a)(1)—(14) of this section, that are places of employment or that are public places. All vehicles that are places of employment are considered enclosed places notwithstanding the definition of the term "enclosed places" in Section 24-332. 
(b)  No person may smoke at any of the following outdoor locations: 
(1)  Anywhere on the premises of a childcare center when children who are receiving childcare services are present. 
(2)  Anywhere on the grounds of a Type 1 juvenile correctional facility. 
(3)  A location that is 25 feet or less from a residence hall or dormitory that is owned or operated by the Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System. 
(4)  Anywhere on City premises. This includes, but is not limited to, any premises containing a building, parking ramp or lot, or park or trail controlled by the City. If a restaurant, tavern, private club, or retail establishment is located within this area, the person in charge of such establishment may designate an outside area that is a reasonable distance from any entrance to the establishment where customers, employees, or persons associated with the establishment may smoke. 
(c)  No person may smoke in any of the following: 
(1)  A sports arena. 
(2)  A bus shelter. 
(3)  A public conveyance. 
(d)  No person may use electronic delivery devices within 25 feet of an entrance to a school building. The term "school building" means a building under the control of a school board. 
(Code 1976, § 8.74.040)  
Sec. 24-334. - Responsibility of persons in charge. 
(a)  No person in charge may allow any person to smoke in violation of Section 24-333 at a location that is under the control or direction of the person in charge. 
(b)  A person in charge may not provide matches, ashtrays, or other equipment for smoking at the location where smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  A person in charge shall make reasonable efforts to prohibit persons from smoking at a location where smoking is prohibited by doing all of the following: 
(1)  Posting signs setting forth the prohibition and providing other appropriate notification and information concerning the prohibition. 
(2)  Refusing to serve a person, if the person is smoking in a restaurant, tavern, or private club. 
(3)  Asking a person who is smoking to refrain from smoking and, if the person refuses to do so, asking the person to leave the location. 
(d)  If a person refuses to leave a location after being requested to do so as provided in Subsection (c)(3) of this section, the person in charge shall immediately notify an appropriate law enforcement agency of the violation. 
(e)  A person in charge may take measures in addition to those listed in Subsections (b) and (c) of this section to prevent persons from being exposed to others who are smoking or to further ensure compliance with this section. 
(Code 1976, § 8.74.050)  
Sec. 24-335. - Exceptions. 
The prohibition against smoking in Section 24-333 does not apply to the following: 
(1)  A private residence. 
(2)  A room used by only one person in an assisted living facility as his or her residence. 
(3)  A room in an assisted living facility in which two or more persons reside if every person who lives in that room smokes and each of those persons has made a written request to the person in charge of the assisted living facility to be placed in a room where smoking is allowed. 
(4)  A retail tobacco store that is in existence on June 3, 2009, and in which only the smoking of cigars and pipes is allowed. 
(5)  A tobacco bar that is in existence on June 3, 2009, and in which only the smoking of cigars and pipes is allowed. 
(6)  A retail electronic delivery device store may provide and permit the use of electronic delivery devices and accessories for the purpose of sampling. 
(Code 1976, § 8.74.060)  
Sec. 24-336. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates Section 24-333 shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 for each violation together with the costs of prosecution, for each offense, or, in default of payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned for no more than 60 days for each violation in addition to such other penalties, remedies, sanctions and relief as may be, from time to time, provided by law. 
(b)  Except as provided in Subsections (c) and (d) of this section, any person in charge who violates Section 24-334(b), (c) or (d) shall be subject to a forfeiture of $100.00 for each offense together with the costs of prosecution, or, in default of payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned for not more than 60 days for each violation in addition to such other penalties, remedies, sanctions and relief as may be, from time to time, provided by law. 
(c)  For violations subject to the forfeiture under Subsection (b) of this section, if the person in charge has not previously received a warning notice for a violation of Section 24-334(b), (c) or (d), the law enforcement officer shall issue the person in charge a warning notice and may not issue a citation. 
(d)  No person in charge may be required under Subsection (b) of this section to forfeit more than $100.00 for each violation together with the costs of prosecution for all violations of Section 24-334(b), (c) or (d) occurring on a single day or in default of payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned for not more than 60 days for each violation in addition to such other penalties, remedies, sanctions and relief as may be, from time to time, provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 8.74.070)  
Sec. 24-337. - Injunctive relief. 
State or local officials or any affected party may institute an action in any court with jurisdiction to enjoin repeated violations of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 8.74.080)  
Secs. 24-338—24-362. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 24-363—24-382. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BURGLAR ALARMS, SYSTEMS AND USERS 
 
Sec. 24-383. - Purpose. 
This division is enacted to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to burglar, holdup and fire alarm systems, alarm businesses and alarm users. Both society in general and public safety in particular will be aided by providing a useful and usable system of private security which properly balances quick response by Police and Fire Departments with minimization of police officer and firefighter time spent on alarms which are false or otherwise not the intended function of private security systems. 
(Code 1976, § 9.34.010)  
Sec. 24-384. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm business means any business in which the owners or employees engage in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, or servicing alarm systems. 
Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical equipment designed and arranged to immediately signal or otherwise notify the occurrence or potential occurrence of a fire, burglary or robbery, including, but not limited to, local and other alarms employing an audible signal and/or a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises. Excluded from this definition and from the scope of this division are alarms and alarm systems used solely to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located. 
Annunciator means the instrument or device on an alarm console or other device at the receiving terminal of a signal line which through visual and/or audible signals indicates that an alarm device at a particular location has been activated. The activation of an annunciator may also result from line trouble. 
Answering service refers to a telephone answering service which receives, on a generally continuous or ongoing basis through trained or other employees, emergency signals from alarm systems and thereafter immediately relaying the alarm, signal, or message by any means or form, including, but not limited to, by live voice to the Rock County 911 Communication Center. 
Automatic dialing device refers to an alarm system which, over regular telephone lines and by direct connection or otherwise, automatically sends a pre-recorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
Burglar alarm system refers to an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
False fire alarm means an alarm notification summoning the Fire Department to the location of an alarm activation in which the responding firefighter finds no evidence of a fire emergency. The term "false fire alarm" does not include an alarm activation signal caused by extraordinary extremes of weather such as high winds, lightning storms, other systemic electrical disturbances, or surges in water main pressure. 
False police alarm means an alarm notification summoning the Police Department to the location of an alarm activation in which the responding police officer finds no evidence of the crimes of burglary, attempted burglary, robbery or attempted robbery. The term "false police alarm" does not include an alarm activation signal caused by extraordinary extremes of weather such as high winds, lightning storms or other systemic electric disturbances. 
Fire Chief means the Chief of the Fire Department of the City or his or her designated representative. 
Holdup alarm system refers to an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
Interconnect means the connection of an alarm system to a voice grade telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an emergency message or alarm upon the activation of the alarm system. 
Modified central station means a location to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected and in which operators supervise the circuits. 
Police Chief means the Chief of the Police Department of the City or his or her designated representative. 
Primary truckline means a telephone line leading directly into the Rock County 911 Communication Center that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis, which is identified as such by a specific emergency number or numbers listed in the telephone directory issued by the telephone company, and which covers the service area within the Police and Fire Departments' jurisdiction. 
Subscriber means a person who buys, leases, or otherwise obtains an alarm signaling device system or related service and thereafter contracts with, hires or retains an alarm business to monitor and/or service the alarm device or system. 
(Code 1976, § 9.34.020)  
Sec. 24-385. - Administrative rules. 
The Chief of Police and Fire Chief shall jointly and severally promulgate such written rules as may be necessary for the implementation of this division and its intent. Such rules shall require the prior approval of the City Manager and shall be open to inspection by the public. 
(Code 1976, § 9.34.030)  
Sec. 24-386. - Automatic dialing devices prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall interconnect any automatic dialing device to a Police or Fire Department primary truckline or any other Police or Fire Department truckline. 
(b)  No alarm system shall be operated or programmed to initiate, transmit, or deliver by automatic means to the Police and/or Fire Department an alarm notification described as "panic," "disturbance," "police alert," "medical emergency," or other miscellaneous incidents not constituting burglary, holdup or fire alarms. 
(Code 1976, § 9.34.040)  
Sec. 24-387. - Notification of disruption. 
When an alarm business' service to its subscriber is disrupted for any reason by the alarm business, or the alarm business becomes aware of such disruption, it shall promptly notify its subscriber by telephone that protection is no longer being provided. If, however, the alarm business has written instructions from its subscriber not to make such notification by telephone during certain hours, the alarm business may comply with such instruction. 
(Code 1976, § 9.34.070)  
Sec. 24-388. - Police response fee. 
(a)  There shall be imposed a fee for each police response to a false alarm. The fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(b)  This fee shall be imposed whether the Rock County 911 Communication Center receives the alarm through any intermediary such as an answering service or modified central station. 
(c)  No fee shall be imposed by this section in the event the choice and actual notification of the Police Department are made directly by the person. 
(d)  In the event that the Chief of Police is notified of the date of the installation of a new alarm system, the fee imposed by this section may be waived by the Chief of Police for not more than 90 days beginning with the date of installation. 
(Code 1976, § 9.34.080)  
Sec. 24-389. - Fire response fee. 
(a)  There shall be imposed a fee for each fire response to a false alarm. Such fee for each premises shall be in an amount established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(b)  In the event that the Fire Chief is notified of the date of the installation of a new alarm system, the fee imposed by this section may be waived by the Fire Chief for not more than 90 days beginning with the date of installation. 
(Code 1976, § 9.34.090)  
Sec. 24-390. - Termination of alarms. 
(a)  The Chief of Police and Fire Chief are jointly and severally authorized to require that the owner or lessee of any alarm system shall disconnect such device when such produces, in the sole judgment of either Chief, an excessive number of false alarms. 
(b)  Disconnection shall not be ordered unless the requirements set forth in this subsection have been complied with: 
(1)  Five false alarms for which a fee has been imposed have been responded to in any calendar year and a warning letter has been sent to the lessee/user/owner after the fourth false alarm. 
(2)  The owner/user/lessee is placed in a probationary period for six months and has been so notified in writing. 
(3)  Three false alarms for which a fee has been imposed have been responded to during such probationary period. 
(c)  Disconnection ordered under this provision shall not exceed six months. 
(d)  The Chief of Police or Fire Chief may suspend the disconnection during the six-month period if the owner/user/lessee provides to the Chief convincing proof, to the sole satisfaction of the Chief, that effective and permanent corrective action has been taken. 
(e)  The owner/user/lessee of an alarm system which has been ordered disconnected by either the Fire Chief or Chief of Police has the right to appeal such action in writing to the City Manager. 
(f)  Disconnection shall be ordered in the event any user is more than 90 days delinquent from the date of the invoice in paying in full any police or fire or monitoring fees. 
(Code 1976, § 9.34.100)  
Sec. 24-391. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall, upon conviction therefor, pay a forfeiture to the City, in the amount of not less than $50.00 and nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and upon failure to pay such forfeiture and costs, be imprisoned for not more than 90 days. 
(Code 1976, § 9.34.110)  
Secs. 24-392—24-410. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning disorderly conduct, see Wis. Stats. § 947.01. 
 
Sec. 24-411. - Disorderly conduct. 
No person shall, in a public or private place, engage in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct under circumstances in which the conduct tends to cause or provoke a disturbance. 
(Code 1976, § 9.39.010; Ord. No. 84-400, § (part), 1984)  
Sec. 24-412. - Unlawful use of telephone. 
No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse or harass, make a telephone call and threaten to inflict injury or personal harm to any person or the property of any person. 
(2)  With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse, harass or offend, telephone another and use any obscene, lewd or profane language or suggest any lewd or lascivious act. 
(3)  Make or cause the telephone of another repeatedly to ring, with intent to harass any person at the called number. 
(4)  Make repeated telephone calls, whether or not conversation ensues, with intent solely to harass any person at the called number. 
(5)  Make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without disclosing his or her identity and with intent to abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called number. 
(6)  Knowingly permit any telephone under his or her control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section. 
(Code 1976, § 9.39.020; Ord. No. 84-400, § (part), 1984)  
Sec. 24-413. - Unlawful use of computerized communication systems. 
(a)  In this section, the term "message" means any transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, data or intelligence of any nature, or any transfer of a computer program, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 943.70(1)(c), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(b)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse, annoy, offend, or harass another person, send a message to the person or with a reasonable expectation that the person will receive the message on an electronic mail or other computerized communication system, and in that message threaten to inflict injury or physical harm to any person or the property of any person. 
(2)  With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse, annoy, offend, or harass another person, send a message on an electronic mail or other computerized communication system to the person or with a reasonable expectation that the person will receive the message and in that message use any obscene, lewd or profane language, or suggest any lewd or lascivious act. 
(3)  With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse, annoy, offend, or harass another person, send a message to the person or with the reasonable expectation that the person will receive the message on an electronic mail or other computerized communication system while intentionally preventing or attempt to prevent the disclosure of his or her own identity. 
(4)  With intent solely to harass or annoy another person, send repeated messages to the person or with the reasonable expectation that the person will receive the messages on an electronic mail or other computerized communication system. 
(5)  With intent to harass or annoy another person, send a message to the person or with the reasonable expectation that the person will receive the message on an electronic mail or other computerized communication system while intentionally preventing or attempting to prevent the disclosure of his or her identity. 
(6)  Knowingly permit or direct another person to send a message prohibited by this section from any computer terminal or other device that is used to send messages on an electronic mail or other computerized communication system and that is under his or her control. 
(Code 1976, § 9.39.020)  
Sec. 24-414. - Violation; penalty. 
The penalty for violating any provision set forth in this division shall be a forfeiture to the City of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 together with the costs of prosecution, or in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, imprisonment in the county jail for not less than five nor more than 60 days. 
(Code 1976, § 9.39.030; Ord. No. 84-400, § (part), 1984)  
Secs. 24-415—24-441. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DISTURBING THE PEACE 
 
Sec. 24-442. - Generally. 
No person shall, within the limits of the City, commit any of the offenses set out in this division. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02(part); Code 1976, § 9.42.010; Ord. No. 74-399, § 1(part), 1974)  
Sec. 24-443. - Loud or raucous noise unlawful. 
No person shall make any unnecessary and annoying noise. No person shall, through the means of sound amplifiers or other instruments, make or emit loud or raucous noises in the public streets, public parks or other public places. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02(part); Code 1976, § 9.42.020; Ord. No. 74-399, § 1(part), 1974)  
Sec. 24-444. - Helicopter and aircraft use for construction purposes prohibited from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
No person may use or permit the use of any helicopter or other aircraft for construction or construction related purposes anywhere in the City between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. each night, except for emergencies. 
(Code 1976, § 9.42.025)  
Sec. 24-445. - Assault unlawful. 
No person shall assault another when not excusable or justifiable, or use in reference to and in the presence of another, or in reference to and in the presence of any member of his or her family, abusive or obscene language intended or naturally tending to provoke an assault or any breach of the peace. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02(part); Code 1976, § 9.42.030; Ord. No. 74-399, § 1(part), 1974)  
Sec. 24-446. - Prowling unlawful. 
No person shall prowl about the premises of another in the nighttime, or peek in windows on another's premises, or do any other act intended or naturally tending to frighten or alarm other persons. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02(part); Code 1976, § 9.42.040; Ord. No. 74-399, § 1(part), 1974)  
Sec. 24-447. - Obstruction of highways or traffic unlawful. 
No person shall obstruct any street, sidewalk, crossing, alley, or bridge or any other public places within the City in such manner as to prevent, interfere with, or obstruct the ordinary free use of said public street, bridge, sidewalk, crossing, alley, or other public places by persons passing along and over the same. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02(part); Code 1976, § 9.42.050; Ord. No. 74-399, § 1(part), 1974)  
Sec. 24-448. - Refusing to move from school grounds unlawful. 
No person shall remain on any school grounds in the City when requested to move by the principal of the school or his or her authorized representative or any police officer. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02(part); Code 1976, § 9.42.060; Ord. No. 74-399, § 1(part), 1974)  
Sec. 24-449. - Refusing to move from public property. 
No person shall remain in a group or crowd upon the public streets, sidewalks, or adjacent doorways or entrances, street crossings or bridges or any other public place, under circumstances in which such conduct tends to cause or provoke a disturbance, after being requested to move by any police officer. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02(part); Code 1976, § 9.42.070; Ord. No. 74-399, § 1(part), 1974)  
Sec. 24-450. - Climbing on motor vehicles unlawful when. 
No person shall climb, lay or sit upon the motor vehicle of another person without permission from the owner or person in charge of such vehicle, while such vehicle is parked or standing upon the public streets, public parking lots or other public areas of the City. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02(part); Code 1976, § 9.42.080; Ord. No. 74-399, § 1(part), 1974)  
Sec. 24-451. - Intoxication. 
If any person is in such a state of intoxication as to be annoying or disturbing to any member of his or her own family or others, he or she shall be considered to be disturbing the peace, whether a disturbance or annoyance occurs in his or her own home or elsewhere, provided written complaint be made to the court by one of the parties so disturbed. 
(Prior Code, § 18.02(part); Code 1976, § 9.74.090; Ord. No. 74-399, § 1(part), 1974; Ord. No. 79-148, § 5, 1979)  
Sec. 24-452. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision set forth in this division shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty as follows: 
(1)  Not less than $50.00 nor more than $150.00 for a first violation within 12 months. 
(2)  Not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 for a second violation within 12 months. 
(3)  Not less than $150.00 nor more than $500.00 for a third violation within 12 months. 
(4)  Not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for a fourth and subsequent violations within 12 months. 
(b)  To each such forfeiture the Court shall add and impose against the violator all customary prosecution court costs, fees and assessments. 
(c)  Upon default in payment of an imposed forfeiture, such convicted person shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days and/or as otherwise provided by law. 
(d)  In addition to any and all other remedies herein and/or at law and/or equity, the City may seek injunctive relief to enjoin and/or abate such violation and/or its continuance. 
(Code 1976, § 9.42.100)  
Secs. 24-453—24-472. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - MOB ACTION AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning unlawful assemblies, see Wis. Stats. § 947.06. 
 
Sec. 24-473. - Emergency proclamation—Regulations to preserve peace and order. 
Whenever, in the judgment of the City Council, it is determined that an emergency exists as a result of mob action or other civil disobedience causing danger of injury to or damages to persons or property, or, when in the Council's judgment, such mob action or other civil disobedience appears imminent, the Council shall have the power to impose by proclamation any or all of the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and order of the City: 
(1)  Impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the City thereby requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks or other public places; provided, however, that physicians, nurses and ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services, firefighter and City authorized or requested law enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted from such curfew; 
(2)  Order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within the City for the period of the emergency, such businesses to include, but not be limited to, those selling intoxicating liquors, cereal malt beverages, gasoline or firearms; 
(3)  Designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking areas closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic; 
(4)  Call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the City to assist in preserving and keeping the peace within the City. This shall include the authorization to place on an active status, all auxiliary police previously placed on an inactive basis by the Police and Fire Commission. 
(Prior Code, § 19.12(1); Code 1976, § 9.45.010)  
Sec. 24-474. - Emergency proclamation—Effective when. 
The proclamation of emergency provided in this division shall become effective upon its issuance and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media. 
(Prior Code, § 19.12(2); Code 1976, § 9.45.020)  
Sec. 24-475. - Emergency proclamation—Termination; extension when. 
Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this division shall terminate after 72 hours from the issuance thereof, or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists, whichever occurs first; provided, however, that such emergency may be extended for such additional periods of time as determined necessary by resolution of the governing body. 
(Prior Code, § 19.12(3); Code 1976, § 9.45.030)  
Sec. 24-476. - Emergency proclamation—Violations; penalty. 
Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with the lawful orders of duly authorized law enforcement officers or personnel charged with the responsibility of enforcing the proclamation of emergency authorized in this division is deemed in violation hereof, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a forfeiture of not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00, and in default in payment thereof by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not less than ten days, nor to exceed six months. 
(Prior Code, § 19.12(4); Code 1976, § 9.45.040)  
Sec. 24-477. - Emergency proclamation—Penalty takes preference. 
The penalty provision in Section 24-476 applies in preference to the penalties provided in Sections 8-48, 24-858, 24-884, 34-152, 34-346. 
(Prior Code, § 19.12(7); Code 1976, § 9.45.050)  
Secs. 24-478—24-507. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CURFEW ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 24-508. - Intent. 
The intent of this division is to: 
(1)  Protect children from becoming victims or perpetrators of crimes. 
(2)  Assist parents in exercising their responsibility over their minor children. 
(3)  Protect the community from the dangers posed by unsupervised minors who are out late at night and in the early morning. 
(Code 1976, § 9.50.010)  
Sec. 24-509. - Prohibition; regulation. 
No person under the age of 17 years shall congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in or upon any public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, greenbelts, public properties, public buildings, playgrounds, school grounds, places of amusement and entertainment, dance halls, premises licensed for sale of alcohol beverages, vacant lots or vacant buildings in the City, either on foot or in or upon any licensed or unlicensed conveyance or device being driven or parked thereon, Sunday through and including Thursday nights, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. through and including 5:00 a.m. the next day, except as provided below: Friday and Saturday nights, between the hours of 11:59 p.m. (midnight) through and including 5:00 a.m. the next morning, except as provided below. 
(Code 1976, § 9.50.020)  
Sec. 24-510. - Exceptions. 
This division shall not apply to any person under the age of 17 when: 
(1)  The child is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or other responsible adult having the child's care, custody or control. 
(2)  The child is responding to an emergency. 
(3)  The child is traveling directly between his or her place of residence, school, place of employment or other activity excepted by this section. 
(4)  The child is at work or performing certain employment work or services. 
(5)  The child is attending a supervised school, supervised religious or supervised recreational activity. 
(6)  The child is performing an errand directed by his or her parent, legal guardian or other responsible adult. 
(7)  The child is engaging in activities protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. 
(Code 1976, § 9.50.030)  
Sec. 24-511. - Responsibility of parents. 
No parent, guardian or other adult having the care and custody of a person under the age of 17 years shall willfully permit or allow such child under the age of 17 years to violate the curfew set forth in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 9.50.040)  
Sec. 24-512. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person under the age of 17 who violates any provision of this division shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $250.00 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to the remedies and alternatives for non-payment as provided by law for children. 
(b)  The Court may order, in lieu of or in addition to a monetary forfeiture as provided in this section, that the child participate in a supervised work program or community service program as available and as permitted and ordered by the court and as allowed by Wis. Stats. §§ 938.343 and 938.34(5g) as from time to time amended, revised or renumbered, and upon a failure to comply with any such order, the child shall be subject to the remedies and alternatives for noncompliance, as provided by law for children, including, but not limited to, the forfeiture provided in Subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the person under 17 years who violates this division shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to the remedies and alternatives for non-payment as provided by law for adults. 
(Code 1976, § 9.50.050)  
Secs. 24-513—24-532. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - TRUANCY, CONTRIBUTING TO TRUANCY 
 
Sec. 24-533. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Acceptable excuse means an acceptable excuse, as defined in Wis. Stats. §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
Dropout means a child who has ceased to attend school, does not attend a public or private school, technical college or home-based private educational program on a full-time basis, has not graduated from high school and does not have an acceptable excuse under Wis. Stats. § 118.15(1)(b) to (d) or (3), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
Habitual truant means any person who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part or all of five or more days on which school is held during a semester. 
Truancy is as defined by Wis. Stats. §§ 118.15 and 118.16, as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
Truant means a pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part or all of any day on which school is held during a school semester. 
(Code 1976, § 9.52.010)  
Sec. 24-534. - Adoption of state truancy and contributing to truancy laws. 
(a)  Any and all Wisconsin Statutes pertaining to and governing truancy and contributing to truancy, as may be from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. Any act prohibited by state law is prohibited by this division. 
(b)  In the event that any provision of this division conflicts with any provision of state law, the state law shall govern. 
(Code 1976, § 9.52.020)  
Sec. 24-535. - Prohibition of truancy and habitual truancy. 
No person who has not completed the end of the semester on his or her 18th birthday shall be a truant or habitual truant. 
(Code 1976, § 9.52.030)  
Sec. 24-536. - Dropouts. 
No person under the age of 18 shall cease to attend school unless he or she attends a public or private school, technical college or home-based private educational program on a full-time basis or has an acceptable excuse under Wis. Stats. § 118.15(1)(b) to (d) or (3), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 9.52.040)  
Sec. 24-537. - Prohibition of contributing to truancy. 
(a)  No person 17 years of age or older shall, by any act or omission, knowingly encourage or contribute to the truancy of any person. 
(b)  An act or omission contributes to the truancy of a person, whether or not the person is adjudged to be in need of protection or services, if the natural and probable consequences of that act or omission would be to cause the person to be truant. 
(c)  In a prosecution under this section, if the defendant proves that he or she is unable to comply with the law because of the disobedience of the child, the action shall be dismissed and the child shall be referred to the court assigned to exercise jurisdiction under Wis. Stats. ch. 48. 
(d)  This prohibition does not apply to a person who has under his or her control a person who has been sanctioned under Wis. Stats. § 49.26(1)(h), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 9.52.050)  
Sec. 24-538. - Prohibition of violating state truancy laws. 
No person may violate any provision of Wisconsin's truancy statutes, as from time to time, amended, revised, or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 9.52.060)  
Sec. 24-539. - Penalty. 
(a)  Habitual truancy. Any person who violates any provision of this division related to habitual truancy shall be subject to one or more of the following dispositions and orders of the court, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 938.342(1g), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered: 
(1)  Suspension of the person's Wisconsin motor vehicle operating privilege, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered, for not less than 30 days nor more than one year, in which event, the Court shall immediately seize and take into possession any and all such suspended licenses and forward the same to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension. 
(2)  An order for the person to participate in counseling, community service, or a supervised work program, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. The costs of any such counseling, supervised work program or other community service work may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. 
(3)  An order for the person to remain at home except during such hours as the person is attending religious worship or a school program, including travel time reasonably necessary to and from the school program or place of worship. The order may permit a person to leave his or her home if the person is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(4)  An order for the person to attend an educational program, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 938.3(7d), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
(5)  An order for the department of workforce development to revoke, under Wis. Stats. § 103.72, as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered, a permit under Wis. Stats. § 103.70, as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered, authorizing employment of the person. 
(6)  An order for the person to be placed in a teen court program, as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.342(1g)(f), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
(7)  An order for the person to attend school. 
(8)  A forfeiture of not more than $500.00, plus costs, subject to Wis. Stats. § 938.37, as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. All or part of the forfeiture, plus costs, may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. No court costs or penalty assessments may be imposed on a person less than 14 years of age. 
(9)  Any other reasonable conditions consistent with state law, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or remaining on specified premises, and restrictions on associating with other children or adults. 
(10)  An order placing the person under formal or informal supervision, as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.34(2), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered, for up to one year. 
(11)  An order for the person's parent, guardian, or legal custodian to participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's or legal custodian's own expense or to attend school with the person, or both. 
(12)  An order for the person to report to a youth report center after school, in the evening, on weekends, on other nonschool days, or at any other time that the person is not under immediate adult supervision, for participation in the social, behavioral, academic, community service, and other programming of the center as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.342 (1g)(k), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
(b)  Truant. Any person who violates any provision of this division related to truancy shall be subject to one or more of the following dispositions and orders of the court, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered: 
(1)  An order for the person to attend school. 
(2)  a.  A forfeiture of not more than $50.00 plus costs for a first violation; or 
b.  A forfeiture of not more than $100.00 plus costs for any second or subsequent violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation. 
Forfeitures are subject to Wis. Stats. § 938.37, as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered, and subject to a maximum cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than $500.00 for all violations committed during a school semester. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. No court costs or penalty assessments may be imposed on a person less than 14 years of age. 
(c)  Dropouts. Any person who is at least 16 years of age but less than 18 years of age and is a dropout shall be subject to a suspension of the person's Wisconsin motor vehicle operating privilege, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 118.163(2m), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered and as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. Any such suspension shall be in effect until the person reaches the age of 18. At the time of suspension under this division, the court shall immediately seize and take into possession any and all such suspended license and forward same to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension. 
(d)  Adult. Any person who contributes to truancy, as set forth in this division, shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty as follows: 
(1)  a.  For the first offense, a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00; or 
b.  For a second or subsequent offense, by a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(2)  To each such forfeiture, the Court shall add and impose against the violator all customary court costs, penalties, assessments, and fees. 
(3)  Upon default in payment of the imposed forfeiture, such convicted person shall be incarcerated for not more than 90 days and/or have his or her Wisconsin motor vehicle operating privilege suspended and/or revoked for such period of time as the court deems proper, in accord with applicable law and as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 9.52.070)  
Secs. 24-540—24-556. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY CHILDREN 
 
Sec. 24-557. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cigarette means any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or any substance other than tobacco and as defined in Wis. Stats. § 139.30, as from time to time amended, revised or renumbered. 
Law enforcement officer means any person employed by the state or any political subdivision of the state, for the purpose of detecting and preventing crime and enforcing laws or ordinances and who is authorized to make arrests for violations of laws or ordinances he or she is employed to enforce and as defined in Wis. Stats. §§ 30.50(4s) or 165.85(2)(c), as from time to time amended, revised or renumbered. 
Nicotine product means a product that contains nicotine and is not any of the following: A tobacco product, a cigarette, or a product that has been approved by the U.S. food and drug administration for sale as a smoking cessation product or for another medical purpose and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose as defined in Wis. Stats. § 134.66(f), as from time to time amended, revised or renumbered. 
Tobacco products means cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed and other tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing and smoking as defined in Wis. Stats. § 139.75(12), as from time to time amended, revised or renumbered. The term "tobacco products" does not include cigarettes. 
(Code 1976, § 9.54.010)  
Sec. 24-558. - Adoption of state laws prohibiting purchase and possession of cigarettes, nicotine products, and tobacco products by children. 
(a)  Any and all Wisconsin Statutes and administrative codes pertaining to and governing the purchase and possession of cigarettes, nicotine products, and tobacco products by children, inclusive of, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. §§ 134.66 and 254.92, as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
(b)  In the event that any provision of this division conflicts with any provision of state law, the provisions of this division shall govern to the extent provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 9.54.020)  
Sec. 24-559. - Prohibition of purchase or possession of cigarettes, nicotine products, or tobacco products by children. 
Except as provided elsewhere in this division, no child may do any of the following: 
(1)  Buy or attempt to buy any cigarette, nicotine product, or tobacco product. 
(2)  Falsely represent his or her age for the purpose of receiving any cigarette, nicotine product, or tobacco product. 
(3)  Possess any cigarette, nicotine product, or tobacco product. 
(Code 1976, § 9.54.030)  
Sec. 24-560. - Exceptions. 
A child may purchase or possess cigarettes, nicotine products, or tobacco products for the sole purpose of resale in the course of employment during his or her working hours if employed by a retailer licensed under Article VII of Chapter 12 and/or under Wis. Stats. § 134.65(1), both as from time to time amended, revised or renumbered, or if at least 15 years of age and participating in an investigation under Wis. Stats. § 254.916 that is conducted in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 254.916(3), both as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 9.54.040)  
Sec. 24-561. - Seizure. 
(a)  A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette, nicotine product, or tobacco product involved in a violation of any provision of this division committed in his or her presence. 
(b)  All seized cigarettes, nicotine products, and tobacco products shall be held as evidence by the Janesville Police Department and, after disposition of the related case, be disposed of in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 9.54.050)  
Sec. 24-562. - Prohibition of violating state laws prohibiting purchase or possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by children. 
No person may violate any provision of Wisconsin's statutes prohibiting the purchase or possession of cigarettes, nicotine products, or tobacco products by children, under Wis. Stats §§ 134.66 and 254.92 and/or Chapter 4, as from time to time amended, revised or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 9.54.060)  
Sec. 24-563. - Prohibition of violating any other City ordinances governing the purchase or possession of cigarettes or tobacco products. 
No person may violate any provision of any other City ordinance, as from time to time amended, revised or renumbered governing, licensing and/or in any manner pertaining to the purchase, sale, use or possession of cigarettes or tobacco products including, but not limited to, Article VII of Chapter 12. 
(Code 1976, § 9.54.070)  
Sec. 24-564. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this division is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1976, § 9.54.080)  
Sec. 24-565. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  Any child who violates any provision of this division shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 together with the costs of prosecution, for each offense. 
(b)  Any adult, person, retailer, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this division related to the sale of cigarettes, nicotine products, or tobacco products to children shall, upon conviction, be subject to any one or combination of the following forfeitures, dispositions and/or orders of the court, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 134.66, as from time to time amended, revised or renumbered. 
(1)  A forfeiture of: 
a.  Not more than $500.00 if the person has not committed a previous violation within 12 months of the violation; 
b.  Not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 if the person has committed a previous violation within 12 months of the violation. 
(2)  Upon default of payment of such forfeiture and cost as imposed, the violator shall be imprisoned until such forfeiture and costs are paid, not to exceed the maximum time permitted by law. 
(3)  In addition to and not in lieu of any forfeitures imposed, the City Council may suspend and/or revoke any license or permit issued under Article VII of Chapter 12, as from time to time amended, revised or renumbered. 
(c)  A court shall suspend any license or permit issued under Wis. Stats. §§ 134.65, 139.34 or 139.79 or any ordinance adopting those sections as follows: 
(1)  Not more than three days if the court finds that the person committed a violation within 12 months after committing one previous violation; 
(2)  Not less than three days nor more than ten days, if the court finds that the person committed a violation within 12 months after committing two other violations; or 
(3)  Not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days, if the court finds that the person committed the violation within 12 months after committing three or more other violations. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this division related to the purchasing of cigarettes, tobacco products, or nicotine products on behalf of, or providing to, any person who is under 18 years of age shall, upon conviction, be subject to: 
(1)  A forfeiture of: 
a.  Not more than $500.00 if the person has not committed a previous violation within 30 months of the violation. 
b.  Not more than $1,000.00 if the person has committed two previous violations within 30 months of the violation. 
c.  Not more than $10,000.00 if the person has committed three or more previous violations within 30 months of the violation. 
(2)  Upon default of payment of such forfeiture and cost as imposed, the violator shall be imprisoned until such forfeiture and costs are paid, not to exceed the maximum time permitted by law. 
(Code 1976, § 9.54.090)  
Secs. 24-566—24-593. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA OR DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 24-594. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind that are used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance or controlled substance analog as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 961. The term "drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Kits used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance or controlled substance analog can be derived. 
(2)  Kits used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances or controlled substance analogs. 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant that is a controlled substance. 
(4)  Testing equipment used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of, controlled substances or controlled substance analogs. 
(5)  Scales and balances used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances or controlled substance analogs. 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in cutting controlled substances or controlled substance analogs. 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana. 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in compounding controlled substances or controlled substance analogs. 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances or controlled substance analogs. 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in storing or concealing controlled substances or controlled substance analogs. 
(11)  Objects used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls. 
b.  Water pipes. 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials. 
g.  Chamber pipes. 
h.  Carburetor pipes. 
i.  Electric pipes. 
j.  Air-driven pipes. 
k.  Chilams. 
l.  Bongs. 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
Practitioner means: 
(1)  A physician, advanced practice nurse, dentist, veterinarian, podiatrist, optometrist, scientific investigator or, subject to Wis. Stats. § 448.21(3), a physician assistant, or other person licensed, registered, certified or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to, administer or use in teaching or chemical analysis a controlled substance in the course of professional practice or research in the State of Wisconsin. 
(2)  A pharmacy, hospital or other institution licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to or administer a controlled substance in the course of professional practice or research in the State of Wisconsin. 
Primarily means chiefly or mainly. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended for use in parenterally injecting substances into the human body and any items, including pipes, papers and accessories, that are designed for use or primarily intended for use with tobacco products are excluded from this definition. 
(Code 1976, § 9.55.010; Ord. No. 2018-718, § I, 6-25-2018 )  
Sec. 24-595. - Possession of marijuana prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall possess marijuana, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 961.01(14), unless it was obtained directly from, or pursuant to a valid prescription or order of, a practitioner who is acting in the course of his or her professional practice, or unless otherwise authorized by Wis. Stats. ch. 961, to possess marijuana. 
(b)  If a complaint is issued regarding an allegation of possession of more than 25 grams of marijuana, or possession of any amount of marijuana following a conviction in the State of Wisconsin for possession of marijuana, the subject of the complaint may not be prosecuted under this section for the same action that is the subject of the complaint unless the charges are dismissed or the district attorney declines to prosecute the case as required by Wis. Stats. § 66.0107(1)(bm). 
(Code 1976, § 9.55.020; Ord. No. 2018-718, § I, 6-25-2018 )  
Sec. 24-596. - Adoption of state law prohibiting possession of drug paraphernalia. 
Wis. Stats. § 961.573(1), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered prohibiting the possession of drug paraphernalia is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth as permitted by Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0107(1)(bp) and 961.577. 
(Code 1976, § 9.55.030; Ord. No. 2018-718, § I, 6-25-2018 )  
Sec. 24-597. - Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited; determination. 
(a)  No person may use, or possess with the primary intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance or controlled substance analog as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 961. 
(b)  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority shall consider, in addition to all other legally relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 
(2)  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this division. 
(3)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances or controlled substance analogs. 
(4)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances or controlled substance analogs on the object. 
(5)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this division. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this division shall not prevent a finding that the object is designed for use or primarily intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(6)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use. 
(7)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object that explain or depict its use. 
(8)  Local advertising concerning its use. 
(9)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
(10)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
(11)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
(12)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(c)  In determining under this section whether an item is designed for a particular use, a court or other authority shall consider the objective physical characteristics and design features of the item. 
(d)  In determining under this section whether an item is primarily intended for a particular use, a court or other authority shall consider the subjective intent of the defendant. 
(Code 1976, § 9.55.040; Ord. No. 2018-718, § I, 6-25-2018 )  
Sec. 24-598. - Seizure. 
(a)  A law enforcement officer shall seize any marijuana or drug paraphernalia involved in a violation of any provision of this division committed in his or her presence. 
(b)  All seized marijuana or drug paraphernalia shall be held as evidence by the Janesville Police Department and, after disposition of the related case, be disposed of in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 9.55.050; Ord. No. 2018-718, § I, 6-25-2018 )  
Sec. 24-599. - Violation; penalty. 
The penalty for violating any provision set forth in this division shall be a forfeiture to the City of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 together with the costs of prosecution, or in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days and/or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 9.55.060; Ord. No. 2018-718, § I, 6-25-2018 )  
Secs. 24-600—24-616. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - POSSESSION, SALE AND USE OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 24-617. - Introduction; purpose; definitions; findings. 
(a)  The Janesville Chief of Police and City Council have determined that herbal preparations powdered or sprayed with a chemical synthetic cannabinoid are available for sale within the City of Janesville that claim to produce intoxicating effects similar to THC or marijuana. THC is the psychoactive ingredient in marijuana. 
(b)  While synthetic cannabinoids and synthetic cannabinoid substances are not yet categorized as illegal controlled substances under Wisconsin or federal law, several other countries, states, counties, and municipalities have already taken action to prohibit these substances due to increased overdoses and other negative health effects and concerns. 
(c)  This division incorporates by reference, as if fully set forth herein, verbatim the factual findings of the countries, states, counties, and municipalities that have made investigated, documented, and/or made independent findings and conclusions concerning the increased overdoses and/or other negative health effects and concerns arising from and/or pertaining to the use of synthetic cannabinoids and/or synthetic cannabinoid substances. 
(d)  While these synthetic cannabinoids and synthetic cannabinoid substances are often marketed as benign and legal alternatives to marijuana, they are potentially dangerous to users as the substances can create potency from three up to 100 times greater than marijuana, produce severe adverse health conditions, such as, but not limited to, hallucinations, paranoia, seizures, and vomiting based upon reported emergency room experiences in areas of the country where use is more prevalent, and further that long-term health effects of use of these substances are not yet known. 
(e)  Such substances, also known as fake marijuana and fake pot, are being sold at shops, mostly in the Midwest, under the common names K2 and Spice. The states of Kansas and Missouri, and the country of Ireland, Princeton, MN; North Logan, Utah; Poplarville, MS; Wood River, IL; Allen County, IN; Milton, WI; Eau Claire, WI and La Crosse, WI, to name a few, have each adopted legislation to ban the substance for health, welfare, safety, and peace reasons. 
(f)  Often sold in gram packets for $10.00 to $20.00, K2 and other synthetic cannabinoids are said to mimic marijuana's effects. People smoke it in joints, pipes, bongs, and vaporizers, just like marijuana. 
(g)  One general news article states that Dr. John Huffman, professor of organic chemistry at Clemson, created the compound. That recipe found its way to marijuana users who replicated Huffman's work and began spraying it onto dried flowers, herbs, and tobacco. 
(h)  Products that contain (or have contained at one time) synthetic cannabinoids: 
(1)  Spice, Smoke Blend, K2, Genie, Yucatan Fire, Skunk, DaScents, Sence, Smoke, ChillX, Highdi's, Almdröhner, Earth Impact, Gorillaz, Galaxy, Gold Space, Truckin, Solar Flare, Moon, Rocks, Blue Lotus, Aroma, Scope, Sky, OG, and Potpourri. 
(2)  It's also sold under the names Spice Diamond, Spice Gold, Spice Silver, Yucatan Fire, Zoha, and Zohai. 
(3)  It should be noted that the speed of innovation in this area means that any list of products is likely to become quickly outdated. This division incorporates herein without the necessity of amendment additional names as they occur. 
(i)  The ingredients include Baybean, Blue Lotus, Lion's Tail, Lousewort, Indian Warrior, Dwarf Scullcap, Maconha Brava, Pink Lotus, Marshmallow, Red Clover, Rose, Siberian Motherwort, Vanilla, Canavalia Rosea, Clematis Vitalba, Nelumbo Nucifera, and Pedicularis Grandifolia. 
(j)  Synthetic cannabinoid research chemicals. (This is a partial list of the synthetic cannabinoids that have been used illicitly or may have potential for illicit use in the future): JWH-015, JWH-018, JWH-073, JWH-081, JWH-133, JWH-200, JWH-250, JWH-398, CP 47,497, CP 55,244, CP 55,940, HU-210, HU-211, and WIN 55,212-2. 
(k)  Other articles and sources indicate that the most prevalent synthetic cannabinoid is JWH-018, a new synthetic cannabinoid created by scientists to test receptor function in the lab. The synthetic cannabinoid binds with the CB1 receptor producing the euphoric effect or high in humans. JWH-018 binds with CB1 receptors at a rate four times greater than THC (natural or synthetic.) 
(l)  The common marijuana drug tests are calibrated to detect THC and THC metabolites, not the synthetics used in Spice or K2. NORML's deputy director and an expert in drug testing, Paul Armentano, says Spice or K2 users would pass a drug test. 
(m)  The Missouri and Kansas efforts to outlaw K2 in some cases lump it in with Salvia, causing confusion about the two separate drugs. Federal authorities are enforcing a new crackdown on shipments of the cannabinoids and the K2 type products, such as two recent seizures of K2 and JWH-018 at the Philadelphia Airport UPS shipping facility in early 2010. 
(n)  Medications currently containing synthetic cannabinoids: 
(1)  Dronabinol (Marinol). 
(2)  Nabilone (Cesamet). 
(3)  Sativex. 
(4)  Rimonabant (SR141716/Acomplia). 
(o)  Based upon all of the above, it is hereby determined by the City Council that the effects of these substances are jointly and severally health, safety, welfare, peace, and good order concerns to the residents, businesses, visitors, taxpayers, and citizens of the City of Janesville. 
(Code 1976, § 9.56.010)  
Sec. 24-618. - Prohibitions; possession, use, and sale are illegal. 
It shall be illegal for any person to: 
(1)  Use, possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, sell, publicly display for sale, or attempt to sell, give, and/or barter; 
(2)  Produce, manufacture, dispense; 
(3)  Possess with intent to produce, manufacture, or dispense; 
(4)  Distribute, or agree, consent, offer, or arrange to distribute; and/or 
(5)  Possess with the intent to distribute; any one or more of the following synthetic cannabinoids and/or chemicals, whether under the common street or trade names of Spice, K2, Genie, Yucatan Fire, fake or new marijuana, or by any other name, label, or description: 
a.  Salviadivinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof; any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
b.  (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6dimethyl-3-(2methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol some trade or other names: HU-210; (1R,3s)-3-hydroxycyclohexy; 
c.  1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole-some trade or other names: JWH-018 spice; 
d.  1-Butyl-3-(1naphthoyl) indole-some trade or other names: JWH-073; 
e.  1-(3{trifluoromethylphenyl}) piperazine-some trade or other names: TFMPP; 
f.  Synthetic equivalents of the substances contained in the plant cannabis, and/or in the resinous extractives of cannabis and/or synthetic substances, derivatives, and their isomers with similar chemical structure and pharmacological activity, and/or any substance which claims such properties even if in actuality they do not; 
g.  Compounds of these structures, regardless of numerical designation of atomic positions are similarly prohibited, since nomenclature of these substances is not internationally standardized; and/or 
h.  Any similar structural analogs, such as, and including, but not limited to, the synthetic cannabinoids that fall into and/or are part of one or more of the seven major structural groups: 
1.  Naphthoylindoles (e.g. JWH-018, JWH-073 and JWH-398). 
2.  Naphthylmethylindoles. 
3.  Naphthoylpyrroles. 
4.  Naphthylmethylindenes. 
5.  Phenylacetylindoles (i.e., benzoylindoles, e.g., JWH-250). 
6.  Cyclohexylphenols (e.g., CP 47,497 and homologues of CP 47,497). 
7.  Classical cannabinoids (e.g., HU-210). 
(Code 1976, § 9.56.020)  
Sec. 24-619. - Medical or dental use allowed. 
Acts otherwise prohibited under this division shall not be unlawful if done by or under the direction or prescription of a licensed physician, dentist, or other medical health professional authorized by law to direct or prescribe such acts, provided that such use is permitted under state and federal laws. 
(Code 1976, § 9.56.030)  
Sec. 24-620. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person 17 years of age or older (adult) convicted of violating any provision of this division shall be subject to the imposition of and shall pay a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, for each violation, together with all costs, fees, and assessments allowed and/or mandated by law, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(b)  Any person 16 years of age or younger (child) convicted of violating any provision of this division shall be subject to the imposition of and shall pay a forfeiture of $75.00 for each violation, together with all costs, fees, and assessments allowed and/or mandated by law, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(c)  Upon non-payment of an imposed forfeiture, the convicted violator shall be subject to the remedies then available at law, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(d)  Each day's continuance of any violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1976, § 9.56.040)  
Secs. 24-621—24-643. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 24-644—24-674. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CEMETERY HOURS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning cemeteries, see Wis. Stats. ch. 157; for provisions authorizing a municipality to determine a system of management and organization, see Wis. Stats. § 157.50. 
 
Sec. 24-675. - Generally. 
No person or vehicle shall enter or remain in any cemetery from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise. This provision shall not apply to the duly elected or appointed officers or agents of the association that operates the cemetery or law enforcement personnel. Persons violating this division are subject to the penalties provided in Section 38-424. 
(Prior Code, § 18.10; Code 1976, § 9.57.010; Ord. No. 74-401, § 1, 1974)  
Secs. 24-676—24-693. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CARE AND USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 24-694. - Street lights and wire lines; damage and interference unlawful. 
No person shall damage or injure or in any manner interfere with any electric or other street light or lamp or with any wire used for the transmission of electricity or conveyance of telegrams or telephonic communications or with any appendage belonging thereto or connected therewith. 
(Prior Code, § 17.01(1)(a); Code 1976, § 9.60.010)  
Sec. 24-695. - Pole and wire apparatus; hitching animal unlawful. 
No person shall hitch any horse or other animal to any pole, mast, tower, guy wire or guy wire post supporting any wires used for the transmission of electric current or conveyance of telephonic communications. 
(Prior Code, § 17.01(1)(b); Code 1976, § 9.60.020)  
Sec. 24-696. - Pole and wire apparatus; defacing unlawful. 
No person shall deface any pole or mast supporting telephone, telegraph, power line or other wires by posting thereon or attaching thereto any advertising poster or devices, or in any manner damage or injure, cut or take down any such mast, guy wire or guy wire post. 
(Prior Code, § 17.01(1)(c); Code 1976, § 9.60.030)  
Sec. 24-697. - Telephone booth or station and apparatus; interference and defacement unlawful. 
No person not authorized shall in any manner, deface or interfere with any telephone booth or station, or with any wires, apparatus or machinery connected therewith. 
(Prior Code, § 17.01(d); Code 1976, § 9.60.040)  
Sec. 24-698. - Pole and wire apparatus; climbing unlawful; exception. 
No person other than an employee performing a service for his or her employer shall climb any pole, mast, tower, storage tank, guy wire or guy wire post supporting any wire or wires used for the transmission of electric current or conveyance of telephone, radio or television communications. 
(Prior Code, § 17.01(e); Code 1976, § 9.60.050)  
Sec. 24-699. - Taking library materials without consent. 
No person shall take and carry away any materials of the Janesville Public Library without consent. The term "consent," as used in this section, means that such materials were properly checked out in accordance with established policy, or were otherwise authorized to be taken by the library director in accordance with established policy. 
(Code 1976, § 9.60.055; Ord. No. 79-154, § 1, 1979)  
Sec. 24-700. - Detention of violators. 
An adult library employee or agent who has probable cause for believing that a person has violated Section 24-699 in his or her presence may detain such person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time to deliver him or her to a peace officer, or to his or her parent or guardian in the case of a minor. The detained person must be promptly informed of the purpose for the detention and shall be permitted to make phone calls, but he or she shall not be interrogated or searched against his or her will before the arrival of a peace officer who may conduct a lawful interrogation of the accused person. Compliance with this section entitles the employee or agent effecting the detention to the same defense in any action as is available to a peace officer making an arrest in the line of duty. 
(Code 1976, § 9.60.056; Ord. No. 79-154, § 2, 1979)  
Sec. 24-701. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not to exceed $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense and in default of the payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days. Each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 17.12; Code 1976, § 9.60.060)  
Secs. 24-702—24-730. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PROPERTY OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 24-731. - Damage to property. 
No person may intentionally cause damage to any physical property of another without the owner's consent. 
(Code 1976, § 9.66.010; Ord. No. 85-429, § (part), 1985)  
Sec. 24-732. - Trespassing. 
(a)  No person may intentionally enter or remain upon any real property without the consent of the owner or the person in lawful possession of the property. 
(b)  The prohibition of Subsection (a) of this section shall apply in the event that: 
(1)  The structure or property is posted "no trespassing," "no soliciting," "do not disturb," "no peddlers," or in similar manner; or 
(2)  The trespasser personally received written or oral notice from the owner or possessor not to enter or remain upon the property. 
(c)  No person may intentionally enter or remain within the dwelling or structure of another without the consent of the owner or possessor of the dwelling or structure. 
(Code 1976, § 9.66.020; Ord. No. 85-429, § (part), 1985)  
Sec. 24-733. - Retail theft. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Merchant includes any merchant as defined in Wis. Stats. § 402.104(1), or any innkeeper, motelkeeper or hotelkeeper. 
Value of merchandise means: 
(1)  For property of the merchant, the value of the property; or 
(2)  For merchandise held for resale, the merchant's stated price of the merchandise or, in the event of altering, transferring or removing a price marking or causing a cash register or other sales device to reflect less than the merchant's stated price, the difference between the merchant's stated price of the merchandise and the altered price. 
(3)  For a service provided by a service provider, the price that the service provider stated for the service before the service was provided. 
(b)  No person may intentionally alter indicia of price or value of merchandise or take and carry away, transfer, conceal or retain possession of merchandise held for resale by a merchant or property of the merchant without his or her consent and with intent to deprive the merchant permanently of possession, or the full purchase price, of the merchandise. 
(c)  The intentional concealment of unpurchased merchandise which continues from one floor to another or beyond the last station for receiving payments in a merchant's store is evidence of intent to deprive the merchant permanently of possession of such merchandise without paying the purchase price thereof. The discovery of unpurchased merchandise concealed upon the person or among the belongings of such person or concealed by a person upon the person or among the belongings of another is evidence of intentional concealment on the part of the person so concealing such goods. 
(d)  A merchant or merchant's adult employee who has probable cause for believing that a person has violated this section in his or her presence may detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time to deliver the person to a peace officer, or to his or her parent or guardian in the case of a minor. The detained person must be promptly informed of the purpose for the detention and be permitted to make phone calls, but he or she will not be interrogated or searched against his or her will before the arrival of a peace officer who may conduct a lawful interrogation of the accused person. Any merchant or merchant's adult employee who acts in good faith in any act authorized under this section is immune from civil or criminal liability for those acts. 
(e)  In any action or proceeding for violation of this section, duly identified and authenticated photographs of merchandise which was the subject of the violation may be used as evidence in lieu of producing the merchandise. 
(f)  Removal of shopping cart. No person may intentionally, with the intent to deprive the owner permanently of possession of such property, remove a shopping cart or stroller from either the shopping area or parking area adjacent to the shopping area to another place without the authorization of the owner or person in charge. 
(Code 1976, § 9.66.030; Ord. No. 85-429, § (part), 1985)  
Sec. 24-734. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this division shall forfeit and pay to the City a forfeiture not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment, shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail until the forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed 90 days. 
(Code 1976, § 9.66.040; Ord. No. 85-429, § (part), 1985)  
Secs. 24-735—24-751. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - WORTHLESS CHECKS 
 
Sec. 24-752. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is declared to be the policy of the City Council to encourage all persons who are recipients of any type of payment by check to do the following: 
(1)  Exercise discretion and care in the acceptance of all checks; 
(2)  Actively attempt to recover the value of all worthless checks before presenting such checks to the City for prosecution under this division; and 
(3)  Make every effort to provide the City with complete and accurate information regarding the violation and the violator when presenting such checks to the City for prosecution under this division. 
(b)  It is further the policy of the City Council to encourage the use of the private resources of the community to address the problem of the issuance of worthless checks and to provide additional deterrents to the problem. 
(Code 1976, § 9.68.010; Ord. No. 86-494, § 1(part), 1986)  
Sec. 24-753. - Issuance of worthless checks; prohibited. 
(a)  Whoever issues any check or other order for the payment of money in an amount equal to or greater than $30.00 but equal to or less than $2,500.00 which, at the time of issuance, he or she intends shall not be paid is guilty of a violation of this division. 
(b)  Any of the following is prima facie evidence that the person, at the time he or she issued the check or other order for the payment of money, intended it should not be paid: 
(1)  Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have an account with the drawee; 
(2)  Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have sufficient funds or credit with the drawee and that the person failed within five days after receiving notice of nonpayment or dishonor to pay the check or other order; or 
(3)  Proof that, when presentment was made within a reasonable time, the person did not have sufficient funds or credit with the drawee and the person failed within five days after receiving notice of nonpayment or dishonor to pay the check or other order. 
(Code 1976, § 9.68.020; Ord. No. 86-494, § 1(part), 1986)  
Sec. 24-754. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this division shall forfeit not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, if the worthless check is for an amount equal to or greater than $30.00 and not more than $150.00. 
(b)  Any person violating any provisions of this division shall forfeit not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution, if the worthless check is for an amount greater than $150.00 and less than $500.00. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this division shall forfeit not less than $100.00 but not more than $10,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, if the worthless check is for an amount equal to or greater than $500.00. 
(d)  Any person who defaults upon payment of a forfeiture imposed under this division shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail until the forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed 120 days, or otherwise dealt with in the manner provided by law for unpaid forfeitures. 
(Code 1976, § 9.68.030; Ord. No. 86-494, § 1(part), 1986)  
Sec. 24-755. - Restitution permitted; discretionary. 
In addition to any other penalty provided by this division, a judge may order a violator to pay restitution to a victim. 
(Code 1976, § 9.68.040; Ord. No. 86-494, § 1(part), 1986)  
Secs. 24-756—24-778. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CONSUMER PROTECTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 24-779—24-809. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DRUG SAMPLES 
 
Sec. 24-810. - Distribution unlawful when. 
No person shall throw, deposit, distribute or deliver or cause to be thrown, deposited, distributed or delivered, any sample package or packages of any drug or compound of drugs or medicine whatsoever in or upon any doorstep, into any building or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place. 
(Prior Code, § 7.11; Code 1976, § 9.72.010)  
Sec. 24-811. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division shall pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 and not exceeding $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense and each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In default of the payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not less than five days nor to exceed 60 days. 
(Prior Code, § 7.22; Code 1976, § 9.72.020)  
Secs. 24-812—24-830. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - WEAPONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 24-831—24-853. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONCEALED WEAPONS 
 
Sec. 24-854. - Prohibitions; exceptions; definitions; state law incorporated. 
Carrying dangerous or concealed weapons is permitted, except as prohibited by state law. Applicable state laws, as from time to time amended or renumbered, regulating guns, firearms, knives, and other weapons are adopted and incorporated by reference herein as if fully set forth verbatim. The carrying of firearms or weapons in City buildings contrary to Division 4 of Article VI of Chapter 24 is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 9.84.010)  
Sec. 24-855. - Selling prohibited when. 
No person shall sell any blackjack, billy, bludgeon, crossknuckles or knuckles of any metal to any minor in the City. 
(Prior Code, § 19.02(2); Code 1976, § 9.84.020)  
Sec. 24-856. - Possession of certain weapons prohibited; by adult or child. 
No person shall have in his or her possession at any time, whether concealed or visible, any karate stick, karate club, or any similar instrument consisting of two straight bars, each less than 25 inches in length, jointed together by leather, cloth, metal hinge, or any other type of flexible joint. 
(Prior Code, § 19.02(3); Code 1976, § 9.84.030)  
Sec. 24-857. - Possession of firearm and handgun; permitted; prohibited. 
(a)  Carrying non-concealed firearms is permitted, except as prohibited in this division in conformity with state law. No person, however, shall carry or possess a firearm or handgun contrary to Wisconsin Statutes, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(b)  No person shall place, possess, or transport a firearm in or on a motorboat with the motor running, unless the firearm is unloaded or is enclosed in a carrying case or as contrary to Wis. Stats. § 167.31(2)(a), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(c)  No person shall place, possess, or transport a firearm in or on a vehicle unless the firearm is unloaded and encased or is enclosed in a carrying case or contrary to Wis. Stats. § 167.31(2)(b), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(d)  No person shall possess a firearm if such person is under a court-ordered injunction or restraining order for domestic abuse, child abuse, or harassment or as contrary to Wis. Stats. §§ 813.12(4m), 813.122(5m), or 813.125(4m), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(e)  No person shall endanger the safety of another by the negligent operation or handling of a firearm or as contrary to Wis. Stats. § 941.20(1)(a), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(f)  No person shall operate or go armed with a firearm while under the influence of an intoxicant or restricted controlled substance or as contrary to Wis. Stats. § 941.20(1)(b) or (bm), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(g)  No person shall intentionally point a firearm at or toward another person or as contrary to Wis. Stats. § 941.20(1)(c), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(h)  No person shall go armed with a firearm in any building owned or leased by the state or any political subdivision of the state or as contrary to Wis. Stats. § 941.235(1), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(i)  No person shall intentionally go armed with a handgun on any premises for which a Class "B" or "Class B" license or permit has been issued under Wis. Stats. ch. 125 or as contrary to Wis. Stats. § 941.237(2), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(j)  No person shall possess a firearm if such person has been convicted of a felony, adjudicated delinquent, found not guilty by reason of mental disease or defect, committed for treatment under Wis. Stats. ch. 51, or is prohibited from possessing a firearm for any and all reasons or as contrary to Wis. Stats. § 941.29, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(k)  No person under 18 years of age shall possess or go armed with a firearm contrary to Wis. Stats. § 948.60, or as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(l)  No person shall knowingly possess a firearm at a place that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to believe, is a school zone contrary to Wis. Stats. § 948.605, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 9.84.040)  
Sec. 24-858. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division and/or contrary to state law shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not to exceed $300.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense and in default of payment, the violator shall be imprisoned not more than 60 days. 
(Code 1976, § 9.84.050)  
Secs. 24-859—24-879. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FIREARMS 
 
Sec. 24-880. - Discharge unlawful; permits granted by Police Department. 
No person shall, within the limits of the City commit any of the following offenses, namely, discharge any pistol, gun, air rifle, air pistol, firearm, or other weapon for the discharge of bullets, projectiles or pellets, whether the bullets, projectiles or pellets are propelled by an explosion of gun powder or other explosion, or by a spring, air pressure, or other mechanical device, or whether the bullets, projectiles or pellets be propelled in any other manner within the City limits, unless granted a permit to do so by the Police Department. Permits shall be granted only to the applicant or some member of his or her family, and then only when the circumstances are such that the discharge of such weapons on such land may be accomplished with safety. Permits may also be granted to persons 16 years of age or over to hunt on lands within the City, if such person has the consent of the owner or tenants of the property on which such hunting will be done. 
(Prior Code, § 19.03(1); Code 1976, § 9.87.010)  
Sec. 24-881. - Bow and crossbow hunting; restrictions. 
Bow and crossbow hunting are permitted, but not on any municipally-owned land and not within 100 yards of any permanent building or structure used for human occupancy on another person's land. This distance restriction does not apply if the person who owns the land on which the building or structure is located allows the hunter to hunt within 100 yards of the building or structure. All bows and crossbows shall be discharged toward the ground (e.g., from a tree stand). 
(Code 1976, § 9.87.012)  
Sec. 24-882. - Discharge unlawful; exceptions. 
Shooting on duly supervised rifle or pistol ranges and duly supervised galleries are expressly exempted from the operation of this division. 
(Prior Code, § 19.03(2); Code 1976, § 9.87.020)  
Sec. 24-883. - Bow and arrow shooting of Rough Fish; disposal requirements. 
It is permissible to shoot Rough Fish in the waters of Rock River by means of a bow and arrow during daylight hours. Any fish shot or captured with a bow and arrow must be removed by the shooter and disposed of in a satisfactory manner. Under no circumstances shall such fish be left or disposed of on public property or in public waters. 
(Prior Code, § 19.03(3); Code 1976, § 9.87.030)  
Sec. 24-884. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not to exceed $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and in default of the payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days. Each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 19.11; Code 1976, § 9.87.040)  
Secs. 24-885—24-901. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - NO FIREARMS OR WEAPONS INSIDE CITY BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 24-902. - Prohibition. 
(a)  No person may possess or bring any concealed or unconcealed firearm or weapon into or upon any City-owned, -occupied, or -controlled building or structure at any time. 
(b)  No person may cause any concealed or unconcealed firearm or weapon to be brought into or present upon any City owned, occupied, or controlled building or structure at any time. 
(Code 1976, § 9.88.010)  
Sec. 24-903. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The prohibitions set forth in Section 24-902 do not apply to sworn Wisconsin or federal law enforcement or police officers. 
(b)  The prohibitions set forth in Section 24-902 do not apply to City-owned, -occupied, or -controlled buildings or structures not containing a sign as defined in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 9.88.020)  
Sec. 24-904. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building shall have the meaning as set forth in Chapter 42, as from time to time amended or renumbered, to wit: "any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, chattel, or movable property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to the land but shall not include fences." Buildings shall include each City-owned, -occupied, or -controlled building and structure, as contemplated by, but not limited to, those enumerated and described in Wis. Stats. § 943.13(1m)(c)4, as from time to time amended or renumbered, that contain a sign providing notice of the prohibitions. 
Federal means employed by the United States of America or a Federal agency. 
Firearm means all weapons that act by force of gunpowder within the scope of Wis. Stats. § 167.31(1)(c). 
Law enforcement officer means those defined as police officers. 
Police officer means any sworn City of Janesville police officer, Rock County Sheriff, Undersheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Game Warden, State Patrol Officer, State Game Warden, other sworn Wisconsin Law Enforcement Officer, or sworn federal law enforcement agent. 
Sign, signs, and signed means City Manager authorized written information that provides notice of the prohibitions set forth in this division prominently posted near all of the entrances open to the public for that building so that any individual entering the building can be reasonably expected to see the notice signs. See also: Wis. Stats. § 943.13(2)(bm)2, am, as from time to time amended or renumbered for guidance as to notice and signs. 
Structure shall have the meaning as set forth in Chapter 42, as from time to time amended or renumbered, to wit: "…anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location or which is attached to something having a permanent location on or in the ground, a stream bed or lake bed." Structures shall include, but not be limited to, each City-owned, -occupied, or -controlled building and structure, all other City-owned buildings and structures as contemplated by, but not limited to, those enumerated and described in Wis. Stats. § 943.13(1m)(c)4, as from time to time amended or renumbered, that contain a sign providing notice of the prohibitions. 
Weapon means electric weapon, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 941.925, as from time to time amended or renumbered, knife, billy club, and any pistol, gun, air rifle, air pistol, firearm, or other weapon for the discharge of bullets, projectiles or pellets, whether the bullets, projectiles or pellets are propelled by an explosion of gun powder or other explosion, or by a spring, air pressure, or other mechanical device, or propelled in any other manner. 
(Code 1976, § 9.88.030)  
Sec. 24-905. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $200.00 and not to exceed $10,000.00 per weapon per incident, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture penalty, the violator shall be subject to the remedies available to a court by law and/or equity for failure to pay imposed forfeitures, including, but not limited to, imprisonment in the Rock County Jail for not more than 180 days. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties set forth in Subsection (a) of this section, the offending firearm and/or weapon shall be seized by the Janesville police and forever forfeited to the State Crime Laboratory. 
(Code 1976, § 9.88.040)  
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to plan and improve public areas as parks, Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Title. 
The regulations contained in this chapter shall be known as the "park ordinances" of the City, and shall be cited as such, and shall rule over all previous regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.010)  
Sec. 26-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure public health, safety and welfare in the control, operation and use of municipal parks, park facilities, golf courses, bathing beaches, playgrounds, greenbelts and open spaces, school grounds, and upon all public lands. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.020)  
Sec. 26-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bathing beaches means any open swimming areas with a sand beach, and developed with the intent to be used for swimming purposes. 
Golf courses means municipally-owned golf links and practice areas. 
Greenbelts means areas of municipally-owned land that are intended to serve an environmental control function such as erosion control, flood control and groundwater preservation, which land is not generally desirable for public development but may include any special interest activities which may lend themselves to the area, such as trails. 
Open spaces means areas of municipally-owned land maintained in their natural state, thus supporting native plants and animals. 
Park facilities means any park area, equipment or structures that have been set aside with a specific use intended. 
Parks means and includes all existing, proposed and future municipal property set aside for active or passive use of leisure time. 
Playground means an area, either within a larger park area or a small area set aside for the purpose of promoting imaginative and creative play of school children and by providing a means of physical exercise through the use of play apparatus. 
Public property means all municipally-owned parks, park facilities, playgrounds, bathing beaches, golf courses, greenbelts, open spaces, streets, parking facilities and easements for public use. 
Public school ground properties means land and buildings under the care, control and management of the school district. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.030)  
Sec. 26-4. - Park Director; duties. 
The Park Director shall have the responsibility for operations within the Park Division, and shall be responsible for the management and supervision of all public property under the Division's jurisdiction, and any other duties or services appropriate to office as delegated to him or her by the City Manager. The Park Director may establish temporary rules and regulations to control specific conditions and situations which may arise, doing so in the best interest of the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and the City. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.040)  
Sec. 26-5. - Swimming regulations generally. 
(a)  Swimming in public waters within the corporate limits is expressly limited to those times and places as are specifically designated for such purpose in this section and Sections 26-7 and 26-8. 
(b)  Designated areas are as follows: 
(1)  Lions Beach; 
(2)  Public pools, water depth of 24 inches or deeper; 
(3)  Wading pools. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.050)  
Sec. 26-6. - Use of bridges and dams by swimmers prohibited. 
The use of City-owned structures, such as bridges and dams, for swimming and related activities in the Rock River and connecting waterways is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.060)  
Sec. 26-7. - Wading pool; age limitations; foreign materials not allowed. 
No person nine years old or older shall be allowed in the wading pools, except those persons directly supervising or assisting a child of under ten years of age. No foreign materials shall be carried, placed or thrown into a wading pool which may be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of persons utilizing said facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.070)  
Sec. 26-8. - Rubbish or litter; unlawful disposition. 
Depositing rubbish or litter in any park or on public property is prohibited. No person shall place or deposit any filth, ashes, embers, dirt, garbage, rubbish, paper or other litter, refuse or offensive matter in or on any park or other public property. This provision shall not prevent the proper use of rubbish burners, or other receptacles where they are provided by the City. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.080)  
Sec. 26-9. - Automotive maintenance prohibited. 
Any and all automotive repair or changing oil or washing vehicles on all public property is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.090)  
Sec. 26-10. - Public facility—Use; reservations. 
All public facilities are for the use of the general public, and are available on a first-come, first-serve basis. Park facilities and structures may be made available on a reservation basis to civic groups, organizations, or individuals, by special permission. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.100)  
Sec. 26-11. - Public facility—Rental fees established. 
Fees for the rental or use of public equipment and facilities shall be established by the Park Director subject to the approval of the City Manager. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.110)  
Sec. 26-12. - Public facility—Fermented malt beverages and intoxicating beverages prohibited. 
The possession or consumption of fermented malt beverages, coolers, and intoxicating liquors are prohibited within the limits of any public parks, facility, or other public property included in this chapter, except as specifically permitted by this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.120; Ord. No. 2017-700, § II, 11-13-2017 )  
Sec. 26-13. - Permits for possession and consumption of beer and wine permitted in certain areas of Traxler Park, Riverside Park, Palmer Park, the Town Square, and Festival Street. 
(a)  Anything to the contrary elsewhere in this Code notwithstanding, the carry on, possession, and consumption of fermented malt beverages and wines is permitted but only in the approved designed areas of Traxler Park, Riverside Park, Palmer Park, the Town Square, and Festival Street, and only in strict accord with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Designated areas shall be the warming house and Lions Pavilion in Traxler Park, the north and south pavilions in Riverside Park, the Hilltop Pavilion in Palmer Park, the JP Cullen Pavilion in the Town Square, and the park area within ten feet around each of these pavilions, as well as Festival Street (River Street from Milwaukee Street to Court Street) and all abutting public property when Festival Street is rented for a private event. 
(c)  The possession and consumption of fermented malt beverages and wines shall only be permitted, possessed, and consumed within approved designated areas. 
(d)  Only those persons of lawful drinking age may use the approved designated areas for permitted alcohol purposes. 
(e)  The applicant shall be of lawful drinking age, apply for and pay a per-day fee in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and hold the appropriate park beer and wine permit. An applicant shall only be authorized to apply for the appropriate park beer and wine permit if the applicant has paid for and obtained the appropriate public facility reservation permit for the corresponding location and street closure permit per Section 34-175 if applicable. Park beer and wine permits may be granted by the Recreation Director and/or his or her designee. 
(f)  The permit shall authorize and allow the permit holder and all members of the applicant's event, who are of lawful drinking age or otherwise permitted by law to possess and/or consume alcohol, to lawfully transport, carry on, possess, and consume the permitted alcohol in the designated areas. 
(g)  Members of the applicant's event means all persons of lawful drinking age who, in the discretion of the permit holder sponsoring and/or conducting the event, are good faith invitees, guests or participants in the event, which is not an event open to the general public. Also included are underage persons who are good faith invitees, guests, or participants, but only if such underage person's parent or guardian accompanies the underage person and permits the possession or consumption of the permitted alcohol, as those terms are understood in Wisconsin alcohol laws, at the specific event and only in the designated areas. No underage person shall transport any alcohol to or from the designated areas. No underage person shall possess or consume any permitted alcohol without the parent or guardian present in the designated areas at the time of such underage person's consumption or without the express permission of such parent or guardian. 
(h)  The permit holder shall be present during the possession and consumption of fermented malt beverages and wines in any designated areas. Possession and consumption of fermented malt beverages and wines in any designated areas without the permit holder present is prohibited. 
(i)  The permit holder and every member of the permit holder's events shall abide by each and every provision set forth in this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and state laws. 
(j)  In addition to the individual violators, the permit holder shall be vicariously liable and responsible for any and all violations of this chapter, state law, and other City ordinances and may be prosecuted and held subject to the penalties for said violations concurrently, jointly, or severally with the individual violators. 
(k)  No person shall litter, permit littering, leave behind, or permit the leaving behind of any empty, full, or partially full alcohol containers in any part of any designated areas or elsewhere upon any public site or public way after an event, except for trash and refuse placed in City or lessee trash containers or lessee recycling containers placed at or near the designated areas for that purpose. In the event that the City Parks Division personnel or other City officials find litter or containers left behind after an event, the City shall remove the items and charge the full cost of said removal and clean-up to the permit holder. The permit holder shall pay the fee. 
(l)  No person shall carry on, possess, or consume fermented malt beverages and wines in a glass bottle and/or container. 
(m)  Consumption of fermented malt beverages and wines are prohibited after 11:00 p.m., except for the Palmer Park hilltop pavilion, which shall be prohibited after 9:00 p.m. consistent with established park hours. 
(n)  No person may sell any permitted alcohol in any designated areas thereof at any time. This prohibition includes any caterer, food or beverage provider, independent contractor, or other person directly or indirectly retained, contracted, or hired by the permit holder. 
(o)  The park beer and wine permit is not transferable. 
(p)  The City Council hereby expressly and forever reserves unto itself the right, privilege and prerogative to amend, condition, modify, and otherwise limit, at any time, any park beer and wine permit granted or issued by the City to the permit holder after public hearing and public action thereon in open session, the public welfare and good so requiring. 
(q)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Beer, fermented malt beverages, fermented malt beverage based wine coolers, wine, and alcohol mean those beverages as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 125, as from time to time amended, and/or as defined and/or interpreted by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue, as from time to time modified. 
City means the City of Janesville and its lawfully authorized officials, officers, employees, agents and representatives. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.120; Ord. No. 2019-747, § II, 2-11-2019 ; Ord. No. 2019-753, § I, 5-13-2019 )  
Sec. 26-14. - Penalty for Section 26-13. 
The forfeiture imposed for violation of Section 26-13 shall not be as set forth in Section 26-40, but shall be not less than $100.00 together with the cost of prosecution for each offense. In default of the payment of such penalty, the court shall impose imprisonment for not less than seven days. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.130; Ord. No. 78-100, § 1, 1978; Ord. No. 2019-747, § III, 2-11-2019 )  
Sec. 26-15. - Public facility—Smoking; prohibited when. 
Smoking on park premises or on other public properties where "No Smoking" signs are posted is strictly prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.140)  
Sec. 26-16. - Public facility—Fires allowed when. 
Fires of any nature shall not be built or allowed to burn except in appropriate containers, grills or fireplaces, and those fires required for maintenance in any park, Greenbelt or open space, or other public lands covered by this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.150)  
Sec. 26-17. - Parks; hours. 
(a)  No person or vehicle shall be allowed on park premises between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except those persons using the through streets in such parks, or by special permission granted in writing by the Park Director for specific use thereof. 
(b)  However, Lustig Park (south of the Rock River, west of Pearl Street and Chatham Streets, north of State Street and east of Monterey Lane) shall close at 9:00 p.m. except as set out above. 
(c)  No person or vehicle shall be allowed in Rotary Gardens between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. except for approved activities authorized by Rotary Council. Rotary Gardens is described as that area bounded by South Randall Avenue on the east, Palmer Drive on the south, Lions Beach on the west and Rotary Pond on the north. Not included is the parking lot. 
(d)  No person or vehicle shall be allowed in the upper portion of Palmer Park between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. The upper portion of Palmer Park is defined as that area bounded by Arbor Drive on the north side, Harmony Drive on the east and south sides and East Racine Street on the west side. 
(e)  No person or vehicle shall be allowed in Fourth Ward Park between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except as set out above. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.160; Ord. No. 75-486, § 1, 1975)  
Sec. 26-18. - Public facility—Damaging unlawful. 
(a)  The cutting, picking, breaking, digging up, defacing or injuring in any manner of any tree, shrub, plant, flower, grass, sign, structure or other public property in any public park or other public lands covered by this chapter is prohibited. 
(b)  No person shall cause damage to the public bathhouse, public toilets, park buildings or any other public structures. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.170)  
Sec. 26-19. - Public facility—Notice posting prohibited when. 
The posting of notices of any kind on public property other than official notices having to do with the use of parks and public recreational facilities is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.180)  
Sec. 26-20. - Parks—Dangerous equipment prohibited; exceptions. 
Any device, equipment or apparatus considered to be dangerous by the Park Director to any person legally or legitimately utilizing the public parks is prohibited; however, special areas for such devices, equipment or apparatus may be designated by the Park Director. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.190)  
Sec. 26-21. - Parks—Automobile parking prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall stop or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, and whether temporary or otherwise, in any public park, except in specifically designated areas. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.200)  
Sec. 26-22. - Pets prohibited. 
(a)  No person being the owner or having possession, custody or control of any dog or cat shall permit the same to be in any park or city golf course from May 15 to September 15 each year, or in any playground or school ground at any time. This regulation applies whether the pet is running at large or is on a leash, or otherwise under the control of any person. This regulation is in addition to all other regulations relating to dogs. Exempt from the prohibitions in this section are service animals that are required to be accommodated by the Americans with Disabilities Act and law enforcement dogs used in official police business. 
(b)  The riding or leading of beasts of burden upon public property, except streets, that have not been specifically provided for such purpose, is prohibited. 
(c)  Dogs and cats may be present, throughout the year but only during such hours that the park is lawfully open to the public, in those specifically signed "Pet Exercise/Training Areas" which the Parks Director, from time to time, so designates with Council approval. Dogs and cats permitted in such areas shall, at all times, be under the effective control of the owner/possessor, but no leash is required. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.210; Ord. No. 2018-715, § I, 3-26-2018 ; Ord. No. 2018-723, § III, 6-25-2018 )  
Sec. 26-23. - Camping prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall use any park or other public grounds as a camping grounds except when written permission has been previously granted by the Parks Director. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.220)  
Sec. 26-24. - Licensed motorized vehicles not to be operated when. 
No motorized vehicles which may be legally licensed in the state may be operated in or on any parks or public lands covered by this chapter, except on roadways or parking areas specifically provided for this purpose, except any vehicles operated by employees of or incidental to the function of any federal, state or municipal governmental body or any subdivision thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.230)  
Sec. 26-25. - Unlicensed motorized vehicles not to be operated when. 
No motorized vehicle which cannot be legally licensed in the state may be operated in or on any parks or public lands covered by this chapter, except vehicles operated by employees of or incidental to the function of any federal, state or municipal governmental body or any subdivision thereof or as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.240)  
Sec. 26-26. - State statutes adopted. 
Chapter 350 of the statutes of the state (Wis. Stats. ch. 350) is adopted by reference, incorporated in this chapter as if set forth in their entirety, except Wis. Stats. §§ 350.05, 350.07 and 350.11 that are specifically not adopted. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.250)  
Sec. 26-27. - Snowmobile operation—Prohibited; exception. 
Snowmobiles are specifically prohibited from operating on public lands within the City, or upon any public lands owned by the City, except those areas and time periods approved by the City Council, and designated on an official map in the office of the Director of Public Works. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.260)  
Sec. 26-28. - Snowmobile operation—Hours. 
Snowmobile operations shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.270)  
Sec. 26-29. - Snowmobile operation—Stock mufflers required. 
Stock mufflers are required on all machines. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.280)  
Sec. 26-30. - Snowmobile operation—Age restrictions. 
No person under the age of 12 years may operate a snowmobile within the City; those 12 years through 15 years may operate a snowmobile only under the direct supervision of a parent or guardian. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.290)  
Sec. 26-31. - All-terrain vehicle regulations. 
All-terrain vehicles shall be subject to all snowmobile regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.300)  
Sec. 26-32. - Golf and golf practice; prohibited; exceptions. 
Golfing and golf practice is expressly prohibited on City property, school ground property, or park land, except on golf courses and designated practice areas. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.320)  
Sec. 26-33. - Golf courses; hours. 
The use of the municipal golf courses for any purpose between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.330)  
Sec. 26-34. - Golf and golf practice; prohibited; closure when. 
Golf and golf practice is strictly prohibited on the golf courses and practice areas when said facilities have officially been closed for the season, or due to adverse weather conditions when turf may be seriously damaged. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.340)  
Sec. 26-35. - Neighborhood park uses; prohibitions. 
The use of neighborhood parks for playing golf, or any other similar activity is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.350)  
Sec. 26-36. - Sport activities at Monterey Stadium; approval required. 
No person shall engage in any sport activity, organized or unorganized, upon Monterey Stadium property, without prior approval of the superintendent of public schools or his or her authorized representative subject to the supervision of the Board of Education. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.410)  
Sec. 26-37. - School grounds; trespassing unlawful. 
No person shall trespass upon any public school ground properties, including Monterey Stadium property, after the time of sunset and until the time of sunrise, without express approval of the Superintendent of Public Schools or his or her authorized representative subject to the supervision of the Board of Education. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.420)  
Sec. 26-38. - Rock River closure; boating prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall operate a boat, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.50(1) (2001-2002), as from time to time renumbered, amended or revised, or other motorized watercraft upon a part or all of the waters of the Rock River, its tributaries and floodplains contained solely within the City of Janesville over such areas of said river specifically designated from time to time, and at any time, as temporarily prohibiting boats and boat use by the Director of Public Works and/or his or her designee in the event such public official has found one or more of the following: 
(1)  High or low water level such that use of a boat at any speed would or could cause damage to persons and/or to abutting properties. 
(2)  Emergency conditions. 
(3)  Special maintenance, repair, construction or related and authorized public or private projects. 
(4)  Public shows, demonstrations and related community events which have received prior approval by the appropriate governmental unit and for which the temporary closure of a part or all of the Rock River is required for public safety purposes. 
(b)  The closure shall be posted as required by state law, on the banks of the Rock River at all City of Janesville public access points affected by such closure, and by a Type I public press release. 
(c)  Exempt from the prohibitions and regulations of this chapter are boats and other watercraft operated by law enforcement or on governmental business. 
(d)  Incorporated herein by reference, as if fully set forth verbatim, are the provisions, requirements, prohibitions and regulations set forth in Sections 25.01 through and including 25.06 of the Code of Ordinances of the County of Rock, as from time to time renumbered, amended or revised. Each and every provision, requirement, prohibition and regulation set forth in such County Ordinances is required and/or prohibited by this chapter. A violation of any such County Ordinance is a violation of this City ordinance. The City's ordinance is in addition to and not in lieu of the County's Ordinances. 
(e)  This and related City ordinances applying to activities upon or under the Rock River shall and may be enforced by the Janesville Police Department, the Rock County Sheriff's Department and state DNR Wardens, and their respective deputies. 
(f)  The City Council of the City of Janesville in enacting this chapter hereby find that each and every of the above reasons for closure from time to time and at any time of a part or all of the Rock River within the City of Janesville to boats and other motorized watercraft are in the interest of the public's health, welfare, safety, peace and/or good order, and consistent with the intent and scope of Wis. Stats. § 30.77 (2001-2002) as from time to time renumbered, amended or revised. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.440)  
Sec. 26-39. - Boat ramp closing. 
(a)  The Director of Public Works and/or his or her designee is authorized to close boat ramps in the parks and any other boat ramps owned or operated by the City during periods of high or low water, or any time an ordinance enacted by a contiguous township or the County controlling water traffic during periods of high or low water is in effect. No person shall use such a boat ramp when a sign is posted stating the ramp is closed. 
(b)  All other provisions set forth in Section 26-38 are incorporated herein by reference, as if fully set forth verbatim, including, but not limited to, law enforcement agencies that may enforce this chapter, exemptions and County Ordinance incorporation. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.450)  
Sec. 26-40. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, except Sections 26-18(b), 26-37 and 26-38 or any of the rules and regulations prescribed, shall pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the cost of prosecution for each offense, and each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In default of the payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not less than one day nor more than 30 days. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of Sections 26-18(b) and 26-37 shall pay a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with costs of prosecution, and in default in payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail not less than ten days nor more than 60 days. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision set forth in Section 26-38, as and for a penalty therefor, shall pay a forfeiture to the City of Janesville in accord with Wisconsin state boating penalties as found in Wis. Stats. § 30.80 (2001-2002), and the deposits as established in the Uniform Deposit and Bail Schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference, both of which are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth verbatim and both of which may be from time to time renumbered, amended or revised. 
(Code 1976, § 12.60.460)  
Chapter 28 - SIGNS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by creating a framework for a comprehensive and balanced system of signs, and thereby to facilitate an easy and pleasant communication between people and their environment. With this purpose in mind, it is the intention of this chapter to establish standards for the construction, placement, type, size, materials and maintenance of signs, and authorize the use of signs which are: 
(1)  Compatible with their surroundings; 
(2)  Appropriate to the type of activity to which each pertains; 
(3)  Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen; 
(4)  Constructed of approved materials and placed or fastened and electrically connected in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 14.04.010; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-2. - Severability. 
If any part of this Code is found to be invalid, then all valid parts that are severable from the invalid parts shall remain in effect. If any part of this Code is found to be invalid in one or more of its several applications, the part shall remain in effect in all valid applications that are severable from the invalid applications. 
(Code 1976, § 14.04.020; Ord. No. 84.373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Secs. 28-3—28-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 28-21. - Generally. 
As used in this article, the terms defined in this article shall have the meanings designated in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.010; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-22. - Attention-getting device. 
The term "attention-getting device" means a supplemental sign or series of signs, streamers, pinwheels, pennants or other such devices which are made of flexible materials and suspended, hung, pinned or otherwise fastened to or away from a structure in such a manner that they are permitting to spin, fly, flap or otherwise move with the wind, thereby attracting attention. 
(1)  Banners, national flags, state flags, and flags of political subdivisions are not considered attention-getting devices for purposes of this article. 
(2)  Flags and banners of nonprofit organizations and nonprofit corporations, when used in conjunction with a commercial enterprise, venture, or purpose, are considered attention-getting devices for purposes of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.020; Ord. No. 87-500, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-23. - Awning. 
The term "awning" means a temporary shelter extending from part or all of a building wall and composed of nonrigid materials except for the supporting framework. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.030; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-24. - Building Official. 
The term "Building Official" means the official designated by the City Manager to enforce and administer this article, or his or her duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.040; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-25. - Canopy (marquee). 
The term "canopy (marquee)" means a permanent roof-like shelter extending from part or all of a building wall and construction of some durable, rigid material such as metal, glass or plastic. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.050; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-26. - Center City. 
(a)  Center City is that area in the City bounded by the following streets: 
(1)  Centerway between Cornelia Street and Center Avenue; 
(2)  Center Avenue between Centerway and McKinley Street; 
(3)  McKinley Street between Center Avenue and South Jackson Street; 
(4)  South Jackson Street between McKinley Street and West Racine Street; 
(5)  Racine Street between South Jackson Street and South Parker Drive; 
(6)  South Parker Drive between Racine Street and St. Lawrence Avenue; 
(7)  St. Lawrence Avenue between South Parker Drive and Atwood Avenue; 
(8)  Atwood Avenue between St. Lawrence Avenue and Prospect Avenue; 
(9)  Prospect Avenue between North Atwood Avenue and Cornelia Street; 
(10)  Cornelia Street between Prospect Avenue and East Centerway. 
(b)  Center City includes all lots abutting on both sides of those portions of the streets listed in Subsection (a)(1) through (10) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.060; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-27. - Curb elevation. 
The term "curb elevation" means the elevation of the established curb in front of a building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb elevation has been established, the City Engineer shall establish such curb elevation. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.070; Ord. No. 34-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-28. - Electronic message signs. 
The term "electronic message sign" means and includes, without limitation, all on-premises and off-premises signs displaying, in whole or in part, words, numerals or graphics which change their appearance, or which indicate the names or depict persons associated with or events conducted upon or products or services offered upon the premises where the sign is maintained or which indicate or depict the names of persons associated with, events conducted upon or products or services offered off-premises and at other than the premises where the sign is maintained, and which is illuminated internally by means of electronic bulbs or other similar methods, controlled electronically and able to be programmed to change indefinitely. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.070)  
Sec. 28-29. - Frontage. 
The term "frontage" means the length of the property line of any one parcel parallel to and along each public street it borders. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.080; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-30. - Height of sign. 
The term "height of sign" means the vertical distance measured from the adjacent curb elevation of the nearest street, which permits the greatest height to the highest point of the sign. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.090; Ord. No. 34-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-31. - Integrated center. 
The term "integrated center" means a grouping of compatible uses on a single parcel being in single ownership or under unified control. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.100; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-32. - Parcel. 
The term "parcel" means individual piece of land given a separate parcel number by the Assessor's office. However, when contiguous pieces of land with separate parcel numbers are under unified control and are in use by the same business enterprise, all such contiguous land shall be treated as one parcel. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.110; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-33. - Person. 
The term "person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization, singular or plural, of any kind. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.120; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-34. - Roof line. 
The term "roof line" means the top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.130; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-35. - Sign. 
The term "sign" means any surface, fabric, device or display which bears lettered, pictorial, or sculptured matter illuminated or non-illuminated which is visible from any public place and which advertises, identifies, conveys information or directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise or any emblem, placard or temporary sign. For the purpose of this article, signs shall also include all sign structures and component parts. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.140; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-36. - Banner sign. 
(a)  The term "banner sign" means any sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to plastic, fabric or other nonrigid material, 
(b)  No banner sign may be constructed, in whole or in part, of paper. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.150; Ord. No. 87-500, § 5, 1987; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-37. - Building sign. 
The term "building sign" means any sign lettered to give the name of a building itself, as opposed to the name of the occupants or services. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.160; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-38. - Construction sign. 
The term "construction sign" means any sign giving the name or names of principal contractors, architects and lending institutions responsible for construction on the site where the sign is placed, together with other relevant information included thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.170; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-39. - Directional sign. 
The term "directional sign" means any off-premises sign which serves solely to designate the location or direction of a place or area. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.180; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-40. - Ground sign (pole sign). 
The term "ground sign (pole sign)" means any sign which is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.190; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-41. - Instructional sign. 
The term "instructional sign" means any sign which provides directions, information or instructions for the premises on which it is located. Instructional signs include, but are not limited to, the following examples: signs for traffic movement onto and within premises, such as "enter" and "drive through lane-keep right;" signs for operation of equipment, such as instructions for self-service gasoline pumps or self-service car washes; signs for safety or warning, such as "nine-foot clearance" and "no parking-fire lane." 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.200; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-42. - Mobile sign. 
The term "mobile sign" means any portable sign structure not permanently attached to the ground or to any other structure. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.210)  
Sec. 28-43. - Off-premises sign. 
The term "off-premises sign" means any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment not related to the parcel on which the sign is located, or to a business, commodity, service or entertainment which is conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the parcel on which the sign is located. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.220; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-44. - Off-premises sign, electronic. 
The term "off-premises sign, electronic," means any off-premises sign that meets the definition of an electronic message sign. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.225)  
Sec. 28-45. - On-premises sign. 
The term "on-premises sign" means any sign identifying or advertising a business, person, activity, goods, products or services located on the parcel where the sign is installed and maintained. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.230; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-46. - Projecting sign. 
The term "projecting sign" means any sign attached to and projecting perpendicular from a wall. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.240; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-47. - Roof sign. 
The term "roof sign" means any sign erected or constructed wholly upon or over any portion of the roof of any building and supported solely on the roof structure. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.250; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-48. - Sandwich board sign. 
A sandwich board sign is an outdoor, freestanding sign consisting of two sign faces hinged together. A sandwich board sign does not include other portable signs. A sandwich board sign must exclusively refer to a business, person, activity, product, service or price located on the premises immediately adjacent to the public sidewalk or private property where the sign is located or used. Upon a public sidewalk, use is permitted only upon that portion of the sidewalk immediately in front of the referred-to business property. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.255; Ord. No. 2018-724, § I, 6-25-2018 )  
Sec. 28-49. - Subdivision sign. 
Subdivision sign means any sign which provides only the name of a subdivision, the name of an apartment complex, the name of a condominium development or a similar development. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.260; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-50. - Wall sign. 
Wall sign means any sign which is parallel to and affixed to an exterior wall or mansard roof of a building. Wall signs also include signs which are parallel to the wall of the building and attached to the roof of a canopy. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.270; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-51. - Window sign. 
Window sign means any sign placed inside or upon a window facing the outside, which is intended to be seen from the exterior. 
(Code 1976, § 14.08.280; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Secs. 28-52—28-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT AND FEES 
 
Sec. 28-76. - Permit required; application form; information required. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter place, maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, unless the maintenance is for an existing, legal sign, any sign on any land or on any building visible from any public place without first having received a permit from the Building Official. 
(b)  Applications for each permit shall be on forms furnished by the City, complete with a sketch of the sign, not necessarily to scale, with material, manufacturer's name, and Underwriters Laboratories approval, or inspected and approved by the City Inspection Department, a picture of the parcel and building, type of illumination, along with written approval of the owner or occupant of the property on which the sign is to be located. Such approval shall indicate agreement to remove the sign at such approver's expense when the sign is abandoned or when, in the opinion of the Building Official, such sign constitutes a potential hazard to persons or property. 
(Code 1976, § 14.12.010; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-77. - Permit—Signs using electrical lighting systems; requirements. 
(a)  A permit is required for any sign which employs an electrical lighting system as an integral part of the sign. The permit application shall contain the individual serial number of the Underwriters Laboratories label which shall be affixed to the sign upon installation, unless approval has been granted by the City Building Division. 
(b)  No permit may be issued for any electrical sign unless it is made, wired and constructed in accordance with the Underwriters Laboratories' standards and the ordinance of the City. 
(c)  No electrical connections may be made from any sign to an electrical service, or from an electrical service to any sign, except by a Class A licensed electrician. Any freestanding sign requiring electrical installation shall be supplied power only by underground wiring. 
(Code 1976, § 14.12.020; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), amend. 1, § 1, 1984)  
Sec. 28-78. - Permit—Issuance. 
The Building Official shall issue a permit under this article to the applicant if the applicable regulations have been complied with, if the applicant has a currently valid sign erector's license, and if the proper fees under this article have been paid. 
(Code 1976, § 14.12.030; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-79. - Information required to be displayed on sign. 
On every sign of any nature, the erector shall, in a permanent manner, state the name and address of the license holder that erected the sign, the permit number, and the date of its erection. Such information must be readable from a distance of at least one foot. Failure of any sign, for which a permit is required, to have such information on it shall be just and sufficient cause for immediate removal of the sign at the expense of the property owner. 
(Code 1976, § 14.12.040; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-80. - Fee—Specified. 
(a)  All signs. The permit fees for all new and/or modified signs shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(b)  If a sign is erected or placed without obtaining the necessary permit, fees for such permit shall be doubled. 
(Code 1976, § 14.12.050; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-81. - Fee—Computation of sign area. 
(a)  In computing the area of any sign within a perimeter which forms the outside shape of a sign, standard mathematical formulas for known or common shapes (parallelogram, triangle, circle or any other easily recognized geometric shape) will be used. In the case of irregular shapes, straight lines drawn closest to the extremities of the shape will be used. If the sign consists of more than one module, the total area of all modules constitutes the sign area. Sign supports and minor nonlighted decorative effects shall not be included in the sign area. 
(b)  If a sign consists solely of letters or symbols attached to a building, the sign copy area shall be determined by straight lines drawn closest to copy extremities encompassing individual letters or words. 
(c)  For purposes of computation of three-dimensional signs, a three-dimensional sign shall be considered a two-sided sign. 
(d)  The maximum area limitation, as provided in this article for on-premises signs in all districts apply only to one face. If the sign has two faces, each face may have the maximum area provided. A permit must be issued for each face and the appropriate fee must be paid for each face. 
(e)  The Building Official shall have final authority in determining sign area. 
(Code 1976, § 14.12.060; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Secs. 28-82—28-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SIGN ERECTORS 
 
Sec. 28-106. - License—Required; examination. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall engage in erecting, removing or servicing signs, as defined by this chapter, without first obtaining a sign erector's license. 
(b)  To qualify for a license, every applicant must successfully pass an examination of competence and knowledge of this Sign Code given by the Building Division. Such examination shall be given quarterly during the months of January, April, July and October. 
(c)  Only one license per firm is required. Such license may be issued in the name of the applicant or the firm which employs the applicant. If the license is issued in the name of the firm, such firm shall notify the City immediately if the applicant is no longer employed by such firm. Both the firm and the applicant shall be responsible for compliance with the ordinance and for all activities performed pursuant to such license. 
(Code 1976, § 14.16.010; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-107. - License—Fee; council approval. 
Each applicant for a sign erector's license shall, at the time the examination is given, file an application for such license accompanied by a fee in an amount established by the City Council from time to time with the City Clerk-Treasurer, who shall transmit such application to the City Council. The City Council is authorized to grant a sign erector's license to any qualified applicant. 
(Code 1976, § 14.16.020; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984; Ord. No. 2017-705, § IX, 11-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 2018-742, § X, 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 28-108. - Liability insurance required. 
Every person, firm or corporation applying for a sign erector's license under this article shall file with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance showing that the applicant carries public liability and property damage insurance with coverage of at least $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 per event. Furthermore, each applicant shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the City and its officials from any and all claims, damages, losses, liabilities, actions, suits or judgments which may be presented, brought, secured or sustained against the City or any of its officials on account of the construction, installation, maintenance, alteration or removal of any of the signs, or by reason of any accidents caused thereby or resulting therefrom. 
(Code 1976, § 14.16.030; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), amend. 1, § 2, 1984)  
Sec. 28-109. - Expiration date; renewal. 
Every sign erector's license shall expire on June 30 following the date of its issue and may be renewed for one year upon payment to the City Clerk-Treasurer of the license fee not later than June 30 in the year in which the license expires. Should any person fail to renew his or her license by June 30 of the year in which such license expires, he or she will be required to make application for and take the examination for a new license in the same manner as a new applicant. The City Council is authorized to renew a sign erector's license for any qualified applicant. 
(Code 1976, § 14.16.040; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-110. - Applicability. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation holding a sign erector's license to allow the use of his or her license, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining local permits for others, except that a person with a sign erector's license may lawfully obtain permits for a corporation or firm which is actively engaged in the sign contracting business with a recognized business location, provided that such person is permanently employed by such firm or corporation. 
(Code 1976, § 14.16.050; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-111. - Revocation. 
Any license may be revoked, or any application for such license may be denied by the City Council should the licensee violate any ordinance or law relating to signs or other advertising structures. No license shall be revoked unless the licensee has been notified in writing of the charges against him or her and the date of the hearing of the charges, and is allowed to be heard at the hearing, and is allowed all other rights required by the guarantees of due process. Non-renewal of an existing license shall carry the same due process requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 14.16.060; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Secs. 28-112—28-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 28-136. - Generally. 
The regulations in this article shall apply to all signs, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.010; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-137. - Scope. 
All signs visible from a public place and all structural alterations or relocations of existing signs occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this article unless specifically exempted and shall be subject to other applicable ordinances of the City. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.020; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-138. - Conflicting provisions. 
Any time there is more than one provision applicable to a situation, and there is a conflict between such provisions, the more restrictive provision or the one that imposes a higher standard shall control. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.030; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-139. - Signs—Prohibited on public property. 
No person, firm or corporation shall place any sign upon, over or in any public property; provided, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the erection or placing of any sign authorized by law, or specifically permitted by this article to project into the public way or to be located upon public property. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.040; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-140. - Signs—Not to interfere with traffic signs. 
No person, firm or corporation shall erect any sign at any location where it may, by reason of its position, shape, color or other characteristics, interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, device or signal, nor shall any sign make use of words such as "stop," "danger" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse users of streets or highways. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.050; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-141. - Signs—Not to constitute a public hazard. 
All signs shall be constructed and maintained in a safe and proper manner so as to prevent any harm or hazard to the public. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.060; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-142. - Signs—On structures. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall paint, paste or otherwise affix any sign or attention-getting device directly upon any wall, building, fence or any other such structure, or any billboard unless such billboard is authorized by this article. If removal of such sign is required, removal shall be defined as painting, sandblasting, chemical removal or using similar methods to completely remove such sign so that it is no longer visible. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall paint, paste or otherwise affix any sign or attention-getting device directly upon any post or utility pole when such post or pole is being used for any purpose other than support of a sign. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.070; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), amend. 3, § 2, 1984)  
Sec. 28-143. - On-premises ground signs. 
(a)  In addition to all other limitations specified in this chapter, an on-premises ground sign may be displayed only if: 
(1)  It is at least 30 feet from any other ground sign; 
(2)  There is no projecting or roof sign located on the same parcel, except if otherwise specifically permitted in this article. 
(b)  (1)  The message portion and message portion framework of the on-premises ground sign shall have not less than a ten-foot minimum clearance above grade. 
(2)  The message portion and message portion framework of an on-premises ground sign may possess less than a ten-foot minimum clearance above grade only if: 
a.  The ground sign is located where otherwise permitted by this chapter but in no event less than two feet from a parking lot, driveway, highway, other right-of-way, sidewalk, or property line and in no event within a vision triangle, as defined in Section 42-354(a) for uncontrolled intersections, which shall be applied to the following areas of the property: 
1.  All property corners located at street intersections and along all side property lines; and 
2.  At all intersections of driveways and sidewalks leading from the site to the adjoining property line or right-of-way lines. For these locations, the outside pavement, curb or sidewalk edges shall be used as the interior leg of the vision triangle and the intersecting property line as the other. 
b.  The ground sign shall not exceed 75 square feet of total area including the sign base except for parcels located within Sign District A, B or C and having 600 linear feet or more of parcel frontage on public streets, in which case the ground sign area may not exceed 125 square feet including the sign base. For any site with less than 600 linear feet of frontage, the surface area of the sign base shall be calculated based on the total perimeter boundary of the base from ground plane to the top of the sign area and from outside edge to outside edge of the vertical sides. Any openings in the base shall be included within the area calculation. For any site within Sign District A, B or C with more than 600 linear feet of frontage, a sign area of greater than 75 square feet in area and no copy lower than ten feet above ground plane, the first ten feet of the sign from ground plane shall be exempt. The surface area of such sign shall be calculated based on the perimeter boundary from outside edge to outside edge from ten feet above ground plane to the top of the sign. Any openings in the base shall be included within the area calculation. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.080)  
Sec. 28-144. - Off-premises ground signs. 
Off-premises ground signs are allowed in accord with the provisions of Section 28-189. Those provisions limit the locations for off-premises signs to only those parcels fronting specific streets regardless of the parcel's sign district designation. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.085)  
Sec. 28-145. - Wall signs. 
(a)  Wall signs may be attached flat to or pinned away from the wall. Such sign shall not project more than 12 inches from the wall, or 18 inches for time and temperature signs. 
(b)  Wall signs shall not extend above the roof line. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.090; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-146. - Projecting signs. 
(a)  No projecting sign may be erected if either a ground sign or a roof sign is located on the same parcel, except if otherwise permitted by this article. 
(b)  Only one projecting sign may be located per occupancy per street frontage. 
(c)  Projecting signs shall be spaced no less than 30 feet from another projecting sign. 
(d)  No projecting sign may extend above the roof line. 
(e)  Projecting signs shall clear the ground by at least ten feet. 
(f)  The restrictions in this section do not apply to canopies. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.100; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-147. - Support design. 
Projecting and ground signs shall appear to be free of any bracing, angle iron, chains, guy wires or cables. Any supports shall appear to be an architectural and integral part of the building. Supporting columns or round, square, or shaped steel members may be erected if required. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.110; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-148. - Electronic message signs; on-premises. 
(a)  No illuminated flashing signs shall be permitted. Flashing signs are those which change their appearance more than once every four seconds. Chasing lights shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Electronic message signs located on-premises may be allowed in Sign Districts A, B, C and D subject to compliance with the criteria in Subsection (c)(1) through (7) of this section. Electronic Message signs located on-premises may be allowed in Sign District E only if the sign is oriented to traffic on the adjoining street and is located at least 500 feet from a residential principal building as measured perpendicular to each sign face along the adjoining street. 
(c)  All on-premises electronic message signs shall be subject to the following review criteria: 
(1)  Such signs shall comprise no more than 30 percent of the face of the ground sign area. 
(2)  No sign shall interfere with the visibility of any traffic signal. 
(3)  No such sign shall be illuminated to a degree or brightness that is greater than necessary for adequate visibility. Signs found to be too bright shall be adjusted in accordance with the instructions of the City. 
(4)  No such signs shall be higher than ten feet above the curb elevation in Sign District E, no higher than 20 feet above the curb elevation in Sign District C or D, no higher than 25 feet above the curb elevation in Sign District B and no higher than 40 feet above the curb elevation in Sign District A. 
(5)  Routine messages and graphics shall not repeat in intervals of less than four seconds. 
(6)  No traveling message signs shall be permitted. 
(7)  No such sign located in Sign District E, or located in any Sign District where the sign is visible within 500 feet of a residential principal building shall operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(d)  Electronic message signs located within 50 feet of a traffic control signal as measured perpendicular to each sign face along the adjoining street shall display messages or graphics in white color only. 
(e)  Time and temperature signs are allowed in all sign districts subject to compliance with the criteria listed in Subsection (c)(1) through (5) of this section. 
(f)  Illuminated price or rate panels for hotel/motel and motor fuel which change no more than once daily are allowed in all sign districts subject to compliance with the criteria in Subsection (c)(1) through (3) of this section. 
(g)  Rotating signs shall be limited to a maximum of eight revolutions per minute and shall not flash or have traveling bulb effects. 
(h)  Multiple message signs or tri-vision signs whose message are on triangular louvered facings and are changed by electronic rotation of the louvers are permitted for off-premises signs, provided that the time the message remains in a fixed position shall be six seconds or more. 
(i)  On-premises electronic message signs may be allowed to vary from the standards provided in this section upon the review and approval of a conditional sign permit by the Plan Commission as provided in Section 28-338. The Plan Commission, in its review, must find that the character of the sign is compatible with the general area, and that limited visual impact will occur to nearby residential areas prior to approving such signs. 
(Code 1976, § 14.20.120)  
Secs. 28-149—28-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIFIC REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 28-180. - Attention-getting devices; prohibition; exceptions. 
(a)  Attention-getting devices are not permitted except as provided in this article. 
(b)  An attention-getting device is permitted upon each parcel not more than once within each calendar year, for not more than seven consecutive days, and only upon issuance of an attention-getting device permit. 
(c)  Application for an attention-getting device permit shall be made to the Building Division. 
(d)  The fee for an attention-getting device permit shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(e)  Attention-getting devices for which a permit is required and for which a permit has been issued are exempt from the requirements of Articles III and IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.010; Ord. No. 87-500, § 2, 1987; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-181. - Awnings. 
Signs on awnings are permitted for all activities in all nonresidential areas. Awnings may extend to within one foot of the vertical lane straight up from the curbs. Awnings shall have a clearance of at least seven feet between the bottom of the awning and the ground beneath. No more than 25 percent of the awning may be covered by signs. Awnings are exempt from the requirements of Articles III, IV and VII of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.020; Ord. No. 84-73, § 1(part), amend. 1, § 3, 1984)  
Sec. 28-182. - Banners. 
(a)  Banners may be displayed only in a manner commensurate with the regulations set forth in this article. 
(b)  Only one banner may be displayed by each business at any time and shall be no greater than 32 square feet in area. 
(c)  No banner may be displayed unless the commercial message contained therein relates to a specific, special promotion of limited duration. 
(d)  The banner shall be completely attached to the building. 
(e)  No banner may be displayed or used as a general or ongoing advertisement of the business or its customary activities. 
(f)  No banner may be displayed or used as a replacement for permanent signage. 
(g)  (1)  The Building Official shall have the authority to order the removal of any banner: 
a.  Displayed or used contrary to any provision of this article; 
b.  Which is or which appears to be out-of-date; 
c.  Which is or which appears to be deteriorated, or which is or which appears to be in such a state of disrepair, wear, or neglect so as to detract from the aesthetic tranquility or beauty of the parcel or surrounding parcels; 
d.  Which is or which appears to be abandoned; 
e.  Which has been displayed for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(2)  a.  The owner or possessor of any banner ordered removed by the Building Official may appeal such order to the Zoning Board of Appeals not later than ten days after service of the order. 
b.  Such appeal shall be in writing, accompanied by the appropriate fee, and filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer. 
c.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider and shall decide upon such appeal not later than at the Board's next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.030; Ord. No. 87-500, § 4, 1987)  
Sec. 28-183. - Building signs. 
Building signs are exempt from all provisions of this chapter except general regulations, provided such signs are no larger than four square feet in area. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.040; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984; Ord. No. 87-500, § 3(part), 1987)  
Sec. 28-184. - Construction signs. 
Construction signs are exempt, from all provisions of this chapter except general regulations, provided no more than one construction sign or street frontage may be placed on the site and only during the period the construction takes place. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.050; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984; Ord. No. 87-500, § 3(part), 1987)  
Sec. 28-185. - Directional signs. 
Directional signs are exempt from all provisions of this chapter except general regulations, provided such signs are no larger than 16 square feet in area and carry no commercial message other than the name of the business. Directional signs are permitted on any parcel in addition to all other signs allowed on such parcel; however, no more than one directional sign is allowed for each 30 feet of street frontage. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.060; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984; Ord. No. 87-500, § 3(part), 1987)  
Sec. 28-186. - Instructional signs. 
Instructional signs are exempt from all provisions of this chapter except general regulations, provided such signs are no larger than 16 square feet in area. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.070; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984; Ord. No. 87-500, § 3(part), 1987)  
Sec. 28-187. - Lettering less than three inches in height. 
Signs which contain lettering less than three inches in height are exempt from all provisions of this chapter except general regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.080; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984; Ord. No. 87-500, § 3(part), 1987)  
Sec. 28-188. - Mobile signs. 
Mobile signs are not permitted except as follows: 
(1)  A temporary mobile sign not to exceed 72 square feet may be allowed as a substitute interim sign for a period of 90 days when no other sign is on the parcel. The Building Inspector may extend the time allowed for a substitute interim sign for one additional 30-day period if there is good cause shown. A permit must be obtained for such sign and a fee must be paid prior to use of the sign. 
(2)  One temporary mobile sign, per parcel, not to exceed 72 square feet may be allowed for promotional purposes for a period not exceeding 30 consecutive days once in any calendar year. A permit must be obtained for such sign and a fee must be paid prior to use of the sign. 
(3)  Any motor vehicle used on a regular basis for a bona fide business purpose other than advertising is not deemed a mobile sign and is exempt from all provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  In addition to the temporary mobile sign permitted in Subsection (2) of this section, an additional temporary mobile sign may be allowed for each change of occupancy on the parcel. Said sign shall not exceed 72 square feet and may be allowed for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days within the first three months that the new occupant is open for business. However, at no time shall more than one temporary mobile sign be permitted on the parcel. A permit must be obtained for such said sign and a fee must be paid prior to the use of the sign. 
(5)  The fees described in this section shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.090)  
Sec. 28-189. - Off-premises signs. 
(a)  Off-premises directional signs, which are not exempt under Section 28-184 (construction signs), shall comply with the provisions for on-premises ground signs in Section 28-227 and shall be limited to one per parcel. 
(b)  Off-premises signs shall only be located on parcels that have frontage directly on the following streets or street segments (share the right-of-way line as a common property line). Said signs shall only be located along the parcel's frontage of the listed street. Said signs must be located within 100 feet of the adjoining right-of-way line of said listed street. The message portion of said signs shall be predominately perpendicular to the listed street that it fronts. 
(1)  Milton Avenue (STH 26) from Black Bridge Road north to Lexus Lane. 
(2)  Humes Road (USH 14) from Deerfield Drive west to Newville Road. 
(3)  Interstate 90 from Humes Road (USH 14) northwest to the City limits. 
(4)  Interstate 90 from Palmer Drive south to the City limits. 
(5)  Racine Street (STH 11) from I-90 east to USH 14. 
(6)  Delavan Drive from Main Street east to South Wright Road. 
(7)  Center Avenue (USH 51) from Joliet Street south to the City limits. 
(8)  Beloit Avenue from Conde Street south to the City limits. 
(9)  Avalon Road (STH 351/11) from Oakhill Avenue east to Interstate 90. 
(10)  South Jackson Street from Delavan Drive south to Elliott Street. 
(11)  West Court Street from Arch Street west to Crosby Avenue. 
(c)  In addition to all other limitations specified in this chapter, off-premises ground signs that do not meet the definition of electronic message signs may be displayed only if they comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Off-premises signs may only be located on land zoned for business or industrial purposes. 
(2)  All off-premises signs shall be spaced not less than 750 feet from any other off-premises sign; such distances shall be measured along the same side of the street abutting the sign parcel. 
a.  The Plan Commission shall have the authority to vary the above spacing through the conditional sign permit process outlined in Section 28-338 to not less than 375 feet in order to allow the construction of a new off-premises sign. The Plan Commission, in its review, shall consider the following: 
1.  The relationship of the proposed off-premises sign location to other off-premises signs, on-premises signs, existing manmade and natural features and residential and agriculture zoned properties. 
2.  The impact of the proposed off-premises sign on existing residences in the surrounding area regardless of the zoning of the parcel on which said residences are located. 
3.  The impact of the proposed off-premises sign on the development or redevelopment of the parcel on which it is proposed to be located. 
(3)  All off-premises signs shall be spaced not less than 600 feet from any land zoned residence or agriculture. Such spacing distance shall be measured along both sides of abutting streets except that the Plan Commission may, by issuing a conditional sign permit following the process outlined in Section 28-338, reduce the 600-foot spacing from residence and agriculture zone districts to 300 feet for only said districts on the opposite side of the street from the proposed sign. The Plan Commission, in its review, shall consider the criteria outlined in Subsection (c)(2)a of this section. 
(4)  If any portion of the sign parcel adjoins any parcel zoned residence or agriculture district and if the specific location of the sign on said sign parcel is within 600 feet of the boundary with said residence or agriculture district, then in addition to satisfying the spacing prescribed in Subsections (c)(2) and (3) and (c)(9) of this section, the sign shall not be permitted unless the Plan Commission determines it appropriate by issuing a Conditional Sign Permit following the process outlined in Section 28-338. The Plan Commission, in its review, shall consider the criteria outlined in Subsection (c)(2)a of this section. 
(5)  All off-premises signs shall be spaced not less than 600 feet from the ordinary high water mark of the Rock River. 
(6)  All off-premises signs are prohibited within the downtown as defined by the area included within Sign District D and its overlap with Sign District B. 
(7)  The maximum surface area for an off-premises sign, including the frame or trim, shall be 300 square feet for each single face, not to exceed a total of 600 square feet if there is more than one face. For off-premises signs located along Interstate 90, the maximum surface area for an off-premises sign, including the frame or trim, shall be 600 square feet for each single face, not to exceed a total of 1,200 square feet if there is more than one face. 
(8)  No off-premises sign shall extend above a total height of 30 feet above grade. 
(9)  All off-premises advertising signs shall comply with all yard and setback requirements of Chapter 42, and in no case shall a setback be less than 25 feet from any street line. All distances shall be measured from the property line to the outermost physical extension of the sign, sign structure and any component parts. 
(10)  Tri-vision signs whose messages are on triangular louvered facings and are changed by electronic rotation of the louvers are permitted for off-premises signs provided that the time the message remains in a fixed position shall be ten seconds or more. Tri-vision signs shall not be subject to the limitations of off-premises signs that meet the definition of an electronic message sign. 
(d)  In addition to all other limitations specified in this chapter, off-premises ground signs that meet the definition of electronic message signs may be constructed, reconstructed and displayed only upon the review and approval of a conditional sign permit application by the Plan Commission as provided in Section 28-338. The Plan Commission, in its review, shall consider the following: 
(1)  Off-premises electronic message signs may only be located on land zoned for business or industrial purposes. 
(2)  All off-premises signs meeting the definition of electronic message signs shall be spaced not less than 750 feet from any other off-premises signs. 
(3)  All off-premises electronic message signs shall be spaced not less than 1,200 feet from display face from any land zoned residence or agriculture or 600 feet if the sign face is not visible from a residence or agriculture district. Such spacing distance shall be measured along both sides of abutting, adjacent or intersecting streets, except that the Plan Commission may, by issuing a Conditional Sign Permit following the process outlined in Section 28-338, reduce the 1,200-foot spacing from residence and agriculture zone districts to 600 feet for only said districts on the opposite side of the street from the proposed sign. The Plan Commission, in its review, shall consider the following criteria: 
a.  The relationship of the proposed off-premises electronic message sign location to other off-premises signs, on-premises signs, electronic message signs, existing manmade and natural features and residential and agriculture zoned properties. 
b.  The impact of the proposed off-premises electronic message sign on existing residences in the surrounding area regardless of the zoning of the parcel on which said residences are located. 
c.  The impact of the proposed off-premises electronic message sign on the development or redevelopment of the parcel on which it is proposed to be located. 
d.  If an existing off-premises sign is to be converted to an off-premises electronic message sign. 
(4)  If any portion of the sign parcel adjoins any parcel zoned residence or agriculture district and if the specific location of the sign on said sign parcel is within 1,200 feet of the boundary with said residence or agriculture district, then in addition to satisfying the spacing prescribed in Subsection (d)(2) of this section and the following Subsection (d)(9) of this section, the sign shall not be permitted unless the Plan Commission determines it appropriate by issuing a conditional sign permit following the process outlined in Section 28-338. The Plan Commission, in its review, shall consider the criteria outlined in Subsection (d)(3)a through d of this section. 
(5)  All off-premises electronic message signs shall be spaced not less than 600 feet from the ordinary high water mark of the Rock River. 
(6)  All off-premises electronic message signs are prohibited within the downtown as defined by the area included within Sign District D and its overlap with Sign District B. 
(7)  The maximum surface area for an off-premises electronic message sign, including the frame or trim, shall be 300 square feet for each single face, not to exceed a total of 600 square feet if there is more than one face. 
(8)  No off-premises electronic message sign shall extend above a total height of 30 feet above grade. 
(9)  All off-premises electronic message signs shall comply with all yard and setback requirements of Chapter 42, and in no case shall a setback be less than 25 feet from any street line. All distances shall be measured from the property line to the outermost physical extension of the sign, sign structure and any component parts. 
(10)  No electronic message sign may be installed on or as a replacement for a nonconforming off-premises sign. 
(11)  All off-premises electronic message signs at all times shall comply with the following operational standards: 
a.  No sign shall interfere with the visibility or the operation of any traffic control device. 
b.  No sign shall include a graphic and/or depiction that does or could resemble or be mistaken for a traffic control device, signal or sign. 
c.  No such sign shall be illuminated to a degree or brightness that is greater than necessary for adequate visibility in the opinion of the Chief of Police or Building Official. Signs found to be too bright shall be adjusted in accordance with the instructions of the City. 
d.  No message shall change in intervals of less than eight seconds. 
e.  No moving graphics of any type shall be utilized at any time. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.095)  
Sec. 28-190. - Political signs. 
Political signs are exempt from all provisions of this chapter except general regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.100)  
Sec. 28-191. - Public signs. 
Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, erected by, permitted by or on the order of a governmental unit, or required by governmental statute, ordinance or regulation, such as safety signs, danger signs, no trespassing signs, memorial plaques, signs welcoming people to the City, signs identifying parks, signs of historical interest and other similar signs are exempt from all provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.110; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984; Ord. No. 87-500, § 3(part), 1987)  
Sec. 28-192. - Real estate signs. 
Real estate signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of premises or part of the premises on which the signs are displayed are exempt from all provisions of this chapter except general regulations, provided the copy portion of such signs is not over four feet in height and 16 square feet in area. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.120; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984; Ord. No. 87-500, § 3(part), 1987)  
Sec. 28-193. - Residential name plates. 
Name plates, not exceeding one square foot in area and which indicate only the name and address of the occupant in a residential area are exempt from all provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.130; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984; Ord. No. 87-500, § 3(part), 1987)  
Sec. 28-194. - Sandwich board sign. 
Sandwich board signs are regulated exclusively by this section. Sandwich board signs must comply with each of the following requirements and conditions: 
(1)  Require a sign permit. The annual permit fee must be paid in full to the Building Division prior to the use of the sign. This fee shall not be prorated. The fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(2)  Is permitted on the public pedestrian right-of-way (or public sidewalk) immediately in front of the business occupancy to which it refers, and only in Sign District D only (Downtown). Such signs located in all other sign districts shall be placed solely on private property in accordance with Section 28-139. 
(3)  Must not obstruct or impede, or permit the obstruction or impeding, of use of the pedestrian right-of-way on any public sidewalk. For purposes of this article, the term "pedestrian right-of-way" means an unobstructed area of a minimum of five contiguous feet in width measured in a straight line at right angles from the building and running the length of the property line. 
(4)  Must be removed each day at the close of business until the normal opening of the business the next day, but in no event later than 11:00 p.m. or before 6:00 a.m., respectively, each day. 
(5)  Must not exceed eight square feet in the sign area per sign face, or a total of 16 square feet for two sign faces. 
(6)  Must not exceed four feet in height. 
(7)  Must not exceed one in number per business establishment. 
(8)  Must be set back a minimum of two feet from the curb. 
(9)  Will not be counted in calculating the total allowable sign area on the sign owner's premises. 
(10)  Must not be an off-premises sign. 
(11)  Must be freestanding, contain two sign faces, and be hinged together at all times. 
(12)  A sandwich board sign does not include other portable signs. 
(13)  A sandwich board sign must exclusively refer to a business, person, activity, product, service, or price located on the premises immediately adjacent to the public sidewalk or private property where the sign is located or used. 
(14)  Upon a public sidewalk, use is permitted only upon that portion of the sidewalk immediately adjacent to the referred-to business property. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.135; Ord. No. 2018-724, § II, 6-25-2018 )  
Sec. 28-195. - Signs on seasonal roadside stands. 
Signs used in conjunction with seasonal sales from legal roadside stands are exempt from all provisions of this chapter except general regulations, provided the total area of all signs is no greater than 16 square feet. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.140; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984; Ord. No. 87-500, § 3(part), 1987)  
Sec. 28-196. - Subdivision signs. 
Subdivision signs are exempt from the provisions of Articles III and IV of this chapter and are permitted where use of the land is residential provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A subdivision sign shall be a ground sign; 
(2)  The maximum height of a subdivision sign shall be five feet above grade; 
(3)  The maximum area of a subdivision sign shall be 32 feet per face; and 
(4)  A subdivision sign shall be at least 30 feet from any other ground sign. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.150; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-197. - Temporary public service signs. 
Temporary signs which support an authorized community-wide civic or charitable event or drive, or which extend a message in connection with a holiday period are exempt from all provisions of this chapter except general regulations, provided such signs display the date of installation, are removed within 30 days after installation and carry no commercial advertisement. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.160; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-198. - Traffic signs. 
Authorized traffic signs, signals or other traffic control devices are exempt from all provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.170; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-199. - Warning signs. 
Signs warning of danger or a hazardous condition are exempt from all provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.180; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), amend. 1, § 5(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-200. - Window signs. 
Signs located on the inside of a window are exempt from all provisions of this chapter except as follows: 
(1)  Window signs are not permitted in any area where the use of the land is residential; and 
(2)  An electrical permit must be obtained for a window sign if it requires electrical connection other than a plug. 
(Code 1976, § 14.24.190; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), amend. 1, § 5(part), 1984)  
Secs. 28-201—28-223. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SIGN OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 28-224. - Generally. 
In order to regulate the proper placement of signs, the City is divided into sign overlay districts. Each district has specific regulations to provide for the proper placement, size, height, area and special effects that will be in keeping with the permitted uses as allowed in the underlying zoning districts. The sign overlay districts are designated upon the sign district map made a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.010; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-225. - Special regulations applying to the O3 and B1 Zoning Districts. 
In addition to the regulations contained herein, signs proposed within the O3, Neighborhood Office District and the B1, Neighborhood Convenience District are also subject to regulations found within Chapter 18. Said regulations are more restrictive than those found herein and limit the types of signs that may be used within those districts. As such, both the regulations contained herein and those of said Chapter 18 should be consulted for signs proposed within the O3 and B1 Districts. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.015)  
Sec. 28-226. - District A. 
(a)  Area defined. Sign Overlay District A is defined as that area which is within a distance of one-fourth mile of the centerline of I-90, as measured at right angles thereto, plus all the area within a distance of 2,000 feet from the point of intersection of the centerline of I-90, and any intersecting state or federal highway; however, specifically not included in this district is any area within 2,000 feet from the point of intersection of East Milwaukee Street and I-90. This district permits larger off-premises signs as well as on-premises signs that may be seen by persons driving vehicles approaching these areas at a higher rate of speed than found elsewhere in the City. 
(b)  Signs allowed. 
(1)  In Sign Overlay District A where the use of the land is nonresidential, only the signs designated in Sections 28-227 and 28-228 are permitted. 
(2)  In Sign Overlay District A where the use of the land is residential, there shall be no signs allowed other than one name plate, not exceeding one square foot in area, which indicates only the name and address of the occupant. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.020; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-227. - District A—On-premises signs permitted. 
In Sign Overlay District A, the following on-premises signs are permitted: 
(1)  One freestanding ground sign may be permitted for each parcel of land, provided no roof-mounted sign or projecting sign is located on the parcel. Where a parcel has in excess of 300 feet of frontage, one additional ground sign may be erected for each additional 300 feet of street frontage in excess of the first 300 feet of street frontage abutting the developed portion of the parcel. 
a.  Such ground sign shall not extend above a total height of 40 feet except as provided in Subsection (1)c.3 and 4 of this section. 
b.  The area of such ground sign shall not exceed 300 square feet for one face or 600 square feet for two or more faces except as provided in Subsection (1)c.3 and 4 of this section. 
c.  Ground signs up to 70 feet in height and 450 square feet for one face or 900 square feet for two or more faces in area are allowed subject to the following criteria: 
1.  The property shall be zoned B4. 
2.  The sign shall have no message center over 40 feet above the curb elevation. 
3.  No more than one 70-foot ground sign may be permitted for each platted parcel of land or certified survey lot. 
4.  Signs with area greater than 300 square feet per face and 600 square feet for two or more faces shall only be allowed to identify multiple occupant businesses, which are located on a platted parcel of land or certified survey lot and in consideration of a reduction of the number of permissible ground signs on the lot. 
5.  The sign shall be located at least 500 feet from any residential zoned district, not including interstate right-of-way zoned residential, and with said measurement to include any unbuildable buffer zone, Conservancy District or perpetual landscape easement used, reserved or designated as such, unless a conditional sign permit is issued by the Plan Commission granting a lesser spacing as provided in Subsection (1)c.4 of this section. 
d.  The Plan Commission may allow, through review and approval of a conditional sign permit as provided in Section 28-338 the following: 
1.  Ground signs up to 70 feet in height and 450 square feet per face or 900 square feet for two or more faces in area to identify a single occupant business outside of the 500-foot spacing requirement as provided in Subsection (1)c.5 of this section. 
2.  Ground signs up to 70 feet in height and 600 square feet per face or 1,200 square feet for two or more faces in area to identify multiple occupant businesses located on a platted parcel of land or certified survey lot outside of the 500-foot spacing requirement as provided in Subsection (1)c.5 of this section. 
3.  A reduction of the 500-foot spacing requirement from a residential zoned district as provided in Subsection (1)c.5 of this section to allow ground signs up to 70 feet in height and 450 square feet per face or 900 square feet for two or more faces in area. 
e.  The Plan Commission, in its review of a conditional sign permit, shall consider the following: 
1.  The criteria listed in Subsection (1)c.1—4 of this section. 
2.  The sign will have limited visual impact on the residential area due to its placement, orientation or configuration. 
3.  A reduction of the number of permissible ground signs on the lot if more than one ground sign is permitted on such lot under this chapter. 
(2)  One projecting sign per business occupancy, not to exceed 60 square feet in area per face, may be permitted, provided no ground sign or roof-mounted sign is located on the parcel. Such projecting sign shall not extend above the roof line. 
(3)  One roof sign may be permitted per parcel, provided there is no ground sign or projecting sign located on the parcel. Area and height of such roof sign shall follow the same restrictions as for ground signs. 
(4)  One under-canopy sign per business occupancy may be permitted, provided such sign shall not exceed ten square feet in area and shall have a clearance of nine feet between the bottom of the sign and the ground beneath it. Under-canopy signs may only be placed above pedestrian walks. 
(5)  One wall sign may be permitted for each street frontage or each separate business occupancy, provided that such signs comply with the following regulations: 
a.  The maximum area of all wall signs shall not exceed the total area of the front face of the building, or that portion of a building devoted to a business occupancy, divided by ten. 
b.  Such sign shall not extend above the roof line. 
c.  No wall sign shall be positioned on the building elevation facing a non-street rear lot line of the parcel upon which the building is located. 
d.  No wall sign shall be positioned on a building elevation directly adjoining a residential zone district. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.030)  
Sec. 28-228. - District A—Off-premises signs permitted. 
In Sign Overlay District A, off-premises signs are permitted in accord with the provisions of Section 28-189. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.040)  
Sec. 28-229. - District B. 
(a)  Area defined. Sign Overlay District B includes all areas along federal and state highways within 660 feet from the centerline of such highways, except areas in District A. Specifically, they are USH 51 along Center Avenue, Centerway and North Parker Drive, STH 26 along Centerway and Milton Avenue, STH 11 along West Court Street, Jackson Street, East and West Racine Street and Center Avenue. 
(b)  Signs allowed. 
(1)  In Sign Overlay District B where the use of the land is nonresidential, only the signs designated in Sections 28-230 and 28-231 are permitted. 
(2)  In Sign Overlay District B where use of the land is residential, there shall be no signs allowed other than one name plate, not exceeding one square foot in area, which indicates only the name and address of the occupant. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.050; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-230. - District B—On-premises signs permitted. 
In Sign Overlay District B, the following on-premises signs are permitted: 
(1)  One freestanding ground sign may be permitted for each parcel of land, provided no roof sign or projecting sign is located on the parcel. Where a parcel has in excess of 300 feet of frontage, one additional ground sign may be erected for each additional 300 feet of street frontage in excess of the first 300 feet of street frontage abutting the developed portion of the parcel. 
a.  The maximum area of the ground sign is determined by the setback from the centerline of the street to the closest part of the sign as set out below: 
Maximum Area of Sign (in square feet) 	Setback from Centerline of Street (in feet) 
150 	0—80 
151 plus one additional square foot in area for every one-foot setback beyond 81 feet up to a maximum area of 225 square feet 	81—155 
 
b.  The maximum height of ground signs is determined by the setback from the centerline of the street to the closest part of the sign, as set out below: 
Maximum Height of Sign (in square feet) 	Setback from Centerline of Street (in feet) 
25 	0—80 
25 plus one additional foot for every 5 feet of setback beyond 80 feet up to a maximum height of 40 feet 	81—155 
 
(2)  One projecting sign may be allowed per business, provided no ground sign is located on the parcel. The maximum area of projecting signs shall be based upon the number of stories of the building to which it is attached, as set out below: 
Maximum Area of Sign (in square feet) 	Number of Stories 
50 	1 and 2 
Plus 25 square feet for each story additional story above the second up to 150 square feet 	3 or more 
 
(3)  One under-canopy sign per business occupancy may be permitted, provided such sign shall not exceed ten square feet in area, and shall have a clearance of nine feet between the bottom of the sign and the ground beneath it. Under-canopy signs may only be placed above pedestrian walks. 
(4)  One wall sign is permitted for each street frontage, or each separate business occupancy, provided that such signs comply with the following regulations: 
a.  The maximum area of all wall signs shall not exceed the total area of the front face of the building, or that portion of a building devoted to a business occupancy, divided by ten. 
b.  Such sign shall not extend above the roof line. 
c.  No wall sign shall be positioned on the building elevation facing a non-street rear lot line of the parcel upon which the building is located. 
d.  No wall sign shall be positioned on a building elevation directly adjoining a residential zone district. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.060)  
Sec. 28-231. - District B—Off-premises signs permitted. 
In Sign Overlay District B, off-premises signs are permitted in accord with the provisions of Section 28-189. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.070)  
Sec. 28-232. - District C. 
(a)  Area defined. Sign Overlay District C includes lands zoned for office, business and industry not covered by the A, B or D districts. 
(b)  Signs allowed. 
(1)  In Sign Overlay District C where the use of the land is nonresidential, only the signs designated in Sections 28-233 and 28-234 are permitted. 
(2)  In Sign Overlay District C where the use of the land is residential, there shall be no signs allowed other than one name plate, not exceeding one square foot in area, which indicates only the name and address of the occupant. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.080; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-233. - District C—On-premises signs permitted. 
The following on-premises signs are permitted in sign overlay district C: 
(1)  One freestanding ground sign may be permitted for each parcel of land, provided no roof-mounted sign or projecting sign is located on the parcel. Where a parcel has in excess of 300 feet of frontage, one additional ground sign may be erected for each additional 300 feet of street frontage in excess of the first 300 feet of street frontage abutting the developed portion of the parcel. 
a.  The maximum area of the ground sign is determined by the setback from the centerline of the street to the closest part of the sign, as set out below: 
Maximum Area of Sign (in square feet) 	Setback from Centerline of Street (in feet) 
75 	0—50 
76 plus one additional square foot in area for every foot of setback beyond five feet up to a maximum area of 125 square feet 	51—100 
 
b.  The maximum height of ground signs is determined by the setback from the centerline of the street to the closest part of the sign, as set out below: 
Maximum Height of Sign (in feet) 	Setback from Centerline of Street (in feet) 
20 	0—50 
Plus one additional foot for every five feet of setback beyond 50 feet up to a maximum of 30 feet 	5—100 
 
(2)  One projecting sign may be allowed per business, provided no ground sign is located on the same parcel. Projecting signs shall be placed a minimum of 30 feet from one another, and shall contain a surface area of no more than 50 square feet per face. 
(3)  One under-canopy sign per business occupancy may be permitted, provided such sign shall not exceed ten square feet in area, and has a clearance of nine feet between the bottom of the sign and the ground beneath it. Under-canopy signs may only be placed above pedestrian walks. 
(4)  One wall sign may be permitted for each street frontage, or each separate business occupancy provided that such signs comply with the following regulations: 
a.  The maximum area of all wall signs shall not exceed an area equal to three square feet for each linear front foot of the building or that portion of a building devoted to a business occupancy. 
b.  Such signs shall not extend above the roof line. 
c.  No wall sign shall be positioned on the building elevation facing a non-street rear lot line of the parcel upon which the building is located. 
d.  No wall sign shall be positioned on a building elevation directly adjoining a residential zone district. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.090)  
Sec. 28-234. - District C—Off-premises signs permitted. 
In Sign Overlay District C, off-premises signs are permitted in accord with the provisions of Section 28-189. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.100)  
Sec. 28-235. - District D. 
(a)  Area defined. Sign Overlay District D encompasses the center City, as defined in Section 28-26, and includes any area designated as unique by the City Council. 
(b)  Signs allowed. 
(1)  In Sign Overlay District D where the use of the land is nonresidential, only the signs designated in Sections 28-236 and 28-237 are permitted. 
(2)  In Sign Overlay District D where use of the land is residential, there shall be no signs allowed other than one name plate, not exceeding one square foot in area, which indicates only the name and address of the occupant. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.110; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-236. - District D—On-premises signs permitted. 
In Sign Overlay District D, the following on-premises signs are permitted: 
(1)  One freestanding ground sign may be permitted for each parcel of land, provided sufficient setback from the street right-of-way is provided so as not to cause encroachment into the right-of-way. 
a.  Such ground sign shall not extend above a total height of 20 feet above grade. 
b.  The maximum area of any ground sign shall not exceed 75 square feet per face. 
(2)  One under-canopy sign per business occupancy may be permitted, provided each sign shall not exceed ten square feet in area and shall have a clearance of nine feet between the bottom of the sign and the ground beneath it. Under-canopy signs may only be placed above pedestrian walks. 
(3)  One wall sign may be permitted for each street frontage or each separate business occupancy. For the purposes of this article, the downtown parking plaza and the riverfront public walkway between Centerway and West Racine Street shall be considered a street frontage. Such signs comply with the following regulations: 
a.  The maximum area of all wall signs shall not exceed an area equal to 2½ square feet for each linear front foot of building or that portion of a building devoted to a business occupancy. 
b.  Such signs shall not extend above the roof line. 
c.  No wall sign shall be positioned on the building elevation facing a non-street rear lot line of the parcel upon which the building is located, except where such building adjoins the downtown parking plaza or the riverfront public walkway between Centerway and West Racine Street. 
d.  No wall sign shall be positioned on a building elevation directly adjoining a residential zone district. 
(4)  One projecting sign may be permitted for each parcel or for each 30 feet of street frontage. Multiple projecting signs on one parcel shall be spaced a minimum of 30 feet apart, measured horizontally. 
a.  Such signs shall not extend more than four feet perpendicular from the building or one-half the width of the sidewalk from the property line to the face of the curb, whichever is less. 
b.  Signs shall not extend above the roof line. 
c.  Projecting signs shall not exceed 12 square feet per face. 
d.  Signs should be pinned away from the wall at least six inches, but no more than 12 inches. 
e.  Projecting signs shall only contain the business name or services provided. Advertising of specific brands is prohibited. 
f.  Such signs shall not be changeable message boards or letter boards, unless the sign is for the purpose of a theater marquee. 
g.  Projecting signs shall be exterior lit. Interior lit signs and signs utilizing neon lighting are prohibited. All blinking and flashing signs are prohibited. Spot lighting, used to illuminate the sign, must be attached to the building. 
h.  The bottom of the sign must be a minimum of ten feet above the top of the adjoining street curb. 
i.  Only those properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places or located in a locally designated Historic Overlay District will be permitted to erect projecting signs. 
j.  All projecting signs will be reviewed by the City's Historic Commission, in accordance with Section 42-445(b)(2); and such signs are to be consistent or historically sensitive to the building design. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.120)  
Sec. 28-237. - District D—Off-premises signs. 
Off-premises signs are prohibited in District D and that portion of District B that overlaps with District D as outlined in Section 28-189. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.130)  
Sec. 28-238. - District E. 
(a)  Area defined. Sign Overlay District E includes all areas not included in districts A, B, C or D. 
(b)  Signs allowed. 
(1)  In Sign Overlay District E where the use of the land is nonresidential, only the on-premises signs designated in Section 28-239 are permitted. No off-premises signs are permitted. 
(2)  In Sign Overlay District E where the use of the land is residential, the following signs shall be allowed: one name plate, not exceeding one square foot in area, that indicates only the name and address of the occupant. In addition, one attention-getting device may be posted on each parcel when that property is enrolled as a participant in a community-wide event (such as a tour of homes) and at the discretion of the Building Official. Said device shall not exceed ten feet in height with maximum area of no more than two feet horizontal and ten feet vertical and may be posted on the property for a period not to exceed 14 consecutive days during a calendar year. This use of temporary signage is exempt from the requirements set forth in Section 28-180(b), (c) and (d). A list of sign rules shall be provided to the permit applicant. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.140; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-239. - District E—On-premises signs permitted. 
In Sign Overlay District E, the following on-premises signs are permitted: 
(1)  One freestanding ground sign may be permitted for each parcel of land, provided setback requirements of the zoning code are met and provided no wall sign, roof sign or projecting sign is located on the parcel. 
a.  Such ground sign shall not extend above a total height of ten feet above grade. 
b.  The maximum area of any ground sign shall not exceed 20 square feet per face. 
c.  Such ground sign must be at least 30 feet from any other ground sign. 
(2)  One wall sign is permitted for each street frontage or each separate business occupancy, provided no ground sign, roof sign or projecting sign is located on the parcel, and provided that such signs comply with the following regulations: 
a.  Maximum area of any wall sign shall not exceed 20 square feet. 
b.  The maximum area of all wall signs shall not exceed an area equal to 2½ square feet for each linear front foot of the building. 
c.  Such wall sign shall not extend above the roof line of the building on which it is located. 
d.  No wall sign shall be positioned on the building elevation facing a non-street rear lot line of the parcel upon which the building is located. 
e.  No wall sign shall be positioned on a building elevation directly adjoining a residential zone district. 
(Code 1976, § 14.28.150)  
Secs. 28-240—28-256. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - AREAS OF SPECIAL CONTROL 
 
Sec. 28-257. - Designation; map. 
(a)  It is recognized that the regulations provided in this article may not sensitively handle all of the sign situations in an area as diverse as that covered by the City. Therefore, the City Council, by ordinance, and following notice and hearing, may designate any of the following areas as areas of special control: 
(1)  Architectural, historic or scenic areas; 
(2)  Integrated centers over eight acres in area. 
(b)  The City Plan Commission shall prepare a map showing all areas of special control which have been designated by the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 14.32.010; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-258. - Architectural, historic or scenic areas. 
An architectural, historic or scenic area is an area whose special and unique visual characteristics or whose natural beauty requires special sign regulations to ensure that all signs used within the area are compatible with that area and with each other. 
(Code 1976, § 14.32.020; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-259. - Integrated centers. 
Integrated centers are intensive business areas over eight acres in area whose character indicates that signs should be permitted under regulations which are less restrictive than those which would otherwise be applicable under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 14.32.030; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-260. - Establishment of special regulations. 
In areas of special control, the City Council, by ordinance, may establish special regulations for signs either more or less restrictive than this article. 
(Code 1976, § 14.32.040; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Secs. 28-261—28-283. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS 
 
Sec. 28-284. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Any sign, existing on the date the ordinance codified in this article became effective or on the date when any amendment of this article became or shall become effective, which is in violation of any provision of this chapter or any amendment thereto, is a nonconforming sign. 
(b)  Nonconforming signs which are structurally altered, relocated or replaced shall comply immediately with all provisions of this Code. For purposes of this section, the term "structural alteration" means the replacement or modification of a substantial portion of the framing or supports of a sign or modification of the size or height of the sign. 
(c)  Nonconforming signs shall be removed when the principal structure located on the premises undergoes a change of use. For purposes of this section, the term "change of use" means any use which is different from the previous use of the building or land. All signs advertising the new use shall be brought into compliance with this Code or removed within 90 days. 
(Code 1976, § 14.36.010)  
Sec. 28-285. - Exemptions. 
The requirement in Section 28-284 for compliance or removal of a nonconforming sign upon the change of use or destruction or damage resulting from an act of God shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A sign which varies from the height, area, projection, or setback limitations in an amount of not more than 20 percent of the allowable dimension; 
(2)  A sign which is nonconforming solely as a result of its distance from another sign. This exemption does not apply to off-premises advertising signs that do not meet the spacing requirements from any residence or agriculture zoned district. It does apply to off-premises signs which do not meet the spacing distance from other off-premises signs. 
(Code 1976, § 14.36.020)  
Sec. 28-286. - Replacement and relocation of nonconforming off-premises signs. 
(a)  The following regulations shall govern the replacement or relocation of nonconforming off-premises signs that have been or will be removed. The intent of these provisions is to allow for the potential to reconstruct nonconforming off-premises signs in their current location or the potential to relocate such signs where they might otherwise be prohibited. 
(b)  The Plan Commission may, through the issuance of a conditional sign permit following the process outlined in Section 28-338, allow a nonconforming sign that has been or will be removed to be replaced in its current location or relocated to a new location. The Plan Commission, in its review, shall consider the following: 
(1)  The relationship of the proposed off-premises sign location to other off-premises signs, on-premises signs, existing manmade and natural features and residential and agriculture zoned properties. 
(2)  The impact of the proposed off-premises sign on existing or planned residences, the Downtown as defined by Sign Overlay District D, and the Rock River. 
(3)  The impact of the proposed off-premises sign on the development or redevelopment of the parcel on which it will be located. 
(4)  The Plan Commission may modify the standards of Section 28-189 to allow the replacement or relocation of a nonconforming sign that has been or will be removed. 
(Code 1976, § 14.36.030)  
Secs. 28-287—28-305. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL 
 
Sec. 28-306. - Maintenance required. 
(a)  All signs and sign structures now existing, or to be constructed, shall be properly maintained and kept in a safe, neat and proper state of maintenance and appearance. 
(b)  Maintenance shall include the following and similar activities: 
(1)  Replacing copy on signs or marquees designed for use of replaceable copy; 
(2)  Replacing or changing the advertising copy on a sign or billboard designed for such replacement without structural changes; 
(3)  Replacing or repairing framework or supports of a sign, as needed to protect the public safety; however, the replacement of a substantial portion of the framing or supports is not maintenance but is deemed to be a new sign, and such new sign must conform to all provisions of this article; 
(4)  Painting or repainting signs, sign copy or sign supports; an existing sign painted directly on any wall or building may be repainted to occupy the same or a smaller area; 
(5)  Cleaning, pasting, straightening and other normal maintenance functions. 
(Code 1976, § 14.40.010; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), amend. 2, § 6, amend. 3 § 1, 1984)  
Sec. 28-307. - Removal required. 
(a)  All signs which no longer serve the purpose for which they were intended, or which are not maintained, or which have been abandoned, or which are unsafe shall be removed by the sign owner or by the owner or occupant of the property upon which the sign is located. Such removal shall be completed within three months of the date of disrepair or abandonment. 
(b)  Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change of ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of at least six months. Such signs shall be removed immediately after the six-month period of abandonment. 
(Code 1976, § 14.40.020; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-308. - Repair or removal ordered. 
(a)  If the condition of the sign is such as to present an immediate threat to the safety and welfare of the public, the Building Official shall have the authority to order any repairs, extra supports or other precautions necessary to protect the public. The Building Official shall also have the authority to order the removal of such sign. 
(b)  Such order shall be personally served on the owner of the sign or on the owner or occupant of the property on which the sign is located. 
(c)  Failure to comply with the Building Official's order within ten days after service shall cause the sign permit to be revoked, and any such dangerous sign shall be removed immediately by the owner of the sign or by the owner or occupant of the property on which the sign is located. 
(d)  In any case where the sign is not repaired or removed within ten days as ordered by the Building Official, the Building Official shall have such dangerous sign removed, and the expense thereof shall be recovered from the sign owner, failing which, it shall become a lien on the property and shall be put on the tax roll. 
(Code 1976, § 14.40.030; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-309. - Maintenance or removal by owner. 
An owner of a sign is permitted to maintain and/or remove his or her own sign without a sign erector's license, provided that a licensed electrician shall perform the maintenance of any electrical wiring and make the electrical disconnection when an electrical sign is involved. 
(Code 1976, § 14.40.040; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Secs. 28-310—28-336. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 28-337. - Zoning Board of Appeals. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals has the powers and duties in respect to this article as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e). 
(Code 1976, § 14.48.010; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-338. - Plan Commission review of conditional sign permits. 
This article provides for Plan Commission review and approval of conditional sign permits. The following application, hearing and review process shall apply. 
(1)  Application. An application for a conditional sign permit shall be filed with the City Planner on a prescribed form, accompanied with the required $500.00 application fee. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan delineating the location of the proposed sign, sign plans normally required with a sign permit application and such plans or other information as deemed necessary by the City Planner to process the application. 
(2)  Hearing on application. Upon receipt of the application and other materials, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application of a conditional sign permit at such time and place as shall be established by the Plan Commission. 
(3)  Notice of hearing. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given as a Class 1 Notice under the Wisconsin Statutes in the official City paper. Notice of time, place and purpose of such public hearing shall also be sent to the applicant and to the property owners as recorded in the property tax assessment rolls within 400 feet of the subject site, said notice to be sent by regular mail at least ten days prior to such public hearing. 
(4)  Plan Commission review. The Plan Commission, after holding a public hearing, shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 60 days, grant or deny the application. Failure to act shall constitute denial of the request. Prior to the granting of a permit, the Commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented that the criteria herein prescribed are being complied with. 
(5)  Applicability. Any sign in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article or any amendment thereto, which would have become a nonconforming sign because of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article or any amendment thereto and which conforms to all of the standards provided for conditional sign permit in this chapter shall be deemed to be a permitted conditional sign and shall be granted a conditional sign permit by the Plan Commission. 
(Code 1976, § 14.48.015)  
Sec. 28-339. - Order to correct violations—Requirements. 
(a)  Where a violation of the Sign Code exists, the Building Official may order the owner of the property on which the sign is located or the owner of the sign to correct the violation. 
(b)  The order to correct shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the property on which the sign is located and a description of the sign sufficient for identification; 
(2)  Specification of the violation, the City ordinance which is being violated, and the section of the Code under which such order is being issued; 
(3)  An order to correct the violation; 
(4)  A reasonable time period in which the violation is to be corrected; and 
(5)  The name of the Building Official ordering correction and the name of the department issuing the order. 
(c)  A copy of the order shall be served on the owner of the property on which the sign is located and on the owner of the sign if known and if different than the owner of the property. 
(Code 1976, § 14.48.020; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-340. - Order to correct violations—Serving procedures. 
Orders to correct violations shall be served upon the owner of record by First Class Mail at the address listed on the most recent property tax bill or by delivering the order to the owner personally. When the owner of record does not have an address listed with the Building Division office, the order may be served: 
(1)  By delivering the order to the owner personally; 
(2)  By First Class Mail addressed to the owner at the last-known address as shown on the most recent property tax bill for the property affected by the order; or 
(3)  By posting the order in a conspicuous place on the exterior of the structure affected by the order. 
(Code 1976, § 14.48.030; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-341. - Order to correct violations—Failure to do so. 
In case any order is not properly complied with, the Building Official may follow any, several or all of the following procedures: 
(1)  Issue a citation to the owner of the property on which the sign is located or to the owner of the sign for the violation, pursuant to the provisions of Sections 1-10—1-14. 
(2)  Request the City Attorney to institute the appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity against the owner of the property on which the sign is located or the owner of the sign, ordering him or her to: 
a.  Restrain, correct or remove the violation; 
b.  Restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of any sign in violation of the Sign Code; 
c.  Prevent the use of the sign or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of or not in compliance with the provisions of the Sign Code or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was issued; or 
d.  Pay a forfeiture pursuant to the penalty provisions of the Sign Code. 
(Code 1976, § 14.48.040; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Sec. 28-342. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit to the City not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 and the costs of prosecution for each violation. In default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, any person, firm or corporation shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of up to 60 days, unless the forfeiture and costs are paid sooner. Each day a violation exists or continues constitutes a separate offense. In addition to other remedies provided by law, the City or any adjoining or neighboring property owner who would be specially damaged by a violation of this article may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful sign. 
(Code 1976, § 14.48.050; Ord. No. 84-373, § 1(part), 1984)  
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the efficient and environmentally sound operation and use of the City's waste disposal facilities and to provide the sanitary and efficient storage, collection, use and disposal of solid waste and recyclables in accordance with state law, as from time to time amended, recreated or otherwise modified. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.010)  
Sec. 30-2. - Statutory authority. 
Portions of this chapter dealing with recycling are adopted under the authority vested in cities under Wis. Stats. ch. 289, as from time to time amended, recreated or otherwise modified. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.020)  
Sec. 30-3. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the stricter restrictions of this chapter shall supersede, govern and apply. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.030)  
Sec. 30-4. - Interpretations. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(b)  Where any terms or requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive or stricter requirements or interpretation shall apply. 
(c)  Where a provision of this chapter is required by any Wisconsin Statute or Administrative Code, and where the provision of this chapter is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wisconsin Statutes or Administrative Codes in effect on the date of adoption of this chapter, in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this chapter, or then in effect. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.040)  
Sec. 30-5. - Severability. 
Should any portion or provision of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.050)  
Sec. 30-6. - Applicability. 
(a)  The requirements of Article II of this chapter apply to all persons utilizing the sanitary and/or demolition landfills of the City. 
(b)  The requirements of Articles II and IV of this chapter apply to all persons within the City. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.060)  
Sec. 30-7. - Administration. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Director of Public Works and his or her designated agents. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.070)  
Sec. 30-8. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Asphalt roof shingle means a roof shingle made of felt impregnated with asphalt and covered with mineral granules. 
Bi-metal container means a container for carbonated or malt beverage that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum. 
Bulky waste means discarded articles of such size as are not normally collected with residential or commercial waste, including, but not limited to, appliances, furniture, plumbing fixtures, windows and doors. 
City means the City of Janesville. 
Collection cart means a wheeled cart issued by the City to each customer eligible for collection of solid waste and recyclables which must be utilized by the customer in order to receive collection service provided by the City. 
DNR means Department of Natural Resources. 
Demolition waste means waste resulting from building construction or demolition, alteration or repair including excavated material, remodeling and other waste such as concrete, stone, asphalt, sod, earth, dirt and brick. 
Department means the City of Janesville Department of Public Works. 
Dwelling unit means a room or group of rooms, including cooking accommodations, occupied by one family, and in which not more than two persons, other than members of the family, are lodged or boarded for compensation at any one time. 
Effective recycling program means as specified in NR 544 Wisconsin Administrative Code, as from time to time amended. 
Electronic waste means as specified in Wis. Stats. § 287.07(5), as from time to time amended or renumbered, and includes, but is not limited to, televisions, computers, desktop printers, computer monitors, other computer accessories (including mice, keyboards, speakers, external hard drives, and flash drives), DVD players, VCRs and other video players, fax machines, and cell phones. 
Eligible customer means owner of real property enumerated and described in Section 30-132, as from time to time amended or renumbered. The solid waste collection and disposal fee shall be charged against and imposed upon the real property or eligible customers, as set forth in Section 30-132. 
Foam polystyrene packaging means packaging made primarily from foam polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is designed for serving food or beverages. 
(2)  Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container. 
(3)  Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container. 
HDPE means high density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2. 
Hazardous or toxic wastes means waste material or substances which during normal storage or handling may be a potential cause of harm, including, but not limited to, pharmaceutical materials, corrosive chemicals, poisonous or pathogenic substances, pesticide chemicals, radioactive materials, toxic materials and all other similar harmful substances whether in solid, liquid or gaseous form. 
LDPE means low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4. 
Magazines means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper. 
Major appliance means a residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes dryer, clothes washer, dehumidifiers, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, refrigerator, stove, furnace, boiler and water heater. 
Motor oil means an engine oil that is unmixed with any other substance which can no longer be used for its intended purpose. 
Multiple-family dwelling means a property containing five or more residential units, including, but not limited to, those which are occupied seasonally. 
Newspaper means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint. 
Nonresidential facilities and properties means commercial, retail, industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. The term "nonresidential facilities and properties" does not include multiple-family dwellings. 
Office paper means high grade printing and writing papers from offices in nonresidential facilities and properties. 
Oil filter and oil absorbing material means used oil filters and oil absorbents originating at nonresidential facilities. 
Other resins or multiple resins means plastic resins labeled by the SPI code #7. 
PETE means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1. 
PP means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5. 
PS means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code #6. 
PVC means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3. 
Person means any individual, natural or artificial, including, but not limited to, any firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, joint venture, partnership, limited liability company, governmental agency, governmental unit, or other entity howsoever comprised or constituted. 
Plastic container means an individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale. 
Post-consumer waste means solid waste other than solid waste generated in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined currently in Wis. Stats. § 291.01, waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined currently in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(17). 
Recyclable materials means lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bi-metal containers. 
Residential property means a lot or parcel of land developed exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family units, duplexes, and multifamily buildings containing up to four separate units. The term "residential property" includes condominiums and manufactured homes. 
Responsible unit means as specified in Wis. Stats. § 287.09. 
Solid waste means as specified in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(33). 
Solid waste facility means a facility for solid waste treatment, solid waste storage, or solid waste disposal, and includes commercial, industrial, municipal, state, and federal establishments or operations such as, without limitation because of enumeration, sanitary landfills, dumps, land disposal sites, incinerators, transfer stations, storage facilities, collection and transportation services, and processing, treatment, and recovery facilities. The term "solid waste facility" includes the land where the facility is located. The term "solid waste facility" does not include: 
(1)  A facility for the processing of scrap iron, steel, or nonferrous metal using large machines to produce a principal product of scrap metal for sale or use for re-melting purposes; 
(2)  A facility which uses large machines to sort, grade, compact, or bale clean wastepaper, fibers, or plastics, not mixed with other solid waste, for sale or use for recycling purposes. 
(3)  An auto junk yard or scrap metal salvage yard. 
(4)  A pyrolysis facility or a gasification facility. 
Solid waste treatment means any method, technique or process which is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of solid waste. 
Treatment includes incineration. 
Waste tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, brush, and clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches diameter. The term "yard waste" does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.090)  
Secs. 30-9—30-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY, DEMOLITION AND OTHER LANDFILLS AND YARD WASTE COMPOSTING SITES 
 
Sec. 30-35. - Sanitary and demolition landfill and yard waste composting sites. 
The following provisions shall apply to all sanitary, demolition and other landfills and yard waste composting sites within the City, owned, operated, contracted for or regulated by the City. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.100)  
Sec. 30-36. - Use—Required. 
The area established from time to time by the City Manager as the sanitary and demolition landfill depository (hereinafter referred to as the landfill), and the yard waste composting sites shall be the only area within the City in which solid waste may be deposited without express permission of the Director of Public Works. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.110)  
Sec. 30-37. - Use—Restrictions. 
(a)  The following wastes and materials are prohibited from disposal, placement or deposit at, upon or into any City sanitary or demolition landfill by any person at any time: 
(1)  Lead-acid batteries; 
(2)  Major appliances; 
(3)  Motor oil, oil filters or oil absorbent materials; 
(4)  Toxic or hazardous wastes; 
(5)  Waste tires; 
(6)  Yard wastes; 
(7)  Materials listed in Section 30-94, unless those materials come from a responsible unit having an effective recycling program approved by DNR; 
(8)  Concrete, reinforced concrete, bituminous concrete, broken pavement, shall not be disposed of in the sanitary landfill, but may be disposed of at the demolition landfill; 
(9)  Electronic wastes; 
(10)  Effective July 1, 2012, asphalt roof shingles. 
(b)  Upon full payment of the required fees, if appropriate, lead-acid batteries, major appliances, motor oil and waste tires may be deposited at a City sanitary landfill but only in areas designated, from time to time, by the Director of Public Works, for eventual recycling. 
(c)  The following, notwithstanding any of the above, shall be the only wastes or materials accepted for disposal at any City demolition landfill: 
(1)  Clean soil; 
(2)  Brick and building stone; 
(3)  Concrete, reinforced concrete; 
(4)  Bituminous concrete; 
(5)  Broken pavement; 
(6)  Unpainted or untreated wood, including brush branches, shrubs, trees and stumps and old and new building materials; 
(7)  Wood pallets; 
(d)  The following, notwithstanding any of the above, shall be the only wastes or materials accepted for disposal at any City yard waste composting sites: 
(1)  Grass clippings originating from properties within the City limits. 
(2)  Leaves originating from properties within the City limits. 
(3)  Garden waste, including all plants, fruits, and vegetables originating from properties within the City limits. 
(4)  Brush waste less than one inch in diameter and originating from properties within the City limits. 
(e)  All other wastes and materials not specifically enumerated above are prohibited from disposal, placement or deposit by any person at any time at, upon or into any City sanitary or demolition landfill or any yard waste composting sites. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.120)  
Sec. 30-38. - Regulations. 
(a)  All persons having the right to use the City landfills, collection services of the City, as provided in this article, shall abide by and conform with each and every regulation set forth, provided for and/or mandated in this article, and with each and every instruction and order of the person authorized by the City Council to supervise dumping operations within the landfills and with all signs and notices posted at the landfill when such signs are posted or regulations are adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  No persons, having the right to use the City landfills as provided in this article, shall be permitted to enter upon or use any City landfill for dumping operations, except during the hours specified by a notice posted at the gate at the entrance to landfill sites. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.130)  
Sec. 30-39. - Removal of objects; permission required. 
No person shall, except by permission of the Director of Public Works, remove any article or object which has been deposited or dumped and left at any City landfill. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.140)  
Sec. 30-40. - Fee schedule. 
(a)  For all wastes hauled to the sanitary landfill in vehicles other than City-owned vehicles, excluding special wastes and wastes used as daily cover, the fee charged shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(b)  The minimum fee must be paid unless the weight of the load is determined to result in a higher fee, in which case the higher fee must be paid. Proration of fees shall be allowed only when the weight of the load, as determined by the method described in Section 30-41, results in a charge greater than the minimum fee contained in Subsection (e) of this section. 
(c)  For material hauled to a City demolition landfill, the fee charged shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. These shall be the minimum fees regardless of the volume of material being deposited. 
(d)  For waste tires, the fee charges for recycling shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(e)  For all microwave ovens; major appliances containing refrigerants and other major appliances deposited for recycling, the fee charged shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(f)  City residents may deposit 96 gallons of waste materials into the sanitary landfill per trip free of charge. 
(g)  Fees for special wastes and wastes used as daily cover shall be determined by the Director of Public Works on a case by case basis. 
(h)  Fees for contract disposal arrangements, long-term and/or substantial tonnage deposits at the Janesville sanitary and/or demolition landfills, respectively, may be established, from time to time, by the City Manager within the following restrictions: 
(1)  The contract minimum tonnage, combined with all other projected waste sources including waste accepted under other contracts, does not average more than 175,000 tons per year through the term of the contract. 
(2)  The term of contract is for five years or less. 
Contract disposal arrangements not meeting the limitation of Subsection (h) of this section shall require review and approval by the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.150)  
Sec. 30-41. - Waste weights; method of computing. 
(a)  In order to determine the weight of waste that is deposited into the sanitary landfill, vehicles hauling such waste shall be weighed before and after depositing the waste. The difference in weight shall be the basis for computing the fee charges. Weighing vehicles shall be done as follows: 
(1)  Semi-trailer units. The tractor shall be weighed. All other axles shall be weighed. The total of these two weights shall be the weight of the vehicle. 
(2)  All other units too large for the City scale. The front axle shall be weighed. All other axles shall be weighed. The total of these two weights shall be the weight of the vehicle. 
(3)  All vehicles which fully fit on the City's scale shall be weighed as a single unit. 
(b)  Any person hauling waste may establish the weight of the waste without using the City's scale only by producing a certification by the operator of a certified scale showing that: 
(1)  The method of weighing was exactly the same as set out in Subsection (a) of this section; 
(2)  The before weighing occurred within one-half hour of the arrival of the vehicle at the landfill; 
(3)  The after weighing occurred within one-half hour of the departure of the vehicle from the landfill. 
(c)  No weight shall be added to the vehicle between the weighing at a certified scale and arrival at the landfill or in between leaving the landfill and the subsequent weighing. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.160)  
Sec. 30-42. - Commercial hauling; permit required. 
(a)  All persons hauling solid waste to any sanitary landfill by hire shall be required to purchase annual permits from the City. 
(b)  The permit shall be purchased from the City Clerk on or before June 30 of each year. 
(c)  The annual fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(d)  This annual permit shall authorize commercial haulers, upon payment of the proper fees when applicable, to deposit certain lawful and permitted solid wastes into any City sanitary landfill, except prohibited wastes. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.170)  
Sec. 30-43. - Covered loads; required. 
(a)  All persons hauling solid or demolition wastes to any City sanitary and/or demolition landfill shall transport such wastes in an enclosed truck, trailer or vehicle, or shall have the wastes covered by a secure tarpaulin. 
(b)  No person may permit or fail to adequately prevent any waste material from falling out or off of, or blowing out or off of, any motor vehicle owned, possessed, operated, or under the control of such person. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.180)  
Sec. 30-44. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of Article II of this chapter shall forfeit and pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default in the payment of the imposed forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail, until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but for not more than 90 days per violation. 
(b)  Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense, and each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate offense for which a separate forfeiture and other penalty and/or relief may be imposed or applied. 
(c)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, any forfeiture, penalty or other relief imposed by any court and/or permitted in this section or elsewhere in this article or other applicable Code of General Ordinances of the City of Janesville, the City may, from time to time apply for, and the court may grant, render, order and enforce, jointly and severally, one or more forms of equitable and/or injunctive relief, including, but not limited to, abatement, removal, mandate and/or prohibition. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.190)  
Secs. 30-45—30-61. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION AT RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES AND NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 30-62. - Collection of solid waste and recyclables generated at residential properties and at certain nonresidential facilities and properties. 
The following provisions shall apply to collection, by the City, of solid waste and recyclables at all residential properties and certain nonresidential facilities and properties.  
Sec. 30-63. - Location, times and volumes. 
(a)  Collection carts containing solid waste and recyclables shall be placed for collection in the following manner, unless otherwise authorized by the Director of Public Works: 
(1)  On streets having curb and gutter, collection carts shall be placed so the front of the collection cart faces the street and so the cart is immediately adjacent to the curb and gutter, including carts placed in driveway openings. Collection carts may also be placed within the curbline of the street provided such placement does not obstruct normal vehicular traffic. 
(2)  On paved streets without curb and gutter, collection carts shall be placed so the front of the collection cart faces the street and so the cart is immediately adjacent to the edge of the pavement. Collection carts may also be placed on the edge of pavement, provided such placement does not obstruct normal vehicular traffic. 
(3)  On unpaved streets without curb and gutter, collection carts shall be placed so the front container faces the street and so the cart is immediately adjacent to future planned placement of curb and gutter, including carts placed in existing and/or planned future driveway openings. 
(b)  Solid wastes and recyclables shall be placed at the street not earlier than 24 hours prior to the day of scheduled collection but before 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. 
(c)  All residential properties and certain nonresidential facilities and properties are eligible to receive collection service from the City at a frequency determined by the City. Nonresidential facilities and properties must request collection service and must be approved by the City prior to receiving collection service. Solid waste placed for collection by nonresidential facilities and properties shall not exceed the capacity of one, 95-gallon collection cart in aggregate per scheduled collection event. Recyclable materials placed for collection at nonresidential facilities and properties shall not exceed the capacity of two, 95-gallon collection carts in aggregate per scheduled collection event without prior approval from the City. 
(d)  Public and private trash and recyclable collection and hauling may only occur between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. in residentially zoned districts (R1, R1D, R2, R3M, R3, R4) within the City. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.200)  
Sec. 30-64. - Collection carts. 
(a)  All residential properties and nonresidential facilities and properties receiving service from the City for collection of solid waste and recyclables shall utilize collection carts specified and/or provided by the City. 
(b)  Solid waste and recyclables must be fully contained within the collection carts specified and/or provided by the City with the cart lid closed in order to be collected. Solid waste and recyclables placed outside of the collection cart shall not be collected. 
(c)  All collection carts shall be removed from the street right-of-way after collection by the City on the day of collection. 
(d)  All collection carts furnished by the City shall remain the property of the City unless separately purchased from the City by an owner or tenant of a property receiving collection service from the City. Such separately purchased cart to remain the property of said owner or tenant. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.220)  
Sec. 30-65. - Non-city waste and recyclables prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall dispose of, deposit or place any solid wastes or recyclables originating outside the City limits in, upon or at any public or private place in the City. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of, deposit or place any solid wastes or recyclables originating outside the City limits in, upon or at any public or private place in the City contrary to this article, as from time to time amended. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any person who, lawfully under this article, is transporting solid wastes to any City sanitary or demolition landfills or who is transporting recyclables to a bona fide, approved, lawfully licensed and lawfully operating recycling facility. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.230)  
Sec. 30-66. - Ownership of materials. 
(a)  From the time of placement of glass, plastic, aluminum or metal containers, newsprint, magazines and/or corrugated cardboard at the curb, for the purpose of collection and recycling by the City, such materials shall be and become the property of the City. 
(b)  No person shall collect or cause to be collected any of the materials listed in Subsection (a) of this section, placed for the purpose of collection by the City, unless specifically permitted or authorized by the Director of Public Works to do so. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.240)  
Sec. 30-67. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of Article III of this chapter shall forfeit and pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default in the payment of the imposed forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but for not more than 90 days, per violation. 
(b)  Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense, and each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate offense for which a separate forfeiture and other penalty and/or relief may be imposed or applied. 
(c)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, any forfeiture, penalty or other relief imposed by any court and/or permitted in this section or elsewhere in this article or other applicable Code of General Ordinances of the City of Janesville, the City may, from time to time apply for, and the court may grant, render, order and enforce, jointly and severally, one or more forms of equitable and/or injunctive relief, including, but not limited to, abatement, removal, mandate and/or prohibition. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.250)  
Secs. 30-68—30-92. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RECYCLING PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 30-93. - Mandatory recycling program requirements. 
The following provisions shall apply to the mandatory recycling program in the City. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.300)  
Sec. 30-94. - Separation of recyclable materials. 
Occupants of single-family and two-to-four-unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall separate the following materials from post-consumer waste prior to deposit in any City landfill and prior to deposit or placement at curbside for collection: 
(1)  Lead-acid batteries; 
(2)  Major appliances; 
(3)  Motor oil; 
(4)  Yard waste; 
(5)  Aluminum containers; 
(6)  Bi-metal containers; 
(7)  Corrugated paper and other container board; 
(8)  Foam polystyrene packaging; 
(9)  Glass containers; 
(10)  Magazines; 
(11)  Newspapers; 
(12)  Office papers; 
(13)  Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other resins or multiple resins; 
(14)  Steel containers; 
(15)  Waste tires; 
(16)  Electronic waste; 
(17)  Asphalt roof shingles. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.310)  
Sec. 30-95. - Separation requirements exempted. 
The separation requirements of set forth above in Section 30-94 do not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Occupants of single-family and two-to-four-unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties that send their post-consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the DNR that recovers the materials specified in Section 30-94 from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible. 
(2)  A recyclable material specified in Section 30-94(5) through (15) for which a variance has been granted by DNR under Wis. Stats. § 287.11 or § NR544.14, Wis. Admin. Code, as from time to time amended or modified. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.320)  
Sec. 30-96. - Care of separated recyclable materials. 
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in accordance with Section 30-94 shall be clean and kept free of contaminants such as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other non-recyclable materials, including, but not limited to, household hazardous waste, medical waste and agricultural chemical containers. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.330)  
Sec. 30-97. - Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties. 
(a)  Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in Section 30-94(5) through (15): 
(1)  Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials; 
(2)  Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling about the established recycling program; 
(3)  Notify in writing, at a minimum, semi-annually, all users, tenants, and occupants of the properties about the established recycling program; 
(4)  Provide for the collection of the separated recyclables and their delivery to a recycling facility; 
(5)  Notify users, tenants, and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and telephone number. 
(b)  The requirements specified in Subsection (a) of this section do not apply to owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities an properties if the post-consumer waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a processing facility licensed by the DNR that recovers for recycling the materials specified in Section 30-94(5) through (15) from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically possible. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.340)  
Sec. 30-98. - Prohibitions on disposal of recyclable materials separated for recycling. 
No person may dispose of, deposit or place into, at or upon any City landfill or other solid waste disposal facility, or burn in any City landfill or other solid waste treatment facility, or permit the placement or burning of, any of the materials specified in Section 30-94(5) through (15) which have been separated for recycling, except that waste tires may be burned with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility in the manner permitted by law. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.350)  
Sec. 30-99. - Enforcement. 
(a)  For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of Sections 30-94 through and including Section 30-98, the Director of Public Works, or his or her designated agents, may inspect separated recyclables, post-consumer waste designated for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. 
(b)  Such inspections may be conducted without any prior or subsequent written or verbal notice to any person. 
(c)  No person, including, but not limited to, any property owner, possessor, manager or individual exercising dominion or control thereof, may directly or indirectly refuse, obstruct, hinder or delay any access to real or personal property and/or any structures, buildings, garages, appurtenances or other improvements, devices or objects thereon, to the Director of Public Works or his or her designated agents, when such access is requested for the purpose of such inspection. 
(d)  No person may directly or indirectly obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.360)  
Sec. 30-100. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of Article IV of this chapter shall forfeit and pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default in the payment of the imposed forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but for not nor more than 90 days, per violation. 
(b)  Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense, and each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate offense for which a separate forfeiture and other penalty and/or relief may be imposed or applied. 
(c)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, any forfeiture, penalty or other relief imposed by any court and/or permitted in this section or elsewhere in this article or other applicable Code of General Ordinances of the City of Janesville, the City may, from time to time apply for, and the court may grant, render, order and enforce, jointly and severally, one or more forms of equitable and/or injunctive relief, including, but not limited to, abatement, removal, mandate and/or prohibition. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.370)  
Secs. 30-101—30-128. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 30-129. - Solid waste collection and disposal fee. 
In addition to all other fees set forth in this article, the following fees shall be imposed, charged, collected, and paid in the manner set forth below. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.500)  
Sec. 30-130. - Creation. 
There is hereby established a solid waste collection and disposal fee, effective January 1, 2011. The entire charge and management of the solid waste collection and disposal operation is vested in the City Manager subject, however, to the general control and supervision of the City Council, pursuant to applicable state law. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.510)  
Sec. 30-131. - Income and revenue. 
The solid waste collection and disposal fee finances shall be accounted for in the sanitation fund by the City. There shall be established annually a sanitation fund budget which is to include all solid waste collection and disposal costs and other costs related to the operation of the solid waste collection and disposal program. The annual sanitation fund budget is subject to approval by the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.520)  
Sec. 30-132. - Eligible customer and property classification. 
For the purpose of imposing and collecting the fee established under this section, the following eligible customer classifications shall apply: 
(1)  All residential properties containing up to four separate dwelling units shall be subject to the fee. 
(2)  All condominiums receiving solid waste collection and disposal service performed by employees of the City of Janesville or its subcontractors shall be subject to the fee. 
(3)  All nonresidential facilities receiving solid waste collection and disposal service performed by employees of the City of Janesville or its subcontractors shall be subject to the fee. This provision shall not apply to any City of Janesville governmental facilities. 
(4)  All unoccupied, developed, residential lots and parcels shall be subject to the fee. 
(5)  In all classifications above, each separate dwelling unit on a single parcel shall be subject to the fee. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.530)  
Sec. 30-133. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  Every eligible customer shall pay to the City the applicable solid waste management fee established and imposed under this section when due for each property and dwelling unit. 
(b)  The basis for computation of the fee is established under this section. The amount of the fee to be imposed, the establishment of formulas for the calculation of charges, the creation of customer classifications for the imposition of the fee, and changes in such charges, formulas, and customer classifications shall be consistent with this chapter. The fee established pursuant to this article shall be fair and reasonable. A schedule of current fee charges shall be maintained and on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(c)  Charges shall be imposed to recover all or a portion of the costs of the City's solid waste management programs. Such charges may include, but are not limited to, the following components: 
(1)  Collection component. The collection component shall include the estimated annual labor, equipment, contractual and administrative costs and transfer to a licensed solid waste disposal or processing facility and as performed by employees of the City of Janesville or its subcontractors. The collection component shall be calculated by taking the sum of all collection component costs and dividing that sum by the estimated number of billable customers. 
(2)  Disposal, processing and/or marketing component. The disposal, processing and/or marketing component shall include the estimated cost of disposing, processing and/or marketing collected solid waste at a licensed solid waste disposal or processing facility, including administrative costs related thereto. The disposal, processing and/or marketing component shall be calculated by taking the sum of all disposal and/or processing costs and dividing that sum by the estimated number of billable customers. 
(3)  Temporary sanitation fund surcharge. The temporary sanitation fund surcharge shall be established with the objective of recovering up to $6,635,995.00. 
a.  The amount of $6,635,995.00 shall not be exceeded. 
b.  The City Council, through authorizing resolution or adoption of the annual City budget, shall establish the annual surcharge amount to be recovered. 
(4)  The City Council shall maintain a minimum sanitation fund balance of 16.7 percent of sanitation fund operating expenses. 
The City Council, through authorizing resolution or adoption of the annual City budget, may authorize utilization of sanitation fund balance in excess of the required minimum balance for sanitary landfill capital project and/or to draw down sanitary landfill debt. 
(5)  The City Council, by majority vote, may declare a fiscal emergency and withdraw any amount of the sanitation fund balance for purposes of addressing the fiscal emergency, provided the emergency is related to activities within the sanitation fund. Any such action must also provide for necessary appropriations to restore the sanitation fund balance to the required minimum balance within a three-year period. 
(d)  The computation of the solid waste management fee shall not include any solid waste management activity for which a separate fee has been established otherwise administratively or by ordinance herein. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.540)  
Sec. 30-134. - Billing. 
(a)  The billing schedule for the solid waste collection and disposal fee shall coincide with the billing schedule for the Janesville Water Utility and the Janesville Stormwater Utility. The fee shall be due and payable to the City Treasurer at the same time that the water utility bills are payable but in no event sooner than the first billing statement sent to customers for the fee each calendar year. 
(b)  Residential bills shall be placed in the name of the property owner except as permitted in Subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Residential property owners may have the bill placed in the name of the tenant if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The owner of the rental dwelling unit notifies the utility in writing of the name and address of the owner. 
(2)  The owner of the rental dwelling unit notifies the utility in writing of the name and address of the tenant who is responsible for payment of the utility charges. 
(3)  If requested by the utility, the owner of the rental dwelling unit provides the utility with a copy of the rental or lease agreement in which the tenant assumes responsibility for the payment of the utility charges. 
(d)  In order to comply with the requirements of Subsection (c) of this section the property owner must complete a written application in compliance with the operating policies of the Janesville Utility. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.550)  
Sec. 30-135. - Payment of charge; lien; penalty. 
(a)  Fees shall be payable upon receipt of invoice or statement, or as of the date of mailing, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Fees shall not be payable in installments. 
(c)  Fees remaining unpaid for a period of 30 days or more from the date of the invoice or statement shall be assessed a late payment penalty charge. All delinquent fees shall be subject to a penalty of one percent computed every 30 days upon the unpaid balance and will be added thereto, in addition to all other charges, penalties or interest, arising or imposed, when the delinquent charge is extended upon the property tax roll for that year. 
(d)  If a charge and/or late penalty remains unpaid for a period of 30 days after the date of the invoice or statement, such charge and penalty, from the date of the invoice or statement mailing, shall become a lien upon the real property to which it applies, as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0821 and 66.0809, and other applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(e)  Delinquent charges and penalties each year shall be automatically extended upon the next available tax roll as a delinquent tax against the real property, and all proceedings relating to the collection, return, and sale of property for delinquent real property taxes shall apply to such charges. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.560)  
Sec. 30-136. - Conflict with other ordinances, laws. 
In the event of any conflict between any provision set forth in this section and any other City ordinance, the competing provisions shall be harmonized to the fullest extent possible so as to facilitate the intent and proper effect of the separate areas of regulation. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.570)  
Sec. 30-137. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates or causes to be violated any provisions set forth in this section shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a forfeiture to the City in the amount of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the cost of prosecution thereof. Upon default in payment of the imposed forfeiture, the violator shall be committed to the Rock County Jail for a term of not more than 90 days. 
(b)  The payment of such imposed forfeiture shall be in addition to the payment of any and all residential solid waste collection and disposal user fee charges imposed by this article. 
(c)  Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense to which a separate forfeiture may be imposed. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the violator to cease and abate the violation immediately. 
(e)  In addition to the forfeitures set forth above and payment of the charges, the City may seek, obtain and enforce injunctive relief. 
(Code 1976, § 8.64.580) 
Editor's note— This ordinance and its fees shall take effect at 12:00 a.m. on January 1, 2011, the public interest, welfare, benefit and good so requiring, and the Council so finding.  
Chapter 32 - STORMWATER SYSTEM  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER UTILITY AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES 
 
Sec. 32-19. - Purpose and necessity; authorization. 
(a)  The City Council hereby find that the management of stormwater and other surface water discharges within and beyond the Rock River and other bodies of water within the City is a matter that affects the health, safety and welfare of the City, its citizens and businesses and others in the surrounding area. All real property in the City, including property owned by public and tax-exempt entities contributes runoff and either uses or benefits from the stormwater system. 
(b)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater affects the sanitary sewer utility operations of the City by, among other things, increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. Surface water runoff may cause nonpoint source pollution, erosion of lands, threaten residences and businesses with water damage, and create environmental damage to the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within and adjacent to the City. A system for the collection, treatment, and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within the City of Janesville and surrounding areas, including those properties not currently served by the system. The cost of operating and maintaining the City stormwater management system and financing necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the system. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the City Council hereby exercises its authority to establish a stormwater utility and establish the rates for stormwater management services. 
(c)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this chapter, the City is acting pursuant to authority granted by Wis. Stats. chs. 62 and 66, including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.04, 62.11, 62.16(2), 62.18, 66.0101, 66.0621, 66.080, 66.0811, 66.0813, 66.0703, and 66.0627. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.010)  
Sec. 32-20. - Creation. 
There is hereby created and established a stormwater utility within the City of Janesville, effective January 1, 2003. The entire operation, charge and management of the stormwater utility is vested in the City Manager, subject, however, to the general control and supervision of the City Council, pursuant to applicable state law. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.020)  
Sec. 32-21. - Authority. 
The City, acting through the stormwater utility, may, without limitation due to enumeration, acquire by gift, purchase, eminent domain, condemnation or otherwise, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, improve, update, modify, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage, finance, borrow monies, assess and/or levy fees for such facilities, operations, maintenance and activities as are deemed, from time to time, by the City to be proper and reasonably necessary for a system of stormwater and surface water management. These facilities may include, without limitation due to enumeration, surface and underground drainage facilities, inlets, manholes, sewers, channels, ditches, retention and detention basins, infiltration facilities, retaining walls, streets, roads, natural drainageways, and such other facilities as will support a stormwater management system. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.030)  
Sec. 32-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural, the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
Charge means the periodic or other fee imposed under this chapter for the rendering of stormwater utility services by the City. 
Director means the Director of Public Works or his or her designee. 
Duplex means any residential property having two dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit means a room or group of rooms, including cooking accommodations, occupied by one family, and in which not more than two persons, other than members of the family, are lodged or boarded for compensation at any one time. 
Equivalent runoff unit or ERU is the basic unit by which a storm sewer charge is calculated under this article and is based upon the impervious area reasonably determined by the City. The term "ERU" means the statistical average horizontal impervious area of single family homes and duplexes within the City of Janesville on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Impervious area means a surface which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by rainwater. The term "impervious area" includes, without limitation due to enumeration, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, loading docks and sidewalks, and semi-impervious surfaces such as compacted gravel, all as measured on a horizontal plane. 
Multifamily unit means any residential property comprised of three or more dwelling units, including condominiums and manufactured homes. 
Nonresidential property means a lot or parcel of land, with improvements such as a building, structure, grading or substantial landscaping, which is not residential property, excluding publicly-owned rights-of-way, recreational trails, and publicly-owned or privately-owned rail beds utilized for railroad transportation. 
Person means each and every property owner and includes, but is not limited to, natural persons, partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies, limited liability partnerships, joint ventures, and all other legal entities of whatever kind or nature. 
Residential property means a lot or parcel of land developed exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family units, duplexes, and multifamily units. The term "residential property" includes condominiums and manufactured homes. 
Single family unit means any residential property consisting of one dwelling unit. 
Stormwater utility means the City-owned and -operated utility established under this article for the purpose of managing stormwater and imposing charges for the recovery of costs connected with such stormwater management. 
Undeveloped property means real property that is not developed by the addition of an improvement such as a building, structure, grading or substantial landscaping. A property shall be considered to be developed if: 
(1)  A certificate of occupancy has been issued for a building or structure on the property or, if no certificate of occupancy has been issued, upon substantial completion of construction or final inspection; or 
(2)  Construction of an improvement on the property is at least 50 percent completed and such construction has ceased for a period of at least three months, whether consecutive or not. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.040)  
Sec. 32-23. - Income and revenue. 
The stormwater utility finances shall be accounted for in a separate Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund by the City. All income and revenues shall be retained by the Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund. The stormwater utility shall prepare an annual budget, which is to include all operation and maintenance costs, debt service and other costs related to the operation of the stormwater utility. The annual budget is subject to approval by the City Council. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.050)  
Sec. 32-24. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  Every person shall pay the applicable Janesville stormwater service charge when due for each property owned by that person. 
(b)  The basis for computation of the charge for stormwater services to lots and parcels of land within the City is established under this section. The amount of charge to be imposed, the establishment of formulas for the calculation of charges, the creation of customer classifications for the imposition of charges, and changes in such charges, formulas and customer classifications shall be consistent with this chapter. All charges established pursuant to this chapter shall be fair and reasonable. A schedule of current charges shall be maintained and on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(c)  Charges shall be imposed to recover all or a portion of the costs of the Stormwater Utility. Such charges may include, but are not limited to, the following components: 
(1)  Base component. The base component shall include the stormwater utility's adopted annual budget administrative and management costs plus any other costs not in the components described below. 
(2)  Runoff component. The runoff component shall include the stormwater utility's adopted annual budget costs associated with the construction, inspection, maintenance, repair, and replacement of all stormwater infrastructure associated with the conveyance or storage of stormwater runoff. In the case of multipurpose infrastructure those costs shall be prorated. 
(3)  Water quality component. The water quality component shall include the stormwater utility's adopted annual budget costs associated with the construction, inspection, maintenance, repair, and replacement of all stormwater infrastructure associated with the cleaning or treatment stormwater. In the case of multipurpose infrastructure those costs shall be prorated. 
(d)  Credits may be available to multifamily and nonresidential property owners. It shall be the burden of the property owner to demonstrate to a reasonable degree of certainty with evidence that a fee adjustment is warranted. All applications for credit shall be reviewed by the Director. The Director may reduce the stormwater utility after taking into consideration the evidence provided. The base Component shall be charged to all properties regardless of credits. Credits may be applicable to multifamily and nonresidential properties based on three criteria: 
(1)  Non-contributing property. A non-contributing property is a property that does not contribute any runoff into the City's stormwater infrastructure. These properties may either drain directly into the Rock River or drain outside of the City without passing through a City facility. A non-contributing property may receive credit towards the runoff component of the utility fee. A non-contributing property may also be eligible for credit towards the water quality component but this shall be considered independently and shall be based on demonstrated water quality treatment provided by on-site facilities. 
(2)  Runoff control. A property may be eligible for runoff control based on onsite stormwater treatment facilities. Any credit towards the runoff component shall be calculated based on the extent to which the property controls the 100-year design storm beyond the required peak flow control. This credit shall be capped at 80 percent of the total component costs. 
(3)  Water quality treatment. A property may be eligible for water quality treatment based on on-site stormwater treatment facilities. Any credit towards the runoff component shall be calculated based on the extent to which the property treats total suspended solids storm beyond the required treatment level. This credit shall be capped at 80 percent of the total component costs. 
In order for a property to be eligible for a credit, a property shall not be in violation of any other stormwater or erosion control requirements and shall have recorded maintenance agreement. All credits will expire on July 1 of every even numbered year beginning with 2020. In order for a credit to remain in effect, proper maintenance records shall be submitted to and approved by the Director. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.060)  
Sec. 32-25. - Classifications of customers. 
The City Council, from time to time, by budget adoption, may establish classifications other than the customer classifications set forth in this article, as may be likely to provide a reasonable and fair distribution of the costs of the stormwater utility to all users. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.070)  
Sec. 32-26. - Billing. 
(a)  The stormwater utility billing schedule shall coincide with the billing schedule for the Janesville Water Utility. Stormwater utility charges shall be due and payable to the City Treasurer at the same time that the water utility bills are payable. 
(b)  Residential bills shall be placed in the name of the property owner except as permitted in Subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Residential property owners may have the bill placed in the name of the tenant if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The owner of the rental dwelling unit notifies the utility in writing of the name and address of the owner. 
(2)  The owner of the rental dwelling unit notifies the utility in writing of the name and address of the tenant who is responsible for payment of the utility charges. 
(3)  If requested by the utility, the owner of the rental dwelling unit provides the utility with a copy of the rental or lease agreement in which the tenant assumes responsibility for the payment of the utility charges. 
(d)  In order to comply with the requirements of Subsection (c) of this section the property owner must complete a written application in compliance with the operating policies of the Janesville Utility. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.080)  
Sec. 32-27. - Payment of charge; lien; penalty. 
(a)  Stormwater utility charges shall be payable upon receipt, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Stormwater utility charges shall not be payable in installments. 
(c)  Charges remaining unpaid for a period of 30 days or more from the date of the utility bill shall be assessed a late payment penalty charge. All delinquent utility charges shall be subject to a penalty of one percent computed every 30 days upon the unpaid balance and will be added thereto, in addition to all other charges, penalties or interest, when the delinquent charge is extended upon the tax roll. 
(d)  If a charge and/or late penalty remains unpaid for a period of 30 days after the date of the utility bill, such charge and penalty shall become a lien upon the real property to which it applies, as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0821 and 66.0809, and other applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(e)  Delinquent charges and penalties shall be automatically extended upon the next available tax roll as a delinquent tax against the real property, and all proceedings relating to the collection, return and sale of property for delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such charges. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.090)  
Sec. 32-28. - Customer classifications. 
(a)  For the purpose of imposing and collecting the charges imposed under this article, all lots and parcels of real property (land) in the City shall be classified into the following customer classifications: 
(1)  Residential—Single-family unit. 
a.  Lot area greater than 7,700 square feet. 
b.  Lot area equal to or less than 7,700 square feet. 
(2)  Residential—Duplex. 
(3)  Residential—Multifamily. 
(4)  Nonresidential. 
(5)  Undeveloped. 
(b)  The Director shall prepare and maintain an updated current list of all lots and parcels of real property (land) within the City of Janesville and assign the appropriate customer classification to each lot and parcel. This list shall include the number of ERU's assigned to each lot or parcel. 
(c)  The average square footage of impervious area of the ERU, as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, is hereby established to be equivalent to 3,200 square feet. 
(d)  The ERU charges for the foregoing customer classifications shall be established as follows: 
(1)  Residential—Single-family unit. 
a.  Lot area greater than 7,700 square feet: 1.0 ERU. 
b.  Lot area equal to or less than 7,700 square feet: 0.7 ERU. 
(2)  Residential—Duplex: 0.5 ERU multiplied by each dwelling unit. 
(3)  Residential—Multifamily: One ERU multiplied by the factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of the property by the square footage equivalent for one ERU. Such impervious area shall be determined based upon the best information reasonably available. The result shall be rounded down to the nearest five-tenths. The minimum charge for a multifamily property shall be equal to the rate for five-tenths of one ERU. 
(4)  Nonresidential—One ERU times a factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of the property by the square footage equivalent for one ERU. Such impervious area shall be determined based upon the best information reasonably available. The result shall be rounded down to the nearest five-tenths. The minimum charge for a nonresidential property shall be equal to the rate for five-tenths of one ERU. 
(5)  Undeveloped—No stormwater charge shall be assigned to undeveloped land. 
(e)  The Director shall be responsible for determining the impervious area based on the best available information, including, but not limited to, data supplied by the City Assessor, aerial photography, the property owner, tenant, or developer. The billing amount shall be updated by the Director based on any additions to the impervious area as approved through the building permit process. Individual property owners may submit site and building surveys to the Director that help more accurately determine the total area and impervious area. 
(f)  All unoccupied developed lots and parcels shall be subject to the stormwater utility charges. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.100)  
Sec. 32-29. - New construction. 
A property owner shall be responsible for timely submitting a fully completed and accurate stormwater utility service application at the time a building permit is issued or a site plan review is conducted. The application shall be made on a form prescribed by the City and provided with each application for a building permit or application for site plan review. Failure to submit such stormwater utility service application or providing false information on such form shall constitute a violation of this article. The implementation of stormwater charges shall commence as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.110)  
Sec. 32-30. - Appeal. 
(a)  The amount of a particular stormwater utility charge may be appealed to the City Manager by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk prior to the due date of the charge or within 30 days of payment. The written appeal shall specify all grounds for challenge to the amount of the charge and shall state the amount of charge that the appellant considers to be inappropriate. Failure to timely appeal waives all right to later challenge the charge. 
(b)  In considering an appeal, the City Manager shall determine whether the stormwater utility charge is fair and reasonable under the particular facts and circumstances pertaining to that specific property and, in the event the appeal is granted, whether or not a refund is due the appellant and the amount of the refund. The City Manager shall notify the appellant in writing of his or her determination. 
(c)  The customer has 30 days from the date of the written decision of the City Manager to file a written appeal with the City Council. 
(d)  If the City Manager or City Council determines that a refund is due the customer, the refund will be applied as a credit towards the customer's next stormwater billing charge, if the refund will not exceed the customer's next stormwater billing charge, or it may be refunded at the discretion of the City Clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.120)  
Sec. 32-31. - Alternative method to collect stormwater charges. 
(a)  The City Council hereby find and determine that the stormwater utility charges established under this article reasonably reflect the services rendered to real property and may be, and are hereby authorized to be, assessed, charged, levied, imposed and a collected upon property as a special charge in accord with all applicable Wisconsin Statutes. 
(b)  The mailing of the bill for stormwater utility charges to a property owner shall serve as notice to the property owner that failure to pay the charges when due may result in the charges being levied upon the owner's applicable real property. 
(c)  In addition, the City may provide notice each October of any unpaid charges to the stormwater utility and such charges, if not paid by November 15, may be placed upon the tax roll and collected in the manner provided by this article and/or the applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. The collection method provided in this section is in addition to the collection method provided for in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.130)  
Sec. 32-32. - Conflict with other ordinances, laws. 
(a)  In the event of any conflict between any provision set forth in this article and any other City Ordinance, the competing provisions shall be harmonized to the fullest extent possible so as to facilitate the intent and proper effect of the separate areas of regulation. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict between any provision set forth in this chapter and in Article IV of Chapter 40, Wastewater Facilities and Sewer Use Ordinance, the provision set forth in Article IV of Chapter 40, as from time to time amended or renumbered, shall take precedence and govern. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.140)  
Sec. 32-33. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates or causes to be violated any provisions set forth in this article shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a forfeiture to the City in the amount of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution thereof. Upon default in payment of the imposed forfeiture, the violator shall be committed to the Rock County Jail for a term of not more than 90 days. 
(b)  The payment of such imposed forfeiture shall be in addition to the payment of any and all stormwater service charges, fees and penalties imposed by the article. 
(c)  Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense to which a separate forfeiture may be imposed. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the violator to cease and abate the violation immediately. 
(e)  In addition to the forfeitures set forth above and payment of the charges, the City may seek, obtain and enforce injunctive relief. 
(Code 1976, § 13.10.150)  
Secs. 32-34—32-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORM SEWER SYSTEM ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION PREVENTION ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 32-55. - Purpose; intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Janesville through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of non-stormwater pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of non-stormwater pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4. 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.010)  
Sec. 32-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized enforcement agency means the Director of Public Works for the City of Janesville or designees of the Director of Public Works for the City of Janesville. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques, or devices employed to avoid or minimize soils, sediments, or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state. 
Contaminated stormwater means stormwater that comes into contact with material handling equipment or activities, raw materials, intermediate products, final products, waste materials, byproducts or industrial machinery in the source areas listed in NR 216 (effective August 1, 2004), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
Department (DNR) means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
Discharge, as defined in Wisconsin Statute Chapter 283 Pollution Discharge Elimination (November 1, 2005), as from time to time amended or renumbered, when used without qualification includes a discharge of any pollutant. 
Discharge of pollutant or discharge of pollutants, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 283 (November 1, 2005), as from time to time amended or renumbered, means any addition of any pollutant to the waters of the state from any point source. 
Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Illicit connections means either of the following: 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4, including, but not limited to, any conveyances that allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the MS4 and any connections to the MS4 from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; and/or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected to the MS4 from a parcel of land which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the Department of Public Works. 
Illicit discharge means any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges authorized by a WPDES permit or other discharge not requiring a WPDES permit such as landscape irrigation, individual residential car washing, firefighting, diverted stream flows, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, lawn watering, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and similar discharges. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to WPDES Industrial Permit per NR 216 (effective August 1, 2004) and Wis. Stats. ch. 283 (November 1, 2005), both as respectively from time to time amended or renumbered. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), as defined in Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 216 (effective August 1, 2004), as from time to time amended or renumbered, means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, channels or storm drains, which meets all the following criteria: Owned or operated by a municipality; designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; which is not combined sewer conveying both sanitary and stormwater. For the City of Janesville, this definition explicitly includes, but is not limited to, the identified Green Belt system and any and all additions thereto. 
Municipality means the City of Janesville, a Wisconsin Municipal Corporation. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Outfall means the point at which stormwater is discharged from an MS4 to waters of the state or to a storm sewer or another permitted MS4 system. 
Owner means any person holding fee title, an easement, or other interest in property. 
Person means an individual, owner, operator, corporation, partnership, cooperative, association, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, entity of whatever other kind or nature, municipality, interstate agency, state agency, or federal agency. 
Pollutant, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 283 (November 1, 2005), as from time to time amended or renumbered, means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive substance, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Pollution, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 283 (November 1, 2005), as from time to time amended or renumbered, means any manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
Pollution prevention means taking measures to eliminate or reduce pollution or a pollutant. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Stormwater means runoff from precipitation including rain, snow, ice melt, or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow. 
Stormwater management plan/stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document which describes the activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel through which water flows. These channels include: all blue and dashed blue lines on the USGS quadrangle maps, all channels shown on the soils maps in the NRCS soils book for Rock County, Wisconsin, as from time to time amended, and new channels that are created as part of a development. The term "watercourse" includes waters of the state, as herein defined, and channelized systems that are not waters of the state including the City of Janesville's identified Green Belt system. 
Waters of the state, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 283 (November 1, 2005), as from time to time amended or renumbered, means those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within the boundaries of Wisconsin, all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, water courses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private within the state or under its jurisdiction, except those waters which are entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a person. 
Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a Wisconsin Pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 283 (November 1, 2005), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.020)  
Sec. 32-57. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all water entering the City of Janesville's MS4 generated on any lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.030)  
Sec. 32-58. - Responsibility for administration. 
The Department of Public Works and/or its agents shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article, together with such others as may from time to time be designated by the City Manager. Any and all powers granted and/or duties imposed upon the Department of Public Works and/or the Director of Public Works may be delegated in writing by the Director of Public Works and/or the City Manager to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of and/or in the employ of the City and/or agency. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.040)  
Sec. 32-59. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whoever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.050)  
Sec. 32-60. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applicability of the remaining provisions, requirements, mandates, or scope of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.060)  
Sec. 32-61. - Ultimate responsibility. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefor this article does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants, or violations hereof. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.070)  
Sec. 32-62. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges and other prohibitions. 
(1)  No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the City of Janesville's MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(2)  Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, or pollutants that would pollute or contaminate water. 
(b)  Allowed discharges. 
(1)  Water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water. 
(2)  Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the Department of Public Works as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Discharges associated with dye testing; however, this activity requires a verbal notification to the Department of Public Works and the Department of Natural Resources a minimum of one day prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under a WPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. Any person subject to such a WPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. 
(c)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage or pollutants to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(4)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the Department of Public Works. 
(5)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the Department of Public Works requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the Department of Public Works. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.080)  
Sec. 32-63. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry; inspecting and sampling. The Department of Public Works shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the Department of Public Works upon proper notification. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the Department of Public Works ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records. The Department of Public Works shall follow all safety requirements of the facility. 
(3)  The Department of Public Works and all City employees performing any activity concerning any part of this article shall have the right to set up upon any facility any and all such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Director of Public Works and/or City Manager to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. The Department of Public Works shall establish such devices in a manner such that interference with facility operations is minimized. 
(4)  The Department of Public Works has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Department of Public Works and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Department of Public Works access to a facility is a violation. A person who is the operator of a facility commits an offense if the person denies the Department of Public Works or any agent thereof reasonable access to the facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(b)  Special inspection warrant. If the Department of Public Works or any agent thereof has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he or she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of any provision of this article, and/or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, and/or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the City and/or community, and/or to any person, then the Director of the Department of Public Works, and/or the City, and/or City Manager, and/or City Attorney may seek issuance of a special inspection warrant, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0119, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.090)  
Sec. 32-64. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes. 
The owner, possessor, or operator of any property, activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the MS4, or waters of the state shall provide, solely at his or her or their own cost and expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal MS4 or watercourses through the use of structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and/or non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid WPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable as determined by the Director of Public Works, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.100)  
Sec. 32-65. - Notification of spills. 
(a)  As soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, or a watercourse, said person shall immediately take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. 
(b)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the Department of Public Works in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Department of Public Works postmarked by the next business day. 
(c)  If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall prepare a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to clean up and prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be personally delivered or mailed via certified mail to the City of Janesville Department of Public Works. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(e)  This section does not replace, or relieve the property owner of or from any federal or state spill response regulations or requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.110)  
Sec. 32-66. - Violations, enforcement, and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlines in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(2)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the Department of Public Works is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation including suspension of MS4 access. The Department of Public Works is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlines elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the Department of Public Works finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the Department of Public Works may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
(6)  A statement that the determination and/or notice of violation may be appealed to the City Plan Commission and then to the City Council, all subject to judicial review in a circuit court solely in Rock County, Wisconsin, by filing a written notice of appeal within three business days service of the City's notice of violation; and 
(7)  A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
Such notice of the violation may require, without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of BMPs. 
(c)  Prosecution and penalties. 
(1)  No person may violate or cause another to violate any provision, requirements, obligation, and/or mandate set forth in this article. 
(2)  Any person that has violated or continues to violate any provisions, requirement, obligation, and/or mandate set forth in this article shall be liable to prosecution to the fullest extent of the law. 
(3)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the relief, enforcement and penalties set forth in Article VII of Chapter 10, as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
(4)  In addition, in the event that the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of the violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within the set time period specified by the City and/or any other authorized agency after the City, the Department of Public Works, and/or the Director of Public Works has/have severally or jointly taken one or more of the actions described above, the violator shall forfeit and pay a penalty set forth in Article VII of Chapter 10, as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
(5)  In addition, each day's continuance of each violation shall constitute a separate violation whether or not notice is provided. 
(6)  In addition, and not in lieu thereof, each day that a violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation shall also constitute a separate violation. The City may concomitantly and/or separately seek and obtain other equitable and/or legal relief, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief and abatement. All penalties, forfeitures, legal, and equitable relief and remedies shall be cumulative and not exclusive. The non-use of one remedy, relief, or penalty for any violation, event, or situation, shall not act as any waiver, estoppels, or other bar to seek and/or obtain such legal and/or equitable remedy, relief, and/or penalty for similar and/or other violation hereof. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.120)  
Sec. 32-67. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
(a)  The Plan Commission for the City of Janesville shall serve as the board of appeals for the purposes of this article; then the City Council of the City of Janesville. The Plan Commission and, if subsequently appealed thereto, the City Council: 
(1)  Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, decision or determination made by the City Engineer and/or the Director of Public Works in administering this article except for cease and desist order; 
(2)  Upon appeal, may authorize one or more variance from one or more provision of this article but only if such variance are not contrary to the public interest; and where owing to unique and/or special conditions, a literal enforcement of the applicable provision of the chapter will result in unnecessary hardship; and 
(3)  Shall use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by other ordinances and/or state statute and/or law in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing such variance. 
(b)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the Plan Commission and subsequently to the City Council may be made by any aggrieved person, whether or not the affected property owner, and/or by any elected or appointed official, officer, department, board, commission, of the City of Janesville affected by an decision of the Director of Public Works involving this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.130)  
Sec. 32-68. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If any violation has not been fully remedied and/or corrected, pursuant to the requirements, obligations, mandates, and provisions set forth in this article and/or as set forth in the notice of violation, and/or, in the event of an appeal, the municipal authority shall uphold the decision and/or order of the Department of Public Works, Director of Public Works, City Manager, and/or her/his respective applicable designee, then representatives, employees, and agents of the Department of Public Works are authorized to enter upon the subject private property from time to time and at any time, and without prior or other notice, and take any and all measures the Director of Public Works, the City Manager, and/or his or her respective designee determine from time to time and at any time, necessary, desirable, and/or helpful to abate the violation; and/or protect the public good, health, welfare, peace, tranquility, and/or good order; protect any person or property from harm or damage; and/or to prevent further violation of this chapter; and/or to directly and/or indirectly protect the public waters of the state. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or other in possession or control of any premises or property to refuse, prevent, obstruct, hinder, delay or not allow the government agency, City, City employees, agents, and representatives, and/or designated contractor to enter upon the premises or property for the purposes set forth above in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.140)  
Sec. 32-69. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
The Department of Public Works, on behalf of the City, may recover, and the applicable property owner shall pay to the City, any and all staff time; contractor time; time and overhead of staff and others; attorney's fees; court costs; remediation and abatement costs, fees and expenses; payment of any kind made, and/or obligations incurred by the City; and any and all other costs, fees, and expenses (Costs) directly and/or indirectly arising from and/or pertaining to the enforcement of any provision set forth in this article. Such shall include, but not be limited to: costs of administration, City staff time, City expenses, private contractor work under contract with the City, sampling and monitoring expenses. The owner of the property shall be notified of the costs. If the Cost amount due is not paid by the date determined by the municipal authority and/or City Clerk-Treasurer and/or his or her designee, the charges shall become a special charge against the property, shall constitute a lien on the property, and shall be collected as property taxes are levied. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.150)  
Sec. 32-70. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
Any violation of any of the provisions set forth in this article shall be declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's sole cost and expense. 
(Code 1976, § 13.20.160)  
Secs. 32-71—32-96. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 32-97. - Authority. 
(a)  This article is adopted by the City Council under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 62.234. This article supersedes all provisions of a chapter or ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23, that relate to stormwater management regulations. Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stats. § 62.234, Wis. Stats. § 62.23, applies to this article and to any amendments to this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body. 
(c)  The City Council hereby designates the Director of Public Works, hereafter referred to as the Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The requirements of this article do not pre-empt more stringent stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any of the following: 
(1)  Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16 and 283.33. 
(2)  Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 151.004. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.010)  
Sec. 32-98. - Findings of fact; purpose; intent. 
(a)  The City Council acknowledges that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and general welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can: 
(1)  Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature. 
(2)  Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria, pathogens and other urban pollutants. 
(3)  Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads. 
(4)  Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading. 
(5)  Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by overtaxing storm sewers, drainage ways, and other minor drainage facilities. 
(b)  The general purpose of this article is to establish long-term, post-construction runoff management requirements that will diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic environment. Specific purposes are to: 
(1)  Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions. 
(2)  Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent and control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth. 
(3)  Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; and control increases in the scouring and transportation of particulate matter. 
(4)  Minimize the amount of pollutants discharged from the separate storm sewer to protect the waters of the state. 
(c)  It is the intent of the City Council that this article regulates post-construction stormwater discharges to waters of the state. This article may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The City Council recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving the stormwater performance standards set forth in this article is through the preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systems-level stormwater management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may prescribe regional stormwater devices, practices or systems, any of which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in conformance with the performance standards developed under Wis. Stats. § 281.16, for regional stormwater management measures it is the intent of this article that the approved stormwater management plan be used to identify post-construction management measures acceptable for the community. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.020)  
Sec. 32-99. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Except as provided under Subsection (b) of this section, this article applies to a post-construction site whereupon one acre or more of land disturbing construction activity occurs during construction. 
(2)  A site that meets any of the criteria in this section is exempt from the requirements of this article: 
a.  A post-construction site with less than ten percent connected imperviousness, based on the area of land disturbance, provided the cumulative area of all impervious surfaces is less than one acre. However, the exemption of this subsection does not include exemption from the protective area standard of this article. 
b.  Agricultural facilities and practices. 
c.  Underground utility construction, but not including the construction of any above ground structures associated with utility construction. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection (a) of this section, this article applies to post-construction sites of any size that, as determined by the Director, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, causes undue channel erosion, or increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. This article applies to post construction sites within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the City of Janesville; 
(c)  Exclusions. This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 227.01(1). 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.030)  
Sec. 32-100. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover means maintenance of sufficient vegetation types and densities such that the physical integrity of the streambank or lakeshore is preserved. Self-sustaining vegetative cover includes grasses, forbs, sedges and duff layers of fallen leaves and woody debris. 
Administering authority means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under Wis. Stats. § 62.234, that is designated by the City Council to administer this article. 
Agricultural facilities and practices has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.16(1). 
Atlas 14 means the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14 Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Volume 8 (Midwestern States), published in 2013. 
Average annual rainfall means a typical calendar year of precipitation as determined by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for users of models such as WinSLAMM, P8 or equivalent methodology. The average annual rainfall is chosen from a department publication for the location closest to the municipality. 
Best management practice or BMP means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state. 
Business day means a day the office of the Director of Public Works is routinely and customarily open for business. 
Cease and desist order means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit or in violation of a permit issued by the Director of Public Works. 
Combined sewer system means a system for conveying both sanitary sewage and stormwater runoff. 
Connected imperviousness means an impervious surface connected to the waters of the state via a separate storm sewer, an impervious flow path, or a minimally pervious flow path. 
Design storm means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency and total depth of rainfall. 
Development means residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land uses and associated roads. 
Direct conduits to groundwater means wells, sinkholes, swallets, fractured bedrock at the surface, mine shafts, non-metallic mines, tile inlets discharging to groundwater, quarries, or depressional groundwater recharge areas over shallow fractured bedrock. 
Effective infiltration area means the area of the infiltration system that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms or pretreatment. 
Erosion means the process by which the land's surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Exceptional resource waters means waters listed in § NR 102.11, Wis. Admin. Code. 
Filtering layer means soil that has at least a three-foot-deep layer with at least 20 percent fines; or at least a five-foot-deep layer with at least ten percent fines; or an engineered soil with an equivalent level of protection as determined by the regulatory authority for the site. 
Final stabilization means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures. 
Financial guarantee means a performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted to the Director of Public Works by the responsible party to ensure that requirements of the article are carried out in compliance with the stormwater management plan. 
Governing body means the City Council of the City of Janesville. 
Impervious surface means an area that releases as runoff all or a large portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, gravel or paved parking lots and streets are examples of areas that typically are impervious. 
In-fill means an undeveloped area of land located within an existing urban sewer service area, surrounded by development or development and natural or manmade features where development cannot occur. 
Infiltration means the entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the soil. 
Infiltration system means a device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices, such as swales or road side channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only. 
Land disturbing construction activity means any manmade alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities. 
Landowner means any person holding fee title, an easement or other interest in property, which allows the person to undertake cropping, livestock management, land disturbing construction activity or maintenance of stormwater BMPs on the property. 
Maintenance agreement means a legal document that provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
Maximum extent practicable means the highest level of performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a performance standard identified in this chapter as determined in accordance with Section 32-101. 
NRCS MSE3 distribution means a specific precipitation distribution developed by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, using precipitation data from Atlas 14. 
New development means development resulting from the conversion of previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses. 
Off-site means located outside the property boundary described in the permit application. 
On-site means located within the property boundary described in the permit application. 
Ordinary high-water mark has the meaning given in § NR 115.03 (6), Wis. Admin. Code. 
Outstanding resource waters means waters listed in § NR 102.10, Wis. Admin. Code. 
Percent fines means the percentage of a given sample of soil, which passes through a # 200 sieve. 
Performance standard means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice. 
Permit means a written authorization made by the administering authority to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state. 
Permit administration fee means a sum of money paid to the administering authority by the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the permit. 
Pervious surface means an area that releases as runoff a small portion of the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious. 
Pollutant has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 283.01(13). 
Pollution has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.01(10). 
Post-construction site means a construction site following the completion of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization. 
Pre-development condition means the extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation of land disturbing construction activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are managed in an environmentally sound manner. 
Preventive action limit has the meaning given in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 140.05(17). 
Protective area means an area of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. 
Redevelopment means areas where development is replacing older development. 
Responsible party means the landowner or any other entity performing services to meet the requirements of this article through a contract or other agreement. 
Runoff means stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow. 
Separate storm sewer means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff. 
(2)  Is not part of a combined sewer system. 
(3)  Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or more stringent treatment. 
(4)  Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state. 
Silviculture activity means activities including tree nursery operations, tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burning, and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction site is not a silviculture activity. 
Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing construction activity occurred. 
Stop-work order means an order issued by the Director of Public Works which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped. 
Stormwater management plan means a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from stormwater, after the site has undergone final stabilization, following completion of the construction activity. 
Stormwater management system plan is a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale. 
TR-55 means the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986, which is incorporated by reference in this article. 
TSS means total suspended solids. 
Technical standard means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method. 
Top of the channel means an edge, or point on the landscape landward from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state, where the slope of the land begins to be less than 12 percent continually for at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is 12 percent or less continually for the initial 50 feet landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high-water mark. 
Total maximum daily load or TMDL means the amount of pollutants specified as a function of one or more water quality parameters, that can be discharged per day into a water quality limited segment and still ensure attainment of the applicable water quality standard. 
Transportation facility means a highway, a railroad, a public mass transit facility, a public-use airport, a public trail or any other public work for transportation purposes such as harbor improvements under Wis. Stats. § 85.095(1)(b). The term "transportation facility" does not include building sites for the construction of public buildings and buildings that are places of employment that are regulated by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.33. 
Type II distribution means a rainfall type curve as established in the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149, published in 1973. 
Waters of the state includes those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within the boundaries of the state, and all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within the state or its jurisdiction. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.040)  
Sec. 32-101. - Applicability of maximum extent practicable. 
Maximum extent practicable applies when a person who is subject to a performance standard of this article demonstrates to the Director's satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable and that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the assertion that a performance standard is not achievable and that a level of performance different from the performance standard is the maximum extent practicable, the responsible party shall take into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing interests such as protection of public safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic properties. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.050)  
Sec. 32-102. - Technical standards. 
The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality, peak discharge, and infiltration components of stormwater practices needed to meet the water quality standards of this article: 
(1)  Consistent with the technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under subchapter V of chapter NR 151, Wis. Admin. Code. 
(2)  Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards may be used, provided that the methods have been approved by the Director. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.060)  
Sec. 32-103. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Responsible party. The responsible party shall comply with this section. 
(b)  Stormwater management plan. A written stormwater management plan in accordance with Section 32-105 shall be developed and implemented for each post-construction site. 
(c)  Maintenance of effort. For redevelopment sites where the redevelopment will be replacing older development that was subject to post-construction performance standards of NR 151 in effect on or after October 1, 2004, the responsible party shall meet the total suspended solids reduction, peak flow control, infiltration, and protective areas standards applicable to the older development or meet the redevelopment standards of this article, whichever is more stringent. 
(d)  Requirements. The stormwater management plan required under Subsection (b) of this section shall include the following: 
(1)  Total suspended solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to control total suspended solids carried in runoff from the post-construction site as follows: 
a.  BMPs shall be designed in accordance with Table 1 or to the maximum extent practicable as provided in Subsection (b) of this section. The design shall be based on an average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls. 
Development Type 	TSS Reduction 
New Development 	80 percent 
In-fill development 	80 percent 
Redevelopment 	40 percent of load from parking areas and roads 
 
b.  Maximum extent practicable. If the design cannot meet a total suspended solids reduction performance standard of Table 1, the stormwater management plan shall include a written, site-specific explanation of why the total suspended solids reduction performance standard cannot be met and why the total suspended solids load will be reduced only to the maximum extent practicable. 
c.  Off-site drainage. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from off-site shall be taken into account in determining the treatment efficiency of the practice. Any impact on the efficiency shall be compensated for by increasing the size of the BMP accordingly. 
(2)  Peak discharge. 
a.  By design, BMPs shall be employed to maintain or reduce the one-year, two-year, ten-year, and 100-year; 24-hour post-construction peak runoff discharge rates to the equivalent 24-hour pre-development peak runoff discharge rates respectively, or to the maximum extent practicable. The runoff curve numbers in Table 2 shall be used to represent the actual pre-development conditions. Peak discharges shall be calculated using TR-55 runoff curve number methodology, Atlas 14 precipitation depths, and the NRCS Wisconsin MSE3 precipitation distribution. 
Table 2. Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers 
Runoff Curve Number 	Hydrologic Soil Group 
	A 	B 	C 	D 
Woodland 	30 	55 	70 	77 
Grassland 	39 	61 	71 	78 
Cropland 	55 	69 	78 	83 
 
b.  This subsection does not apply to any of the following: 
1.  A post-construction site where the discharge is directly into a lake over 5,000 acres or a stream or river segment draining more than 500 square miles. 
2.  Except as provided under Subsection (c) of this section, a redevelopment post-construction site. 
3.  An in-fill development area less than five acres. 
(3)  Infiltration. 
a.  Best management practices. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate runoff in accordance with the following or to the maximum extent practicable: 
1.  Low imperviousness. For development up to 40 percent connected imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries, and low density residential development, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 90 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than one percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
2.  Moderate imperviousness. For development with more than 40 percent and up to 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as medium and high density residential, multifamily development, industrial and institutional development, and office parks, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 75 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than two percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
3.  High imperviousness. For development with more than 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as commercial strip malls, shopping centers, and commercial downtowns, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 60 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than two percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
b.  Pre-development. The pre-development condition shall be the same as specified in Table 2 of Subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
c.  Source areas. 
1.  Prohibitions. Runoff from the following areas may not be infiltrated and may not qualify as contributing to meeting the requirements of this section unless demonstrated to meet the conditions identified in Subsection (d)(3)f of this section. 
(i)  Areas associated with a tier 1 industrial facility identified in § NR 216.21(2)(a), including storage, loading and parking. Rooftops may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory authority. 
(ii)  Storage and loading areas of a tier 2 industrial facility identified in § NR 216.21(2)(b). 
(iii)  Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Runoff from rooftops of fueling and vehicle maintenance areas may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory authority. 
2.  Exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirement when infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate runoff from these source areas is optional: 
(i)  Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for commercial development. 
(ii)  Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for industrial development not subject to the prohibitions under Subsection (a) of this section. 
(iii)  Except as provided under Subsection (c) of this section, redevelopment post-construction sites. 
(iv)  In-fill development areas less than five acres. 
(v)  Roads on commercial, industrial and institutional land uses, and arterial residential roads. 
d.  Location of practices. 
1.  Prohibitions. Infiltration practices may not be located in the following areas: 
(i)  Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet downgradient of direct conduits to groundwater. 
(ii)  Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified in § NR 811.16 (4) or within the separation distances listed in § NR 812.08 for any private well or non-community well for runoff infiltrated from commercial, including multifamily residential, industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices for one- and two-family residential development. 
(iii)  Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in § NR 720.03(2), are present in the soil through which infiltration will occur. 
2.  Separation distances. 
(i)  Infiltration practices shall be located so that the characteristics of the soil and the separation distance between the bottom of the infiltration system and the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock are in accordance with Table 3. 
Table 3. Separation Distances and Soil Characteristics 
Source Area 	Separation Distance 	Soil Characteristics 
Industrial, Commercial, Institutional Parking Lots and Roads 	5 feet or more 	Filtering Layer 
Residential Arterial Roads 	5 feet or more 	Filtering Layer 
Roofs Draining to Subsurface Infiltration Practices 	1 foot or more 	Native or Engineered Soil with Particles Finer than Coarse Sand 
Roofs Draining to Surface Infiltration Practices 	Not Applicable 	Not Applicable 
All Other Impervious Source Areas 	3 feet or more 	Filtering Layer 
 
(ii)  Notwithstanding Subsection (d)(3)d.2 of this section, applicable requirements for injection wells classified under ch. NR 815 shall be followed. 
3.  Infiltration rate exemptions. Infiltration practices located in the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirements under the following conditions, but the decision to infiltrate under these conditions is optional: 
(i)  Where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at the proposed bottom of the infiltration system is less than 0.6 inches per hour using a scientifically credible field test method. 
(ii)  Where the least permeable soil horizon to five feet below the proposed bottom of the infiltration system using the U.S. Department of Agriculture method of soils analysis is one of the following: sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay. 
e.  Alternate use. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet flushing, laundry, or irrigation or storage on green roofs where an equivalent portion of the runoff is captured permanently by rooftop vegetation, such alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by this section. 
f.  Groundwater standards. 
1.  Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this section shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of standards application in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 140. However, if site specific information indicates that compliance with a preventive action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum extent practicable. 
2.  Notwithstanding Subsection (d)(3)a of this section, the discharge from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard at the point of standards application. 
g.  Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance with Subsection (d)(3)f of this section. Pretreatment options may include, but are not limited to, oil and grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips. 
h.  Maximum extent practicable. Where the conditions of Subsection (d)(3)c and d of this section, limit or restrict the use of infiltration practices, the performance standard of Subsection (d)(3) of this section shall be met to the maximum extent practicable. 
(4)  Protective areas. 
a.  Definition. In this section, the term "protective area" means an area of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. However, in this section, the term "protective area" does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, so that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location. 
1.  For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters, 75 feet. 
2.  For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a U.S. Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever is more current, 50 feet. 
3.  For lakes, 50 feet. 
4.  For wetlands not subject to Subsections (d)(3)e or (3)f of this section, 50 feet. 
5.  For highly susceptible wetlands, 75 feet. Highly susceptible wetlands include the following types: calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open and coniferous bogs, low prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland hardwood. 
6.  Swamps, and ephemeral ponds. 
7.  For less susceptible wetlands, ten percent of the average wetland width, but no less than ten feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include: degraded wetland dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass; cultivated hydric soils; and any gravel pits, or dredged material or fill material disposal sites that take on the attributes of a wetland. 
8.  In Subsections (d)(3)d to (3)f of this section, determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the standards and criteria in § NR 103.03. 
9.  Wetland boundary delineation shall be made in accordance with § NR 103.08(1m). This subsection does not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured from the wetland boundary delineation after a fill has been placed. Where there is a legally authorized wetland fill, the protective area standard need not be met in that location. 
10.  For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than 130 acres, ten feet. 
11.  Notwithstanding Subsections (4)a to (4)i of this section, the greatest protective area width shall apply where rivers, streams, lakes and wetlands are contiguous. 
b.  Applicability. This section applies to post-construction sites located within a protective area, except those areas exempted pursuant to Subsection (4) of this section. 
c.  Requirements. The following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area entirely or to the maximum extent practicable. If there is no practical alternative to locating an impervious surface in the protective area, the stormwater management plan shall contain a written, site-specific explanation. 
2.  Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within a protective area, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70 percent or greater shall be established and maintained where no impervious surface is present. The adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish habitat, and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Non-vegetative materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent erosion such as on steep slopes or where high velocity flows occur. 
3.  BMPs such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention ponds, that are designed to control pollutants from non-point sources, may be located in the protective area. 
d.  Exemptions. This section does not apply to any of the following: 
1.  Except as provided under Section 32-103(d)(3), redevelopment post-construction sites. 
2.  In-fill development areas less than five acres. 
3.  Structures that cross or access surface water such as boat landings, bridges, and culverts. 
4.  Structures constructed in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 59.692(1v). 
5.  Areas of post-construction sites from which the runoff does not enter the surface water, including wetlands, without first being treated by a BMP to meet the local ordinance requirements for total suspended solids and peak flow reduction, except to the extent that vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability. 
(5)  Fueling and maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas shall have BMPs designed, installed, and maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, so that the runoff that enters waters of the state contains no visible petroleum sheen, or to the maximum extent practicable. 
(e)  General considerations for stormwater management measures. The following considerations shall be observed in on-site and off-site runoff management: 
(1)  Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream property or public safety. 
(f)  BMP location. 
(1)  To comply with the performance standards required under Section 32-103, BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional stormwater device, practice or system, but shall be installed in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 151.003. 
(2)  The Director may approve off-site management measures provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The Director determines that the post-construction runoff is covered by a stormwater management system plan that is approved by the City of Janesville and that contains management requirements consistent with the purpose and intent of this article. 
b.  The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions: 
1.  The facility is in place. 
2.  The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the performance standards of this article. 
3.  The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and maintenance. 
(3)  Where a regional treatment option exists such that the Director exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum on-site stormwater management requirements, the applicant may be required to pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with the Director. In determining the fee for post-construction runoff, the Director shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land, engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the regional treatment option. 
(g)  Additional requirements. The Director may establish stormwater management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this article if the Director determines that the requirements are needed to control stormwater quantity or control flooding, comply with federally approved total maximum daily load requirements, or control pollutants associated with existing development or redevelopment. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.070)  
Sec. 32-104. - Permitting requirements, procedures and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No responsible party may undertake a land disturbing construction activity without receiving a post-construction runoff permit from the Director prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Permit application and fees. Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the Director a permit application on a form provided by the Director for that purpose. 
(1)  Unless otherwise excluded by this article, a permit application must be accompanied by a stormwater management plan, a maintenance agreement and a non-refundable permit administration fee. 
(2)  The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of Sections 32-103 and 32-105, the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of Section 32-106, the financial guarantee shall meet the requirements of Section 32-107, and fees shall be those as set forth in Section 32-108. 
(c)  Permit application review and approval. The Director shall review any permit application that is submitted with a stormwater management plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used: 
(1)  Within 15 business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all items as required by Subsection (b)(2) of this section, the Director shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this article. 
(2)  If the stormwater permit application, stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement are approved, or if an agreed upon payment of fees in lieu of stormwater management practices is made, the Director shall issue the permit. 
(3)  If the stormwater permit application, stormwater management plan or maintenance agreement is disapproved, the Director shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval. 
(4)  The Director may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the Director shall have 15 business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved. 
(5)  Failure by the Director to inform the permit applicant of a decision within 15 business days of a required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued. 
(d)  Permit requirements. All permits issued under this article shall be subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this article shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The Director may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification of the responsible party. An action by the Director to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in accordance with Section 32-117. 
(1)  Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(2)  The responsible party shall design and install all structural and non-structural stormwater management measures in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit. 
(3)  The responsible party shall notify the Director at least two business days before commencing any work in conjunction with the stormwater management plan, and within two business days upon completion of the stormwater management practices. If required as a special condition under Subsection (e) of this section, the responsible party shall make additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the Director so that practice installations can be inspected during construction. 
(4)  Practice installations required as part of this chapter shall be certified as built or record drawings by the responsible party. Completed stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection by the Director or its designee to determine if they are in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and chapter. The Director shall notify the responsible party in writing of any changes required in such practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of this permit. 
(5)  The responsible party shall notify the Director of any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved stormwater management plan. The Director may require that the proposed modifications be submitted to it for approval prior to incorporation into the stormwater management plan and execution by the responsible party. 
(6)  The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater management practices in accordance with the stormwater management plan until the practices are transferred to subsequent owners as specified in the approved maintenance agreement. 
(7)  The responsible party authorizes the Director to perform any work or operations necessary to bring stormwater management measures into conformance with the approved stormwater management plan, and consents to a special assessment or charge against the property as authorized under Wis. Stats. ch. 66, subch. VII, or to charging such costs against the financial guarantee posted under Section 32-107. 
(8)  If so directed by the Director, the responsible party shall repair at the responsible party's own expense all damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainage ways caused by runoff, where such damage is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(9)  The responsible party shall permit property access to the Director for the purpose of inspecting the property for compliance with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit. 
(10)  Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from a site, the Director may require the responsible party to make appropriate legal arrangements with affected property owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or public safety. 
(11)  The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and penalties detailed in Section 32-109, if the responsible party fails to comply with the terms of this permit. 
(e)  Permit conditions. Permits issued under this subsection may include conditions established by Director in addition to the requirements needed to meet the performance standards in Section 32-103 or a financial guarantee as provided for in Section 32-107. 
(f)  Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the Director notifies the responsible party that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under Subsection (d)(4) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.080)  
Sec. 32-105. - Stormwater management plan. 
(a)  Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan required under this section contain at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice design and certification; person responsible for installation of stormwater management practices; and person responsible for maintenance of stormwater management practices prior to the transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party. 
(2)  A proper legal description of the property proposed to be developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey System or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat. 
(3)  Pre-development site conditions, including: 
a.  One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. The site maps shall show the following: site location and legal property description; predominant soil types and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition; topographic contours of the site at an interval not to exceed two feet; topography and drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be affected by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used in hydrology determinations to show compliance with performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; limits of the 100 year floodplain; location of wells and wellhead protection areas covering the project area and delineated pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.16. 
b.  Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with performance standards. All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map. 
(4)  Post-development site conditions, including: 
a.  Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography and land cover features to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and wetlands. 
b.  Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management measures in the development area imposed by wellhead protection plans and ordinances. 
c.  One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet showing the following: post-construction pervious areas including vegetative cover type and condition; impervious surfaces including all buildings, structures, and pavement; post-construction topographic contours of the site at an interval not to exceed two feet; post-construction drainage network, including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; locations and dimensions of drainage easements; locations of maintenance easements specified in the maintenance agreement; flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; location and type of all stormwater management conveyance and treatment practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area; location and type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the drainage and treatment practices to the nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural drainage way; watershed boundaries used in hydrology and pollutant loading calculations and any changes to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site. 
d.  Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with performance standards. The computations shall be made for each discharge point in the development, and the geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map. 
e.  Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for the placement and design of stormwater management measures. Detailed drawings including cross-sections and profiles of all permanent stormwater conveyance and treatment practices. 
(5)  A description and installation schedule for the stormwater management practices needed to meet the performance standards in Section 32-103. 
(6)  A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater management practice including the required maintenance activities and maintenance activity schedule. 
(7)  Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of each stormwater management practice. 
(8)  Other information requested in writing by the Director to determine compliance of the proposed stormwater management measures with the provisions of this article. 
(9)  All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall be prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and requirements of this article. 
(b)  Alternate requirements. The administering authority may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site stormwater management performance standards under Section 32-103. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.090)  
Sec. 32-106. - Maintenance agreement. 
(a)  Maintenance agreement required. The maintenance agreement required under Section 32-111 for stormwater management practices shall be an agreement between the Director and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of stormwater practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the stormwater management practices. 
(b)  Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following information and provisions and be consistent with the maintenance plan required by Section 32-105(a)(6): 
(1)  Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the drainage area served by the facilities. 
(2)  A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater management plan required under Section 32-111(2). 
(3)  Identification of the responsible party, organization or individual responsible for long term maintenance of the stormwater management practices identified in the stormwater management plan required under Section 32-111(2). 
(4)  Requirement that the responsible party, organization, or individual shall maintain stormwater management practices in accordance with the schedule included in Subsection (b) of this section. 
(5)  Authorization for the Director to access the property to conduct inspections of stormwater management practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement. 
(6)  A requirement on the Director to inform the responsible party responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the stormwater management practice into proper working condition. 
(7)  Agreement that the party designated under Subsection (c) of this section, as responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater management practices, shall be notified by the Director of maintenance problems which require correction. The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable time frame as set by the Director. 
(8)  Authorization of the Director to perform the corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the responsible party designated under Subsection (c) of this section does not make the required corrections in the specified time period. The Director shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the money as a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 66, subch. VII. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.100)  
Sec. 32-107. - Financial guarantee. 
(a)  Establishment of the guarantee. The Director may require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be acceptable to the Director. The financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the Director to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of the stormwater management practices during the period which the designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give the Director the authorization to use the funds to complete the stormwater management practices if the responsible party defaults or does not properly implement the approved stormwater management plan, upon written notice to the responsible party by the Director that the requirements of this article have not been met. 
(b)  Conditions for release. Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are as follows: 
(1)  The Director shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section, less any costs incurred by the Director to complete installation of practices, upon submission of as-built plans or record drawings by a licensed professional engineer. The Director may make provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various development stages. 
(2)  The Director shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section to ensure maintenance of stormwater practices, less any costs incurred by the Director, at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance agreement. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.110)  
Sec. 32-108. - Fee schedule. 
The fees referred to in other sections of this chapter shall be established by the City Manager and may from time to time be modified, and the City Council shall be advised of the rates. A schedule of the fees established by the City Manager shall be available for review in the Director's Office. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.120)  
Sec. 32-109. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff initiated after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived by any person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the ordinance provisions shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The Director shall notify the responsible party by in writing of any non-complying land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and additional enforcement action which may be taken. 
(c)  Upon receipt of written notification from the Director under Subsection (b) of this section, the responsible party shall correct work that does not comply with the stormwater management plan or other provisions of this permit. The responsible party shall make corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the Director in the notice. 
(d)  If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this article are likely to result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state, the Director may enter the land and take emergency actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the Director plus interest and legal costs shall be billed to the responsible party. 
(e)  The Director is authorized to post a stop-work order on all land disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this article, or to request the City Attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction. 
(f)  The Director may revoke a permit issued under this chapter for noncompliance with ordinance provisions. 
(g)  Any permit revocation, stop-work order, or cease and desist order shall remain in effect unless retracted by the Director or by a court with jurisdiction. 
(h)  The Director is authorized to refer any violation of this chapter, or a stop-work order or cease and desist order issued pursuant to this chapter, to the City Attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction. 
(i)  Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with the provisions of this article shall be subject to the relief, enforcement, and penalties set forth in Article VII of Chapter 10, as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Also incorporated herein as if fully set forth verbatim as additional relief are the provisions set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(8), as from time to time amended, revised, or renumbered. 
(j)  Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings. 
(k)  When the Director determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article has failed to follow practices set forth in the stormwater management plan, or has failed to comply with schedules set forth in said stormwater management plan, the Director, or a party designated by the Director may enter upon the land and perform the work or other operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into conformance with requirements of the approved stormwater management plan. The Director shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial security posted pursuant to this subsection. Where such a security has not been established, or where such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is completed. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.130)  
Sec. 32-110. - Appeals. 
(a)  Board of appeals. The City Plan Commission shall serve as the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals: 
(1)  Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the Director in administering this chapter except for cease and desist orders obtained under Section 32-109(e); 
(2)  May authorize, upon appeal, variances from the provisions of this article which are not contrary to the public interest and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the chapter will result in unnecessary hardship; and 
(3)  Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances. 
(b)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by any office, department, or board of the City of Janesville affected by any decision of the Director. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.140)  
Sec. 32-111. - Severability. 
If a court of competent jurisdiction judges any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the chapter shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment. 
(Code 1976, § 15.06.150)  
Chapter 34 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish and change street grades, Wis. Stats. § 62.16; municipal authority to establish, maintain, and require repair of sidewalks, Wis. Stats. § 66.0907. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREET CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-19. - Construction plans and specifications. 
Plans and specifications for street construction shall be prepared by the City Engineer or designee. 
(Code 1976, § 12.04.010)  
Sec. 34-20. - Installation of services before pavement, generally. 
The Council orders that, in case the Council declares its intention to improve any street by paving with a permanent paving, including, without limitation, concrete, or asphalt, then prior to the installation of such paving water, power and gas service pipes shall be first laid in the street, to be so improved from the water, sewer, and gas service mains in the street to the point of the water or gas shutoff back of the curb, as such point is established by the plumbing inspector on both sides of the street except at street and alley crossings. 
(Code 1976, § 12.04.020) 
State Law reference— Laterals and service pipes, generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.0911.  
Sec. 34-21. - Service pipes; plans and specifications. 
Such service pipes, as referred to in Section 34-20, shall be laid at such intervals along the part of the street to be improved as may be determined by the Council either by a formula or rule adopted prior to such installation, or at such locations as may be adopted by reference to a drawing, plan or plat showing the proposed location of such service pipes. 
(Code 1976, § 12.04.030)  
Sec. 34-22. - Installation of services before pavement; cost. 
Such work, as referred to in Sections 34-20 and 34-21, may be done and the cost of such work shall be charged to abutting property owners as set forth in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.16(2) and 66.0911, and/or other applicable statutes. 
(Code 1976, § 12.04.040)  
Sec. 34-23. - Laying of gas mains. 
All gas mains shall be laid to the line and grade as determined by the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 12.04.050)  
Sec. 34-24. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, or any section herein referred to for which a specific penalty may not be provided, shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not exceeding $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and each day during which such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and in default of payment of such penalty, any violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 12.04.060)  
Secs. 34-25—34-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 34-52. - State regulations adopted. 
Wis. Stats. § 66.0907, relating to the construction and maintenance of sidewalks, is adopted by reference. 
(Code 1976, § 12.08.010; Ord. No. 75-472, § 7, 1975)  
Sec. 34-53. - Construction conformance. 
Sidewalks in the City must be constructed in conformity with plans and specifications adopted by the committee of public works which are on file in the City Engineer's office. 
(Code 1976, § 12.08.020)  
Sec. 34-54. - Line and grade specifications. 
All sidewalks shall be constructed to the line and grade as furnished by the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 12.08.030)  
Sec. 34-55. - Owner may construct sidewalk when. 
Any owner of property fronting on any street for which a grade has been established may construct a sidewalk in front of such property, provided such sidewalk is built in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 12.08.040)  
Sec. 34-56. - Nonconforming sidewalks prohibited. 
No sidewalk which is constructed contrary to the provisions of this article shall be considered a legal sidewalk, and the same may be ordered to be replaced with a legal sidewalk, and with a sidewalk in conformity with this article, the same as if no sidewalk whatever had been built or constructed in the place where any such sidewalk is located. 
(Code 1976, § 12.08.050)  
Sec. 34-57. - Interference with grade. 
No person shall raise or lower the surface of any sidewalk or crosswalk above or below the established grade for the same. 
(Code 1976, § 12.08.060)  
Sec. 34-58. - Defacing or injuring sidewalks forbidden. 
No person shall break, mar, or otherwise injure any sidewalk other than for the purpose of repairing or removing the same. 
(Code 1976, § 12.08.070)  
Sec. 34-59. - Snow and ice removal. 
Every occupant of a lot, and every owner of an unoccupied lot having a sidewalk in front of the same shall keep such walk and the nearest one-half part of crosswalks connecting therewith free from snow and ice; provided, however, that a period of 12 hours shall be allowed after each snowstorm for the removal of snow which fell during such storm. 
(Code 1976, § 12.08.080) 
State Law reference— Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks, Wis. Stats. § 66.0907(5).  
Sec. 34-60. - Merchandise or personal property on sidewalks forbidden. 
Unless expressly authorized to do so by the Council, no person shall use the sidewalk, or any part thereof, for the display of merchandise, or the storage of any merchandise or other personal property. The only exception to this provision, is that storage of merchandise or other personal property shall be allowed, provided that it meets all of the below enumerated conditions. The following exception to the above prohibition shall apply, notwithstanding Article VI of Chapter 12 or herein to the contrary: 
(1)  The property is located in the B5 (Central Business) and B6 (Central Service) zoning districts in the City. 
(2)  No person shall obstruct or impede the pedestrian right-of-way of any paved public sidewalk with any merchandise or personal property, except as provided herein. Merchandise shall be located adjoining the building it is marketed from and shall not encroach more than 30 inches from the building facade and in all cases, the unobstructed sidewalk area must be a minimum of five contiguous feet in width and comply with ADA requirements, as from time to time amended. 
(3)  Displayed merchandise shall be consistent to that sold within the business and shall not include food or beverage items. 
(4)  Displayed merchandise or personal property must be removed each day following the close of business, but in no event shall the merchandise be permitted outdoors between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. nightly. 
(5)  Displaying merchandise or personal property on a paved sidewalk shall constitute express permission of the property and/or business owner for the City to take corrective, remedial and removal action. The City may also prosecute violations of this article and seek injunctive relief, from time to time and at any time. 
(6)  The cost of such correction, remediation, and/or removal shall be paid by the owner. 
(7)  The property and business owners are jointly and severally liable for any and all injury to any person or property directly and/or indirectly caused by their joint or several negligence and/or activities occurring on the paved sidewalk under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 12.08.090)  
Sec. 34-61. - Canopies, marquees and awnings over sidewalks. 
Any person owning or occupying a building or part of a building for business purposes may place over the sidewalk in front of such business a canopy, marquee or awing which complies with the regulations of Section 10-27 (Canopies and marquees and awnings) and any other applicable provisions of the code. 
(Code 1976, § 12.08.100; Ord. No. 82-307, § 2, 1982)  
Sec. 34-62. - Openings in sidewalks. 
(a)  No occupant of premises having any manhole, cellar door or other opening in any sidewalk in front of such premises shall allow any such opening to remain open during the nighttime or during the daytime without placing such barriers about the same as will prevent persons from stepping or falling into the same, or suffer any such door, grating or manhole to be in an insecure or unsafe condition at any time. 
(b)  The use of open grating over openings in sidewalks is prohibited, and all such openings shall have solid covers. 
(Code 1976, § 12.08.110)  
Sec. 34-63. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, or any section herein referred to for which a specific penalty may not be provided, shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not exceeding $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and in default of payment of such penalty, any violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 12.08.120)  
Secs. 34-64—34-84. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CURBS AND GUTTERS 
 
Sec. 34-85. - Construction of curb openings; permit required. 
No person shall break, cut, open, alter or destroy any curb, curb stone, or curb and gutter along any street of the City or construct, enlarge, or relocate any driveway or curb opening unless a permit has been issued for such work by the Building Inspector. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.010; Ord. No. 82-295, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 34-86. - Construction of curb or curb and gutter by property owner. 
Construction of curb or curb and gutter along any street of the City by the abutting property owner is prohibited unless such construction is authorized by a permit issued pursuant to Section 34-85, required by Section 34-92 or 34-93 or specifically authorized by the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.020; Ord. No. 82-295, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 34-87. - Construction to conform to City plans and specifications. 
Any construction of a curb opening for which a permit has been issued and any construction of curb or curb and gutter which has been required by ordinance or authorized by the City Engineer shall be subject to and shall conform to the plans and specifications prescribed by the City Engineer and placed on file in the office of the City Engineer. Such plans and specifications may be modified from time to time as the City Engineer deems necessary. Such construction shall be performed and completed to the satisfaction of the City, as determined by the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.030; Ord. No. 82-295, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 34-88. - Curb opening; application for permit; fee. 
(a)  All applications for a permit required by Section 34-85 shall be filed in the Building Inspection Department. Such application shall be on forms available at the office of the Building Inspection Department and shall be furnished upon request. 
(b)  A fee shall be charged for each curb opening permit issued. The permit fee shall be in an amount as established by the Mayor and City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.040)  
Sec. 34-89. - Curb opening; standards for approval. 
(a)  A person who owns land which abuts a public street has a right of access to such street, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Driveway openings shall be located at least 40 feet from a block corner with the exception of single-family and two-family driveway openings which shall be located at least 25 feet from a block corner. 
(2)  The maximum driveway openings for single- and two-family residences shall be no greater than 24 feet at the sidewalk line and 30 feet at the curb. For single-family or two-family residences which have garages that accommodate three or more cars and that have direct access to a public street, the building official may increase the maximum driveway width to 30 feet at the sidewalk line and 36 feet at the curb. The building official may increase the maximum driveway opening to a width not greater than 36 feet at the sidewalk line and 42 feet at the curb to accommodate access to two-car garages for side-by-side two-family dwellings. The Chief Building Official shall have the discretionary authority to increase described single- and two-family driveway opening standards as he or she deems necessary for the specific lot and under the particular facts and circumstances, but in no event ever more than 20 percent of the requirement. 
(3)  The maximum driveway opening for all uses other than single-family or two-family residences shall be 30 feet at the sidewalk line and 36 feet at the curb, unless a greater opening is approved by the Chief Building Official, and the City Engineer, and a permit for such greater opening is issued by the Building Inspector. 
(4)  Where a driveway is in joint use with an adjoining property, there shall be at least ten feet of driveway on each parcel. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued for a curb opening on undeveloped property until a building permit is applied for and, when required, a site plan is submitted and approved. 
(6)  To the extent possible, a curb opening shall be located so that vehicles approaching or using it will have adequate sight distance in both directions along the street. 
(7)  For any use which must be reviewed by the Chief Building Official, no permit for a curb opening shall be issued until after such review has been completed and the location of the curb opening are approved. 
(8)  The number of curb openings permitted serving a single property frontage along the street shall be the minimum deemed necessary by the Building Inspector and the City Engineer or by the Chief Building Official for reasonable service to the property without undue impairment of safety, convenience, and utility of the street. 
(9)  A new curb opening, or any additional or enlarged curb opening, shall not be approved if it reduces the amount of the parking space in the area so as to create or increase parking problems, or if it impairs, endangers, inhibits, or impedes the safe and orderly flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(10)  Where property abuts more than one street, the Building Inspector and the City Engineer or the Chief Building Official may designate the street to which the property owner shall be entitled to access. Such designation of access to one street and prohibition of access to another street is permitted if, in the opinion of the Building Inspector and City Engineer or the Chief Building Official, access to one or more of the abutting streets would interfere with the safe and orderly flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or cause a hazardous situation for movement in and out of the abutting property or for movement upon the street. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application for a permit for curb opening, such permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.050)  
Sec. 34-90. - Curb opening; subject to State Highway Department. 
In the case of state highways, where curb openings, driveways and access rights are controlled, regulated or limited by the State Highway Department, no curb opening permit shall be issued without prior approval of the State Highway Department. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.060; Ord. No. 82-295, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 34-91. - Replacement of existing driveway. 
No permit is required where an existing driveway is replaced at the same location, at the same size, and at the same grade. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.070; Ord. No. 82-295, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 34-92. - Relocation of curb opening; replacement of curb and gutter. 
When application is made for the relocation of a curb opening, the property owner shall replace the curb and gutter, and sidewalk if necessary, in its original location and at his or her own expense within 30 days of relocation of the curb opening. Approval of the curb opening at the new location shall be conditioned upon such replacement. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.080; Ord. No. 82-295, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 34-93. - Abandonment of curb opening; replacement of curb and gutter. 
(a)  Whenever an existing curb opening is abandoned or when the need for a curb opening or for a larger than usual curb opening no longer exists, the property owner shall replace the curb and gutter, and the sidewalk if necessary, at his or her own expense within three months of the abandonment or within three months of the time at which the curb opening is no longer needed. 
(b)  The Building Inspector shall determine whether a curb opening has been abandoned or whether the need for the curb opening no longer exists. If the Building Inspector determines that abandonment has occurred or that the need for the curb opening no longer exists, the Building Inspector shall notify the owner of the property in writing that the curb and gutter, and the sidewalk if necessary, must be replaced. 
(c)  If a change is made in the use of the property for which a permit was issued for an additional curb opening or for a larger than usual curb opening, the Building Inspector shall determine whether the need for such additional curb opening or enlarged curb opening continues to exist under the new use. If it does not, the Building Inspector shall notify the owner or the property, as required in Subsection (b) of this section, that the curb and gutter, and the sidewalk if necessary, must be replaced within 90 days of such notice. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.090; Ord. No. 82-295, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 34-94. - Replacement of curb by City. 
In case the property owner does not complete the replacement of curb and gutter, and the sidewalk if necessary, as required in Section 34-93, the City may do the required replacement work and charge the cost thereof against the property involved. If the costs are not paid by the property owner, such costs shall be a lien on the property against which it is levied on behalf of the municipality and shall be extended upon the current or next tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.100; Ord. No. 82-295, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 34-95. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by or any officer or department of the City affected by a decision made pursuant to this article may appeal such decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals after paying the related fee, pursuant to the provisions of Section 42-70. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.110; Ord. No. 82-295, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 34-96. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building Inspector includes the Building Inspector or authorized representative. 
City Engineer includes the City Engineer or authorized representative. 
Street includes any public street, highway, road, roadway, or alley within the City. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.120; Ord. No. 82-295, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 34-97. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such penalty, any violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 30 days. Each day during which such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 12.12.130; Ord. No. 82-295, § 1(part), 1982)  
Secs. 34-98—34-122. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - EXCAVATIONS IN CITY PROPERTY AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY, AND CERTAIN PROPERTY EXCAVATION REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 34-123. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  In the exercise of governmental functions the City has priority over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The City desires to anticipate and minimize the number of obstructions and excavations taking place therein and to regulate the placement of facilities in the rights-of-way to ensure that the rights-of-way remain available for public services and safe for public use. The taxpayers of the City bear the financial burden for the upkeep of the rights-of-way and a primary cause for the early and excessive deterioration of its rights-of-way is the frequent excavation by persons who locate facilities therein. 
(b)  The City finds increased use of the public rights-of-way and increased costs to the taxpayers of the City and that these costs are likely to continue into the foreseeable future. 
(c)  The City finds that occupancy and excavation of its property and rights-of-way causes costs to be borne by the City and its taxpayers, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Administrative costs associated with public right-of-way projects such as registration, permitting, inspection and supervision, supplies and materials. 
(2)  Management costs associated with ongoing management activities necessitated by public users. 
(3)  Repair or restoration costs to the public property and/or right-of-way associated with the actual excavation. 
(4)  Degradation costs defined as depreciation caused to the public property and/or rights-of-way in terms of decreased useful life, directly and/or indirectly arising or resulting from such excavations and related activities thereon. 
(d)  In response to the foregoing facts, the City hereby enacts this article relating to administration of and permits to temporarily excavate, obstruct and/or occupy public property and/or the public rights-of-way. This article imposes reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of equipment currently within its public property and/or rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. 
(e)  The further purpose of this article is to provide the City a legal, uniform and reasonable framework within which to regulate, manage, inspect, properly maintain, engineer and regulate excavations, repairs, restorations and related effects and aftereffects of and into the City's public properties and rights-of-way, and to provide for recovery of the reasonable associated costs, fees and expenses incurred in doing so. 
(f)  This article provides for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City as they use public properties and the rights-of-way of the City, as well as to ensure the structural integrity of public property and the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.010)  
Sec. 34-124. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
Applicant means any person requesting permission to excavate, cut into, bore into, obstruct and/or occupy public property and/or a public right-of-way. 
City means the City of Janesville, a Wisconsin municipal corporation located in the County of Rock. 
Degradation means the decrease in the useful life of the public property and/or improved or paved portion of a right-of-way, excluding the sidewalk right-of-way, caused by an excavation of the public property or right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such property and/or right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation did not occur. 
Department means the Engineering Division of the City. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property, or requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to a customer. 
Engineer means the City Engineer and/or his or her designee. 
Excavate and/or excavation means to dig, cut, bore into, remove, physically disturb, penetrate and/or in any manner affect the existing condition of any City property, right-of-way or other land included in this article. 
Facilities means all equipment owned, operated, leased or subleased in connection with the operation of a service or utility service, and shall include, but is not limited to, poles, wires, pipes, cables, underground conduits, ducts, manholes, vaults, fiber optic cables, lines and other structures and appurtenances. 
In, when used in conjunction with the terms "public property" and/or "right-of-way," means upon, over, above, within, on or under such public property and/or right-of-way. 
Local representative means a local person, or designee of such persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this article. 
Obstruct means to place any object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way. 
Permittee means any person to whom a permit to occupy, excavate or obstruct public property and/or right-of-way has been granted by the City under this section. 
Person means corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, joint venture, association, organization and individuals and their lessors, transferees, receivers, heirs, personal representatives, agents and all others acting on their behalf. 
Property means the surface and space above and below an improved or unimproved part or whole of any and all City-owned or -leased real property, including, but not limited to, parks, vacant lots, open spaces, developed lands, green belts, parking lots, streets, sidewalks, terraces, rights-of-way, curbs, gutters, alleys, bicycle ways, bike trails, paths, beaches, river banks, easements, drainageways, and other lands. 
Public utility has the meaning provided in Wis. Stats. § 196.01(5), as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
Repair means to perform construction work necessary to make the public property and/or right-of-way useable for appropriate and safe use and, if a right-of-way, in accord with the written and/or verbal requirements, specifications, rules and regulations of the City and/or as promulgated from time to time by the City Engineer; and/or, as applicable, to restore equipment to an operable and appropriate condition. 
Restore or restoration means that process by which an excavated public property and/or right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is reconstructed in accord with the written and/or verbal requirements, specifications, rules and regulations of the City and/or as promulgated from time to time by the City Engineer. 
Right-of-way means the surface and space above and below an improved or unimproved public roadway, highway, street, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the City has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes. 
Site means the specific geographic location for a proposed excavation accurately diagrammed and exactly described with particularity by the applicant in an application. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.020)  
Sec. 34-125. - Prohibition; excavation permit required. 
(a)  No cut, excavation, or service connection shall be made by any person in any City property unless a permit therefor is applied for, the fee paid for, the permit obtained and held issued by the City under this article and then only in strict accord with all provisions and requirements of this article. 
(b)  No person shall undertake to perform the work of making any connection with or repair of any gas pipe, water pipe, sewer, communication, cable, or electric line or facility laid or constructed in any street or public ground, or to repair or remove any such item without having obtained a license authorizing him or her to do such work. No annual license fee is required but individual permits and permit fees for each excavation are required. 
(c)  Every cut, excavation and service connection in any City property that is not a right-of-way shall also require, in addition to the permit, payment of fees and fulfillment of other requirements set forth in this article, separate permission, lease and/or easement from the City Council and/or City Administration, as applicable. Such additional permission is discretionary with the City Council and/or City Administration, is not a matter of right regardless of whether a permit has been applied for and/or issued under this article, and may be denied or withheld without cause. Compliance with this article does not take the place of such additional required permission. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.030)  
Sec. 34-126. - Application for permit. 
(a)  An application for an excavation permit shall be made to the City Engineer or designee prior to any excavation. 
(b)  Permit applications shall contain and will be considered complete only upon compliance with each and every one of the following requirements: 
(1)  Application form. A fully and accurately completed right-of-way permit application shall be completed by a duly authorized representative of the applicant. The application shall be in such form, content and requirements as the City Engineer or their designee may determine and/or direct from time to time. The application shall contain, but is not limited to: 
a.  Each applicant's, diggers hotline registration certificate number must be able to be presented upon request. 
b.  The name, address, e-mail address, and telephone numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of application. 
c.  A detailed description of the scope and a plan set of the excavation work and repair/restoration proposed. 
d.  Indemnification language protecting and holding harmless the City and each and every of the City's elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, agents, contractors and representatives from and against any and all injury, payments, penalties and damages arising from any and all intentional and negligent activities of the applicant and the applicant's appointed officials, officers, employees, agents, contractors and representatives. 
(2)  The completed permit and drawings determined as established by the City Engineer or their designee shall include all required attachments, drawings showing the location and area of the proposed facilities, and the size of any cut, excavation or service connection, and any necessary traffic control proposed for city streets. The proposed permit plans must accommodate all existing underground facilities within the proposed route. 
(3)  Insurance certificate. The applicant shall file a Certificate of Insurance with the City Engineer for preservation by the Clerk Treasurer's office giving evidence of liability insurance in the amounts required from time to time by the City Engineer naming the City and its officials and employees as a co-insureds or additional insureds. The insurance shall cover liability to third parties for the acts of the applicant and applicants officials and employees, agents, contractees, representatives and related others. The insurance shall cover bodily injury and property damage for the individual incidents and aggregates required by the City Engineer. Such insurance shall not be cancelled or reduced without the insurer giving at least ten days prior written notice to the City Engineer. Cancellation or reduction of insurance shall automatically suspend the permit, and no further work shall be done under such permit until a new certificate of insurance complying herewith is filed with the City Engineer. The Certificate of Insurance shall remain in full force and effect for not less than one year from the date of the City's final inspection after completion of the project. 
(4)  Bond. A bond in the form of cash or a performance bond issued by a licensed company in Wisconsin shall be deposited or filed with the City Engineer and preserved by the City Clerk-Treasurer prior to the issuance of the permit. The City Engineer or their designee shall determine the minimum dollar amount of the bond based upon the estimated cost to restore the area involved to a condition the same or similar to that prior to the cut and/or excavation. The bond shall be payable to the City upon demand by the City Engineer for any actual or suspected violation of any provision of this article. The City Engineer shall be able to demand payment upon the bond in whole or in part at any time and from time to time. The bond shall be in such further form, content and requirements as the City Engineer and City Attorney may determine necessary and/or desirable to effect the intent of the City Council in this article. The City need not resort to any other remedy or provide any prior notice to the applicant or permittee before making demand upon, seeking resort or receiving payment from the bond. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for one year from the date of the City's final inspection after completion of the project. 
(5)  A copy of the applicant's certificate of authority from the Wisconsin Public Service Commission or other applicable state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from said commission or other state or federal agency must be available upon request. 
(6)  If the registration is a corporation, an LLC or LLP, a copy of any certificate required to be filed under Wisconsin Statutes as recorded and certified by the Secretary of State must be available upon request. 
(7)  Each application shall contain an accurate diagram and description of the project site as it falls within right-of-way. 
(8)  Payment. Payment of the permit fees and costs shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(c)  The applicant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times by providing to the City Engineer information as to changes within three working days following the date on which the applicant has knowledge of any change. 
(d)  A separate permit must be applied for and held, and a separate fee paid, for each site, excavation, cut and/or project. A separate permit is required for a new or emergency excavation at a previously permitted site if the previous work or excavation ended. 
(e)  Permits are not transferable from person to person. Permits are not transferable from place to place. 
(f)  A photocopy of each issued City excavation permit shall be conspicuously posted and maintained at the site until the project is completed. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.040)  
Sec. 34-127. - Fees. 
(a)  The fees shall be calculated by the City, and assessed to and paid to the City by the applicant at the time the written application is filed with the City Engineer. 
(b)  Permit fees are not refundable for any reason. 
(c)  The permit fees shall be in addition to any forfeiture provided elsewhere in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.050)  
Sec. 34-128. - Costs arising from permittee exceeding specifications; substantial projects. 
(a)  A permittee exceeding the scope of the project reported in the written application shall fully and forthwith reimburse the City for all additional City costs incurred in addition to the fees otherwise applicable and/or paid for the entire project as established. Such actual costs shall include, but not be limited to, actual salaries and staff time, benefits, overhead, vehicle and equipment costs, copies and inspections. 
(b)  Substantial projects. For applications that provide for a substantial undertaking of excavation within a public right-of-way attended by disruption of the general public and traffic, the City Engineer may assess the actual costs of the City employees' time engaged in review and inspection of the anticipated plans and work, multiplied by a factor determined by the City Engineer to represent the City's actual costs and expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, vacation and similar benefits, overhead and supervision, said factor not to exceed 2.0, plus the costs of mileage, vehicle rental/use attributed to the work, plus all consultant fees associated with the work at the invoiced amount plus ten percent for administration. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.060)  
Sec. 34-129. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The City and its public works contractors shall not pay fees or post a bond for excavations pertaining to general governmental functions and projects, but shall apply for and hold a permit under this article, and shall comply with all other provisions of this article. 
(b)  Plumbers who have applied for, paid the fee for, have been issued and hold a City excavation permit for a particular site under Chapter 10.  
Sec. 34-130. - Revocations, suspensions, refusals to issue or extend permit. 
(a)  The City Engineer may refuse to issue a permit or may administratively revoke, suspend or refuse to extend an existing permit if it finds any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant, permittee or occupant has failed to obtain a permit, failed to pay the full required fee for, and/or has not fully complied with any provisions or requirement of the permit or this article; 
(2)  Issuance of a permit for the requested date would interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival or other event; 
(3)  Issuance of a permit would not be in the public's best interest; 
(4)  Issuance of the permit would be contrary health, welfare, safety or good order of the public, community or City; 
(5)  There is a limitation of space as determined by the City Engineer; 
(6)  Misrepresentation of any fact by the applicant, permittee or occupant, or anyone on their behalf; 
(7)  Failure of the applicant, permittee or occupant to obtain, maintain or show proof of required bonds and/or insurance; 
(8)  Failure of the applicant, permittee or occupant to complete work in a timely or appropriate manner on any current or past excavation project in the City; 
(9)  Any current or past violation, breach or nonconformity with any provision of this article by the applicant, permittee or occupant; 
(10)  The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-way or other public property; 
(11)  The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other public property for the facilities of the permittee or applicant; 
(12)  The applicability of ordinances or other regulations of the right-of-way or other public property that affect location of facilities in the right-of-way; 
(13)  The excavation is proposed for a street, sidewalk, bike way, alley or other right-of-way or portion thereof newly installed, or recently resurfaced or reconstructed, and the applicant chose not to excavate and/or repair/replace the utility before such new installation, resurfacing or reconstruction activities were completed. No excavation shall be allowed in newly installed or recently repaired or resurfaced public property and/or rights-of-way for five years from completion of such new installation or recent repair or resurfacing. The City Engineer may make exceptions to this rule for extraordinary circumstances and emergencies, but the City Engineer may add special conditions to be accommodated if an exception is granted. 
(b)  Discretionary issuance. The City Engineer may waive a particular requirement and issue a permit where issuance is necessary to prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the permittee or applicant, or to allow such customer to materially improve its utility service, or to allow the permittee or applicant to comply with state or federal law or City ordinance or an order of a court or administrative agency. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.070)  
Sec. 34-131. - Reporting obligations. 
It is in the best interests of all affected parties to attempt to coordinate construction in public property and/or the public right-of-way whenever it is reasonably possible. Therefore, periodic reporting by the applicant to the City Engineer of known or projected construction plans will be useful to achieve this objective. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.090)  
Sec. 34-132. - Location of facilities; underground. 
The permittee shall endeavor to install facilities underground or within buildings or other structures in conformity with applicable codes and requirements of the City Engineer, unless in conflict with state or federal law, existing aboveground facilities are used, or otherwise approved by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may direct that the installation be made underground if the public health, safety, or welfare so require. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.100)  
Sec. 34-133. - Limitation of space. 
The City Engineer may prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within public property and/or public rights-of-way if, in his or her determination, there is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests of persons to occupy the site, public property and/or right-of-way. In making such decisions, the City Engineer shall strive to the extent reasonably possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the public property right-of-way, but may prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities when he or she determines such is required to protect, safeguard and/or facilitate the public health, safety, or welfare. In reaching this conclusion, the City Engineer may consider the utility's/applicant's obligation to serve. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.110)  
Sec. 34-134. - Attachment to bridges. 
Whenever an applicant requests permission to attach pipes, conduits, cables, or wires to any City bridge structure, the applicant shall pay all costs associated with the granting of such permission, including, but not limited to, administrative expenses in the analysis and inspection of such installation and applicant's plans. The owner of such pipes, conduits, cables, or wires shall be entitled to no compensation for removal or relocation of the same in case of repair, removal, or replacement of said bridge structure by the City or others on the City's behalf, and/or any consequential damages directly and/or indirectly arising therefrom. There is no guarantee permission will be granted to allow attaching facilities to City structures. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.120)  
Sec. 34-135. - Style of cut. 
All excavations in permanently improved right-of-way, streets and/or parking lots, sidewalks, bike trails, and the like, shall be made by final saw cuts around the perimeter of the excavation in accordance with the Specifications for Street and Sidewalk Excavation and Pavement Restoration, as prepared and revised from time to time by the City Engineer, and any other specifications outlined in the permit approval specific to the project. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.130)  
Sec. 34-136. - Repair and/or restoration of paved or improved areas. 
(a)  Temporary and permanent. The permittee shall be responsible for all costs associated with maintaining the temporary and permanent repairs and restorations in accordance with the Specifications for Street and Sidewalk Excavation and Pavement Restoration, as prepared and revised from time to time by the City Engineer, along with any other specifications outlined in the permit approval specific to the project. 
(b)  Unless otherwise required by the City Engineer, disturbed pavement or as otherwise determined by the City Engineer shall be replaced by the permittee or an authorized contractor retained by the City, at the permittee's sole cost and expense. 
(c)  The permittee shall use only materials approved by the City Engineer. The site shall be fully and timely restored by the permittee to a condition better than it was immediately prior to the excavation and in full accord with each and every specification of the City as from time to time supplemental amended or other modified. 
(d)  If the repair and/or replacement pavement hard surface or material settles or cracks within five years of the date of the permit and if failure of the repair and/or replacement is due to improper backfill, compaction or materials, the pavement and backfill in the excavation area shall be forthwith removed and replaced at the expense of the permittee. 
(e)  Repair of unpaved/non-hard surface areas. All excavations in areas which are not paved or hard surface shall be backfilled with natural material compacted in 12 inch layers with mechanical compaction equipment. The surface shall be restored to its original condition, subject to the approval of the City Engineer. The permittee shall guarantee this work for one year from the date of City final inspection after project completion. 
(f)  In all cases, the permittee shall be required to repair the site to City specifications and standards subject to inspection and acceptance by the City. 
(g)  In addition to repairing its own work, the permittee must repair the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas, including the paving and its foundations, to the specifications of the City. 
(h)  At the beginning and at the end of the project, the permittee shall immediately notify the City Engineer. The City Engineer or their designee shall inspect the area of the work and accept the work at the end when the City Engineer determines that proper repair and/or restoration has been made in accord with all specifications and requirements of the City. The permittee shall make the work site available to the City Engineer and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.140)  
Sec. 34-137. - Relocation of facilities. 
An occupant must promptly and at its own expense permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the public property or right-of-way whenever the City and/or City Engineering, jointly or severally acting in his or her or its governmental capacity and having determined that the public health, safety, or welfare so requires, requests such removal and relocation. Notwithstanding the forgoing, an occupant shall not be required to remove or relocate its facilities from any right-of-way or other public property that has been vacated in favor of a non-governmental entity unless and until the reasonable costs thereof are first paid to the occupant therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.150)  
Sec. 34-138. - Interference with other facilities during municipal construction. 
When the City performs work in the right-of-way or other public property and the City Engineer finds it necessary to maintain, support, shore, or move an occupant's facilities, the City Engineer shall notify the local representative. The occupant shall meet with the City's representative within 24 hours and coordinate the protection, maintenance, supporting, and/or shoring of the occupant's facilities. The occupant shall accomplish the needed work within 72 hours, unless the City agrees to a longer period. In the event that the occupant does not proceed to maintain, support, shore, or move its facilities within such time, the City may arrange to do the work and bill the occupant, said bill to be paid within 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.160)  
Sec. 34-139. - Abandoned and unused facilities. 
(a)  Discontinued operations. An occupant or permittee who has decided to discontinue its operations must either: 
(1)  Timely provide information satisfactory to the City Engineer that the occupant's or permittee's obligations under this article for its facilities have been lawfully assumed by another occupant or permittee; or 
(2)  Submit to the City Engineer a proposal and instruments for transferring ownership of its facilities to the City. If an occupant proceeds under this clause, the City may, at its option: 
a.  Accept the dedication for all or a portion of the facilities; 
b.  Require the occupant, at its own expense, to remove the facilities; or 
c.  Require the occupant to forthwith post a bond or provide payment in an amount determined by the City Engineer sufficient to reimburse the City for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
(b)  Abandoned facilities. Facilities that remain unused for two years shall be deemed abandoned. Any occupant or permittee having abandoned equipment in any public property and/or right-of-way shall remove it within two years, unless the City Engineer waives this requirement. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. In addition to any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, the City may, at its option, abate the nuisance, take possession of the facilities, or require the removal of the facilities by the occupant or the occupant's successor in interest, or exercise any of its other rights under this article. A determination by the City Engineer that a facility is abandoned shall be conclusions, final and binding on the occupant and/or permittee. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.170)  
Sec. 34-140. - Emergency situations. 
Each occupant, permittee and/or their agent shall immediately notify the City Engineer by verbal notice on an emergency telephone number provided by the City Engineer of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The occupant, permittee and/or their agent may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency the occupant, permittee and agent shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and otherwise fully comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.180)  
Sec. 34-141. - Compliance with City Engineer directions. 
An applicant, permittee and occupant shall forthwith comply with each and every verbal and written direction and requirement of the City Engineer or designee. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.190)  
Sec. 34-142. - Compliance with other laws. 
Obtaining a permit to excavate and/or occupy the right-of-way or other City property does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by any other City, county, state, or federal rules, laws or regulations. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.200)  
Sec. 34-143. - Vicarious liability. 
Each applicant, permittee and occupant is vicariously responsible and liable under this article for the actions of the respective applicant's, permittee's and occupant's contractors and agents, and is liable for violations by them, jointly and severally. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.210)  
Sec. 34-144. - No repeal of tree requirements. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of a City ordinance requiring persons to plant or maintain a tree lawn in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street curb or pavement, construct sidewalks or driveways or other similar activities. Persons performing such activities shall not be required to obtain any permits under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.220)  
Sec. 34-145. - Raising or lowering street grade or surface prohibited. 
No person, unless duly authorized in writing by the City Manager or by formal action of the Council, shall raise or lower the surface of any street above or below the established grade, or remove any earth or soil from any street, or interfere with the surface or soil of any street in any manner whatsoever. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.230)  
Sec. 34-146. - Cisterns and other openings to be covered; failure to make correction; procedure. 
No person, firm or corporation shall have or permit, on any premises owned or occupied by him, her or them, any open cistern, cesspool, well, or other dangerous openings. All such places shall be securely covered or enclosed in such a manner as to prevent injury to any person, and such covers or enclosures shall be of such design, size, weight and anchorage that the same cannot be removed by children. Where such an opening exists and is considered by the Building Inspector to be a hazard, and the Building Inspector has issued a written order to the property owner, the latter shall cause the hazard to be protected at once. In any case where the property owner fails to correct the situation within 20 days after the notice has been issued to him, her or them, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to see that the protection is completed by the City, and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the property as a special charge and added to the tax rolls. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.240)  
Sec. 34-147. - Open excavations. 
(a)  The owner of any property upon which there are excavations of any kind in connection with any proposed building or construction or the installation of any utilities which have been allowed to remain open and unprotected for a period of 60 days from the date of the issuance of the permit for such work, and which, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, constitutes a hazard, shall, upon written notice from the Building Inspector, cover, fence or fill in such excavations within 20 days of the date of such notice; failing which, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to see that such work is done by the City, and the costs thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which such excavation is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate, and shall be assessed and collected as a special tax. 
(b)  No excavation shall be left open for more than six months. The requirements of this subsection shall be in addition to the requirements of Subsection (a) of this section. In the event any such excavation remains open for more than six months, the Building Inspector, or other designated officer, shall order that a subfloor be installed which would completely cover the excavation or in the alternative that the excavation be filled to grade. The order shall be served upon the owner of the land or his or her agent and upon the holder of any encumbrance of record. If the owner of the land fails to comply with the order within 20 days after service thereof upon him, the Inspector of Buildings or other designated officer shall cause the excavation to be filled to grade, and the costs thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which such excavation is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate, and shall be assessed and collected as a special tax. The Building Inspector, in his or her discretion, may extend the time period for 30, 60 or 90 days, if, in his or her opinion, weather or other uncontrollable circumstances have unduly delayed the building upon the open excavation. 
(c)  The types of excavations to which Subsections (a) and (b) of this section apply include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Open excavations for basements; 
(2)  Open basement excavations in which foundations have been constructed, and upon which no building has been erected or from which a building has been removed; 
(3)  Any foundation in a basement excavation whether supporting a building or not, around which backfilling has not been completed; 
(4)  Any case where a foundation has failed, and any part of such foundation has fallen in, whether supporting a building or not. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.250)  
Sec. 34-148. - Razed building sites to be filled to grade. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall have or permit, on any premises owned or occupied by him or her or them, an open excavation to remain on the site where a building has been razed for over a period of six months. The site where a building has been razed must be filled to grade by crushed rock, sand or other fill acceptable to the City Building Inspector within a period of six months from the date the permit to raze had been issued, unless within that time actual construction has been commenced on the site. If such excavation has not been filled, construction commenced, or an extension granted by the Building Board of Appeals within the six-month period of time, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to have the excavation filled, and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the property as a special charge, and added to the next tax rolls against such property. 
(b)  This section is in addition to and shall take precedence over other provisions contained within this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.260)  
Sec. 34-149. - Double fees. 
(a)  Any person who commences any activities for which a permit is required under this article without first having applied for, paid the fee for and/or holding the required permit shall still be required to apply for, pay the fees for and hold the requisite permit before continuing any excavation or other activities upon the site. 
(b)  Such person shall also be required to pay double the fees otherwise applicable. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.270)  
Sec. 34-150. - Appeal of decisions. 
Any applicant, permittee, occupant or other person aggrieved by a decision of the City Engineer under this article may file a written appeal with the City Engineer requesting review before the City Plan Commission. An appeal shall be filed within ten days of the decision or direction. The Plan Commission shall commence a hearing within 60 days of the filing of the appeal. The determination of the Plan Commission shall be subject to review and approval by the City Council. Wis. Stats. ch. 68 shall not apply to this administrative appeal process. The appeal shall be signed and dated by a person authorized to appeal or to act on behalf of such person. The appeal form shall require such other information as the City Engineer may from time to time require. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.280)  
Sec. 34-151. - Severability. 
If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this section is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.290)  
Sec. 34-152. - Violations; penalty; injunctive and other relief. 
(a)  Any person, officer or principal of any person who violates, causes or permits to be violated any provision of this article, requirement or specification of the City or City Engineer, upon conviction thereof, pay a forfeiture to the City of not less than $50.00 nor more than $10,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail for not less than five days nor more than 90 days, or dealt with as otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  It shall be the ongoing responsibility of the offender to timely abate the violation as quickly as possible. 
(c)  Each and every violation constitutes a separate punishable offense. 
(d)  Each and every day that a violation continues constitutes a separate punishable offense. 
(e)  The City, in addition to the above penalties, may institute and seek injunctive relief through circuit court and/or may commence, maintain and prosecute one or more related or additional actions to achieve compliance and/or enjoin, abate or remove the violation; and the City Council may also revoke or suspend any permit issued hereunder. The City Engineer may deny the issuance of a permit to an applicant who has been convicted of a previous violation of this article, or who has violated or is violating any provision of this article, in the estimation of the City Engineer. 
(f)  If a permit were issued, such issuance shall not constitute a defense for the offender, not shall any error, oversight, previous non-enforcement of a similar or separate violation, or dereliction of duty on the part of any City official, board or body constitute any defense. 
(Code 1976, § 12.16.300)  
Secs. 34-153—34-172. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STREET CLOSINGS, OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Removal of highway encroachments, Wis. Stats. § 86.04; trees on and adjacent to highways, Wis. Stats. § 86.03. 
 
Sec. 34-173. - Prohibitions. 
No person shall, in any manner, close, obstruct, encroach upon, occupy, or encumber any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk, or part thereof, unless expressly authorized to do so by the Chief of Police or their designee, and then only in a manner consistent with this article and all other applicable laws. 
(Code 1976, § 12.20.010)  
Sec. 34-174. - Police Chief; general authorization. 
The Chief of Police or their designee, without prior notice, may order the closing, obstruction, encroachment, occupation or physical encumbrance of any public street, highway, alley, and sidewalk, or part thereof for City purposes or in the case of emergency. 
(Code 1976, § 12.20.020)  
Sec. 34-175. - Permit Procedure; private closure; Chief of Police. 
(a)  The Chief of Police or their designee may issue a permit for closure, obstruction, encroachment, occupation, or physical encumbrance of a definite and limited portion of any public street, highway, alleys, sidewalk, or part thereof, except federal and state marked highways. 
(b)  Application for a permit shall be in writing and shall: 
(1)  Specify, the name, address, telephone number, principal place of business, business address, and business telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  Specify the exact location and portion of the area affected; 
(3)  Set forth the exact time and date proposed for such closure, obstruction, encroachment, occupation or physical encumbrance; 
(4)  Specify all steps that will be taken by the applicant to ensure safety; 
(5)  Specify the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all abutting property owners and possessors; 
(6)  Certify that all abutting property owners and possessors were notified, describe when and how notice was provided, describe all objections, and by whom made; 
(7)  Indemnify the City from any and all liability of whatever kind and nature which arises from such closure, obstruction, occupation, or encumbrance. 
(c)  Applicants shall fully and completely indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all liability of whatever kind and nature for any and all personal injury, death, and property damage directly and indirectly arising from such closure, obstruction, occupation, or physical encumbrance. 
(d)  The Chief of Police or their designee may require a policy of insurance, bond, or other surety, naming the City as the insured, in an amount established, from time to time, by the Chief of Police, and with regard to the particular location, circumstances, and activities proposed. 
(e)  The Chief of Police or their designee may deny the application for a permit at any time and without cause, even though a complete application and full indemnification have been provided. 
(f)  The Chief of Police or their designee may withdraw permission and/or cancel a previously issued permit at any time and without cause, though cause includes, but is not limited to, violation of any provision of this or any other ordinance or order of the City Manager, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Director of Public Works, or their representatives, or for violation of any other law or lawful order. 
(Code 1976, § 12.20.030)  
Sec. 34-176. - No financial gain through concessions, sales, or similar activities; registration fee gains permitted for parades. 
No sales, concessions, or other financial gain activities may occur on any public street, alley, sidewalk, or highway right-of-way. Financial gain realized through the payment of a reasonable registration fee for parades, runs, walks, bicycle events and similar activities is permissible but only if the event and closure are otherwise permitted by the Chief of Police or their designee. 
(Code 1976, § 12.20.040)  
Sec. 34-177. - Responsibilities. 
An applicant who is issued a permit allowing him or her to close, obstruct, encroach upon, occupy or encumber any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk, or part thereof, shall: 
(1)  At all times maintain adequate, sufficient, and properly operating warning signs, lights, barricades, fences, and other warning and public safety devices, and such other warning and safety devices as may be required by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and any additional signage as required by Chief of Police, City Manager, Director of Public Works, Fire Chief, or any of their representatives; 
(2)  At all times maintain sufficient insurance, bond or surety in an amount and as required by the Chief of Police or their designee, naming the City as the insured; 
(3)  Take all precautions necessary to make the public property affected safe for all users; 
(4)  Take all precautions necessary to make the public property affected safe for all abutting property owners and possessors; 
(5)  Not later than the expiration date and time of the permit, remove all litter, rubbish, trash, garbage and refuse, clean, clear and make sightly the entire closure and all abutting private and public property affected by the applicant's activities, and return the property in the same or better condition than that in which it was at the time of closure; 
(6)  Immediately remove any and all obstructions as soon as the need for such obstruction ceases, but not later than the expiration date and time of the permit; 
(7)  Immediately and fully comply with any and all written and oral orders of the Chief of Police, City Manager, Fire Chief, Director of Public Works, or their representatives. 
(Code 1976, § 12.20.050)  
Sec. 34-178. - Appeal; City Council. 
Any interested party may appeal to the City Manager from the decision of the Chief of Police or their designee to issue or not to issue a permit under this article. Any interested party may then appeal to the City Council from the decision of the City Manager to issue or not to issue a permit under this article. For the purposes of this section, any interested party includes any applicant for such permit, and any owner or possessor of property abutting the portion of the public street, highway, alley, or sidewalk proposed to be affected. 
(Code 1976, § 12.20.060)  
Sec. 34-179. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense. Each day during which any violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. In default of payment of the forfeiture and/or costs, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 90 hours. 
(Code 1976, § 12.20.070)  
Secs. 34-180—34-196. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS, TREES AND SHRUBBERY 
 
Sec. 34-197. - Tree and shrubbery trimming and removal requirements, generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any tree standing within and/or abutting the limits of any street, or so located that any of its limbs extend over any street or sidewalk, to keep the same so trimmed that its lower limbs shall be at least seven feet above the sidewalk and 15 feet above the surface of the street over which it may extend. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any bushes, shrubbery or vegetation of any kind located or growing within and/or abutting the limits of any street, or located or growing so that any of its branches, leaves or other foliage extend over any street or sidewalk, to keep the same trimmed so they do not extend over any street or sidewalk. 
(c)  Every owner of a tree shall comply with all provisions set forth in Sections 22-132 through 22-141, as from time to time amended, updated, revised, or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 12.24.010; Ord. No. 80-204, § 1(part), 1980)  
Sec. 34-198. - Tree and shrubbery trimming and removal requirements; hazardous to passersby. 
(a)  It shall also be the duty of every owner of any tree, bush, shrubbery or vegetation of any kind which stands within the limits of any street, or which is so located or growing that if any of its limbs, branches or other foliage fell it might create a hazard to those lawfully using the street or sidewalk, to remove all trees, bushes, shrubbery, vegetation or limbs thereof which are so aged or decayed, or in such condition so as to create a hazard to those lawfully using the sidewalks or other portions of the street. 
(b)  Every owner of a tree shall comply with all provisions set forth in Sections 22-132 through 22-141, as from time to time amended, updated, revised, or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 12.24.020; Ord. No. 80-204, § 1(part), 1980)  
Sec. 34-199. - Objects obstructing traffic or vision of traffic unlawful. 
(a)  A vision triangle is all that land at a street intersection between the vision line and the street intersection. The vision line is determined by drawing a straight line from the curb or edge of pavement of one street to the curb or edge of pavement of the intersecting street, and such line shall run through two points, each such point being on the edge of the street right-of-way/property line and 25 feet back from the corner formed by the intersection of the two street right-of-way/property lines, as shown on the Vision Triangle Ordinance Diagram. No bushes or shrubbery nor any opaque or semi-opaque object is permitted in the vision triangle if such bush, shrub or object is over 30 inches above curb grade, except trees trimmed to the trunk and at least to seven feet above sidewalk grade. Official traffic signs and signals and utility poles are exempt from this restriction. 
(b)  At all intersections controlled by yield signs, stop signs, or traffic signals, only that portion of the vision triangle lying within the public street right-of-way shall apply. 
(c)  All buildings existing within the vision triangle at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 12.24.030)  
Sec. 34-200. - Trees and shrubbery obstructing vision of traffic signs unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to plant, cause to grow, allow to grow, or maintain any trees, bushes, shrubbery or vegetation of any kind which is an obstruction to the clear and complete vision of any traffic sign within the City. It shall be the duty of every owner of any such tree, bush, shrubbery or vegetation to remove such obstruction. 
(Code 1976, § 12.24.040; Ord. No. 80-204, § 1(part), 1980)  
Sec. 34-201. - Tree and shrubbery trimming and removal requirements; failure to comply; City to take action; cost. 
In case any person fails to comply with the requirements of Sections 34-197, 34-198, 34-199, and 34-200 within ten days after the Operations Director or City Engineer notifies him or her to do so, the Operations Director or City Engineer shall cause the necessary trimming and removal to be done and file with the City Clerk a statement of the costs thereof, and any and all costs thereof shall be charged against the real estate, shall be a lien upon the real estate, and shall be assessed and collected as a special tax. In addition, such owner may be prosecuted for violation of this article in case such owner does not comply within ten days after written notice is given by the Operations Director or City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 12.24.050; Ord. No. 80-204, § 1(part), 1980)  
Sec. 34-202. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, or any section herein referred to for which a specific penalty may not be provided, shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not exceeding $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and in default on payment of such penalty, any violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 12.24.060; Ord. No. 80-204, § 1(part), 1980)  
Sec. 34-203. - Maintenance of boulevards. 
Notwithstanding any other of the provisions of this article or any of the provisions of Article IX of this chapter, only the City shall have the right to plant and the responsibility to maintain, trim or remove, as needed, all trees, shrubbery, plants and lawns located on boulevards. The term "boulevard" means any grassed or planted area dedicated to the public and located between the edges of two roadways that together comprise a single street. 
(Code 1976, § 12.24.070; Ord. No. 81-222, § 1, 1981)  
Secs. 34-204—34-229. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - POLES AND WIRES 
 
Sec. 34-230. - Generally. 
The city engineer shall have authority to prescribe all rules and regulations governing construction and installation of all posts, poles, supports for poles, cross arms, cables, conduit and wires, both above and below ground, which may be used by any utility for telephone, communication or electric service. 
(Code 1976, § 12.28.010)  
Secs. 34-231—34-253. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - TERRACES 
 
Sec. 34-254. - Generally. 
The term "terrace," as used in this section, means all that portion of any public way, street or highway right-of-way that is not paved or surfaced for vehicular traffic, not including boulevards as defined in Section 34-203. Every owner of land in the City whose land abuts any terrace is required to maintain, or have maintained by his or her tenant or otherwise, the terrace directly abutting such land follows: 
(1)  If the terrace contains a sidewalk, the sidewalk shall be kept free and clear of snow and ice as required by Section 34-59, as from time to time amended, updated, revised, or renumbered. 
(2)  All that part of the terrace not covered by a sidewalk shall be kept free and clear of all noxious weeds, as defined in Section 22-204, shall not be paved, surfaced, or covered with any material which shall prevent the growth of plants, shall be maintained as a lawn, except in areas specifically approved by the City Engineer in writing, and shall maintain all public and private trees located thereon in the manner set forth in Article V of chapter 22 and Article VII of this chapter, as from time to time amended, updated, revised, or renumbered. Any portion of terrace not maintained in grass shall be at the property owner's sole risk and is not required to be restored in kind if impacted by a public works project. 
(Code 1976, §§ 12.32.010, 12.32.020; Ord. No. 80-194, § 2, 1980)  
Sec. 34-255. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of Section 34-254, or any section therein referred to for which a specific penalty may not be provided, shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not exceeding $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and in default of payment of such penalty, any violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 12.32.020)  
Secs. 34-256—34-273. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - GRADES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to establish the street grades, Wis. Stats. § 62.16. 
 
Sec. 34-274. - Datum plane established. 
(a)  There is established a datum plane to which all grade lines and elevations hereafter officially established shall be deemed to refer. Such datum plane, at all places within the limits of the City, shall be assumed to be a plane 100 feet below the cross cut on the upper surface of the stone monument heretofore planted in the Courthouse Park about one foot beneath the surface of the ground, and at a point which is about 22.7 feet easterly from the easterly line of Main Street, and 30 and one-tenth foot southerly from the southerly line of Court Street. 
(b)  The height of all grade lines and elevations hereafter ascertained and shown for official action thereon shall be shown in feet and decimal fractions thereof with reference to such datum plane. 
(Code 1976, § 12.36.010) 
State Law reference— Establishment of and damage caused by alteration of street grades, Wis. Stats. § 62.16.  
Sec. 34-275. - Benchmarks; records to be kept. 
The respective elevations of all benchmarks, with reference to the datum plane established by Section 34-274, shall be definitely ascertained, and a record of their locations and elevations made in a bench book, together with a record of such other permanent benchmarks or monuments as from time to time may be established, and such bench book shall be kept in the office of the City Engineer as a public record. 
(Code 1976, § 12.36.020)  
Sec. 34-276. - Injury to monuments prohibited. 
No person shall break, remove or displace any monuments or any other benchmark or any stake, stone, iron pin, or other permanent landmark. 
(Code 1976, § 12.36.030)  
Sec. 34-277. - Street grade adoption procedure. 
The City Engineer shall establish proposed grades for streets. In establishing or changing grades there shall be compliance with the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1976, § 12.36.040)  
Sec. 34-278. - Tabulation of proposed grades. 
When proposed grades are shown by tabulations, such tabulations shall show the proposed grade of the street at its intersection with all other streets or public ways, and shall also show the grade at points where the gradient changes. The grade line shall be a straight line between the grades shown on the tabulation, except at points of gradient change where the City Engineer may connect the grade lines with a suitable vertical curve, and the grades along the vertical curve shall be kept on file in the engineer's office. 
(Code 1976, § 12.36.050)  
Sec. 34-279. - Profile of proposed grades. 
When the proposed grades are shown by a profile, such profile shall show the proposed grade line along the centerline of the street, and also along the curblines when the curb grades differ materially in elevation from the grade for the centerline. 
(Code 1976, § 12.36.060)  
Sec. 34-280. - Curb and sidewalk grades established; adjustments allowed when. 
The grade for the top of curbings shall be the same as the grade for the street, except when for topographic or other reason the curb grade may be adjusted to meet conditions to avoid causing substantial injury to abutting properties. The grade for the sidewalk shall be six inches above the grade established for the street except as approved by the City Engineer. The sidewalk shall have a transverse slope toward the curb of one-fourth inch to one foot except as approved by the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 12.36.070)  
Sec. 34-281. - Record to be kept on file. 
Proposed grades which are adopted by the City Council shall be accurately recorded and kept as a public record in the office of the City Engineer. The City Clerk shall in each case certify the grade, stating the date of adoption by the Council. The City Engineer shall retain proposed grades as a public record. 
(Code 1976, § 12.36.080)  
Sec. 34-282. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not exceeding $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and in default of payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 12.36.090)  
Secs. 34-283—34-312. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS 
 
Sec. 34-313. - Names and limits of streets. 
The names and limits of the streets of the City shall be as shown on the map in the City Engineer's office entitled, "Janesville, Rock County, Wisconsin, from surveys and records in the office of the City Engineer, Street Numbering System," which map is drawn to the scale of approximately 400 feet to one inch. Said map may hereafter be supplemented or amended, and said map shall be the official street numbering map of the City; and the same shall be supplemented or amended from time to time and kept up-to-date by the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 12.40.010)  
Sec. 34-314. - Street numbers—Generally. 
(a)  The house numbering system of the City provides a separate number for every 22 feet of street frontage, except where block lengths, positions, or locations require adjustments therefrom. 
(b)  The following described line marks the division for the north and south streets: beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of West Court Street with the present west City limit line, or with any future west City limit line, and running thence east along the centerline of West Court Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of West Milwaukee Street; thence northeasterly along the centerlines of West Milwaukee Street and East Milwaukee Street to the north-south centerline of Section 29, Township 3 North, Range 13 East; thence south along the north-south centerline of said Section 29 and Section 32, Township 3-North, Range 13 East, to the centerline of Ruger Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Ruger Avenue to its point of intersection with the present east City limit line, or any future east City limit line. 
(c)  The east and west streets are divided by a line described as follows: beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of Beloit Avenue, which is the line between LaPrairie and Rock Townships, with the present south City limit line or with any future south City limit line, and running thence north along the centerline of Beloit Avenue to the northeast corner of Section 1, Township 2 North, Range 12 East; thence west along the north line of said Section 1 to the centerline of Rock River; thence northwesterly and northerly along the centerline of Rock River to the present north City limit line at the south line of Section 23, Township 3 North, Range 12 East; thence, for future reference, continuing northerly along the centerline of Rock River to the north line of said Section 23; thence east along the north lines of said Section 23 and Section 24, Township 3 North, Range 12 East to the centerline of U.S. Highway 51, which is the northerly extension of North Parker Drive; thence north along the centerline of U.S. Highway 51 to any future north City limit line, all as outlined on the Detail Numbering Map, Janesville, Wisconsin, and shown in detail on maps on file in the office of the City Engineer. 
(d)  House numbers on the north and south streets, and on the east and west streets begin respectively at the division lines set out in Subsections (b) and (c) of this section with number 1, and continue in numerical order away from said division lines in the frontages allotted for each number as set out in Subsections (b) and (c) of this section, and with the even numbers assigned to the right and the odd numbers assigned to the left, proceeding in a direction away from said division starting lines. Where number 1 as a starting number does not conform with the general pattern of numbers in blocks of relative position, the starting numbers have been and may be adjusted as shown on the official map described in Section 34-313. 
(Code 1976, § 12.40.020)  
Sec. 34-315. - Street numbers—To be displayed. 
Every store, shop, hotel, dwelling, or other building used for residence or business purposes shall be numbered with conspicuous figures not less than 3½ inches long and 2¼ inches wide. Such numbers shall be placed over the centers of front entrance doors if such place is conspicuous or upon some conspicuous and appropriate part of that side of the building or other permanent structure fronting on the street, which such dwelling, house or other aforementioned building is numbered according to such plan. 
(Code 1976, § 12.40.030)  
Sec. 34-316. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person, partnership, firm or corporation, or any officer or other principal of any corporation or business, who violates or causes to be violated any provision of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof shall be committed to the Rock County jail for a term of not more than 60 days. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate the violation forthwith. 
(c)  Each and every day that a violation continues constitutes a separate violation. 
(d)  In addition to the above penalties, the City may institute and seek injunctive, mandamus, abatement and/or any other appropriate legal and/or equitable action, proceeding or relief to prevent, enjoin, abate, remove and/or correct the violation. 
(e)  In addition to the above penalties, the City Council may suspend and/or revoke any license or permit of the violator. 
(Code 1976, § 12.40.040)  
Secs. 34-317—34-335. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - PROHIBITED PRACTICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Camping on highways prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 86.025; play vehicles prohibited from use on roadways, Wis. Stats. § 346.78; riding bicycles on sidewalks, Wis. Stats. § 346.804; miscellaneous prohibited or restricted acts on highways, Wis. Stats. § 346.94. 
 
Sec. 34-336. - Ball playing. 
No person shall engage in playing any game of ball in any street. 
(Code 1976, § 12.44.010)  
Sec. 34-337. - Racing. 
No person shall engage in racing any motor vehicle, including motorcycle, motorbike or motor scooter, bicycle, horse or other animal in any street within the City. 
(Code 1976, § 12.44.020)  
Sec. 34-338. - Horses not be left loose. 
No person in charge of any horse or other beast of burden shall leave the same loose and unattended in any street. 
(Code 1976, § 12.44.030)  
Sec. 34-339. - Hitchhiking. 
No person shall catch or attempt to catch a ride upon any motor vehicle, including motorcycle, motorbike or motor scooter, bicycle, wagon, cutter, sleigh, or other vehicle being driven along any street within the City. 
(Code 1976, § 12.44.040)  
Sec. 34-340. - Coasting on sled, sleigh or skis. 
No person shall coast upon any sled, sleigh or skis upon any sidewalk. 
(Code 1976, § 12.44.050)  
Sec. 34-341. - Leaves and grass on public streets. 
(a)  Leaves. It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any leaves on any street or highway before October 1 or after the City has collected, or caused to be collected, leaves from the applicable street during the City's annual fall leaf collection program. 
(b)  Grass and other lawn debris. It is unlawful to place or cause to be placed any grass, grass clippings, or other lawn debris on any street or highway at anytime. 
(Code 1976, § 12.44.060; Ord. No. 84-363, § 1, 1984)  
Sec. 34-342. - Depositing refuse on streets. 
No person shall place any filth, ashes, dirt, debris, straw, paper, litter, or other refuse or material in any street, alley, sidewalk, or public property, or so haul any ashes, gravel, stones, or any other material on any street, alley, sidewalk, or public property, so as to allow any part thereof to fall upon such street, alley, sidewalk, or public property. 
(Code 1976, § 12.44.070; Ord. No. 86-471, § 2, 1986)  
Sec. 34-343. - Depositing snow on streets, alleys, sidewalks; prohibited. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation located within the Central Business District shall, in any manner, dump, place, or deposit onto any public street, highway or sidewalk, snow removed from property within the property line. This section shall not apply to the removal of snow from any sidewalk outside the property line. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation located outside of the Central Business District shall, in any manner, dump, place or deposit onto any public street, highway, alley or sidewalk, snow removed from property within the property line, and snow removed from driveways, driveway approaches and sidewalk areas. 
(Code 1976, § 12.44.080)  
Sec. 34-344. - Camping in streets; public property. 
No person shall camp upon or use any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public property as a camping ground, or otherwise so as to obstruct or interfere with travel or to annoy travelers thereon, except as permitted by the City Manager. 
(Code 1976, § 12.44.090; Ord. No. 86-471, § 4, 1986)  
Sec. 34-345. - Pets prohibited in City buildings. 
(a)  No person may possess or bring any pet or animal into or upon any City building at any time. 
(b)  Exempt from the prohibitions in Subsection (a) of this section are service animals that are required to be accommodated by the Americans with Disabilities Act, and law enforcement dogs used or animals being held for official police business. 
(Code 1976, § 12.44.095; Ord. No. 2018-723, § II, 6-25-2018 )  
Sec. 34-346. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a forfeiture not to exceed $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and in default of payment shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days. Each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 12.44.100; Ord. No. 86-471, § 5, 1986)  
Secs. 34-347—34-365. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— City authority to regulate heavy traffic, Wis. Stats. § 349.17; local authority to modify weight limitations on highways under certain conditions, Wis. Stats. § 349.15 et seq.; use of certain tire equipment on the highway prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 347.45. 
 
Sec. 34-366. - Use of vehicles with lugs. 
No person shall drive, operate, propel or haul any machine or vehicle whatsoever having wheels with spikes, lugs, or ridges, or having the wheels on such machine or vehicle tied, chained or locked, upon, across or along any street paved with asphalt, asphaltic macadam, asphaltic concrete, macadam, or other material susceptible to injury by such wheels; provided, however, that if the reasonable use or operation of such machine or vehicle is impossible without crossing or passing along any such street, the City Manager may authorize the use of such street or portion thereof, but only upon condition that the pavement shall be planked or otherwise covered to prevent injury from such wheels. 
(Code 1976, § 12.48.010)  
Sec. 34-367. - Vehicle weight restrictions—Generally. 
No person shall operate a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 16,000 pounds (as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01) on any street or highway, unless such street or highway is designated as a through arterial street in Section 38-80, except as provided in this section. 
(1)  A person operating a vehicle with a gross weight rating in excess of 16,000 pounds but less than 30,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating may make pickups or deliveries at location not on a through arterial street, provided that such operated vehicle leaves from and returns to a through arterial street at a point nearest to his or her immediate destination, unless the destination for the next successive pickup or delivery is closer to the location of the past immediate pickup or delivery. 
(2)  A person operating a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 30,000 pounds shall be subject to the requirements of Subsection (1) of this section, and in addition thereto shall make only one delivery or pickup on each deviation. The term "deviation" means an interval in which a vehicle leaves and returns to a through arterial street by the shortest possible route. 
(3)  Vehicles owned by federal or state governments, or political subdivisions thereof shall not be restricted as set forth in this section. 
(4)  The following vehicles are also exempt from the maximum weight restrictions in this section: 
a.  Human service vehicles, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(23g) as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
b.  Registered vehicles bearing antique license plates issued by the State of Wisconsin. 
c.  Registered vehicles bearing collector license plates issued by the State of Wisconsin. 
d.  Registered vehicles bearing hobbyist license plates issued by the State of Wisconsin. 
e.  Medium-duty wrecker or towing trucks or flatbed trucks that: 
1.  Are responding to or from a tow location; or 
2.  Are traveling to or from the residential address of the operator for temporary off-street parking purposes that: 
(i)  Is on-call through the City of Janesville "No Preference Tow Rotation;" 
(ii)  Does not have a towed vehicle attached to or at the property; 
(iii)  Is parked in the residential driveway; 
(iv)  Is not encroaching onto the sidewalk or public right-of-way at such residential location; 
(v)  The address of the on-call employee has been previously provided to the City of Janesville; and 
(vi)  An illegal home occupation is not being conducted at such residential location. 
(Code 1976, § 12.48.020)  
Sec. 34-368. - Vehicle weight restrictions—Additional through arterial streets designated. 
For purposes of Section 34-367, in addition to those streets listed in Section 38-80, any street within the area bounded by Centerway, Court Street, and Division Street and its extensions shall be considered as a through arterial street. 
(Code 1976, § 12.48.030)  
Sec. 34-369. - Vehicle weight restrictions—Additional. 
The City Manager may establish such additional weight restrictions as may be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 12.48.040)  
Sec. 34-370. - Vehicle weight restrictions—Vehicles traveling through City. 
No person shall operate a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 16,000 pounds (as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01) on any street other than federal or state trunk highways when making trips through the City. 
(Code 1976, § 12.48.050)  
Sec. 34-371. - Seasonal weight limitations; authority. 
The officer in charge of maintenance of City streets may, during the period from January l to May l, impose weight limitations on any City street, except a state or federal highway, because of the condition of weakness of such highway. Such limitations shall prohibit any motor vehicle bearing a license which allows more than 8,000 pounds of gross weight to be transported from using such street. Such limitation shall only be enforceable when signs are posted informing highway users of the limitation. Any person violating any imposed weight limitation under this section shall be penalized pursuant to this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 12.48.070; Ord. No. 74-393, § 1, 1974)  
Sec. 34-372. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, except Section 34-371, or any section herein referred to for which a specific penalty may not be provided, shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not exceeding $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and in default of payment of such penalty, any violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 12.48.080)  
Secs. 34-373—34-404. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - BRIDGES 
 
Sec. 34-405. - Assemblage of people prohibited. 
The assembling of persons upon any bridge in such numbers as to obstruct travel thereon is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 12.52.010)  
Sec. 34-406. - Defacement prohibited. 
No person shall sit upon any railing of any bridge or post any handbill on or deface or remove or damage any part of any bridge. 
(Code 1976, § 12.52.020)  
Sec. 34-407. - Private approaches to be kept safe. 
All private walks and other approaches to buildings which adjoin any sidewalk of any bridge, and are left open for public travel, shall, by the owners of the same, be kept in good repair and safe condition, and shall be under the supervision and control of the City Engineer to the same extent as are other sidewalks. 
(Code 1976, § 12.52.030)  
Sec. 34-408. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not exceeding $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and in default of payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 12.52.040)  
Secs. 34-409—34-429. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - RAILROADS AND RAILROAD CROSSINGS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Safety devices at railroad crossings, generally, Wis. Stats. § 195.26. 
 
Sec. 34-430. - Signal lights. 
No locomotive engine, train or car shall be driven along any track of any railroad in the nighttime without having upon the advancing end of the same a conspicuous light. 
(Code 1976, § 12.56.010)  
Sec. 34-431. - Running backward; requirements. 
No locomotive engine or train shall be driven backward, and no detached car or cars shall be run upon any track of any such railroad without having stationed upon the advancing end of the same a person whose duty it shall be to keep a lookout ahead and give warning of the approach of the same to all persons who otherwise might be endangered thereby, and to stop such engine, train or car when necessary to avert danger, and also to give a danger signal to the locomotive engineer in cases where the car upon which such man is stationed is attached to an engine. 
(Code 1976, § 12.56.020)  
Sec. 34-432. - Whistle warning. 
The engine whistle shall not be sounded, except as a warning to avert danger or when approaching crossings. 
(Code 1976, § 12.56.030)  
Sec. 34-433. - Planking or paving at street crossings. 
(a)  At crossings of streets at grade by railway company tracks where the street which is crossed is not paved in any manner, the railway company shall cover the whole surface of its right-of-way, to the width of the traveled portion of the street, either with planking not less than three inches in thickness or with suitable paving. Where the street which is crossed by the railway is paved, the railway shall cover the whole surface of its right-of-way to the width of the paved or surfaced portion of the street so crossed with paving or surfacing comparable to the paving or surfacing on the street so crossed. The railway shall maintain such planking, paving or surfacing in good condition. The upper surface of such planking, paving or surfacing shall be on the level with the tops of the adjacent rails of the track or tracks of such railway company. 
(b)  In cases in which a railway track parallels or runs along a sidewalk so that any portion of the railway right-of-way is lower than the sidewalk grade and lies within two feet of the nearest edge of the sidewalk, the railway shall comply with the requirements of this section by filling the excavation with a suitable paving to the level of the adjacent sidewalk from the nearest edge of the sidewalk to the nearest rail. 
(Code 1976, § 12.56.040)  
Sec. 34-434. - Spur tracks in streets. 
No person or corporation shall lay any ties or rails for the purposes of a branch spur, switch or sidetrack of a railroad within the limits of any street without the consent of the City Engineer. Any person or corporation desiring to construct any such track within the limits of any street shall, before commencing the construction of the same, petition the City Engineer for permission to do so, and shall file with such petition a map showing the proposed location of such track, and in such petition state the purpose for which it is desired to use such track, and the manner in which it is proposed to construct the same. 
(Code 1976, § 12.56.050)  
Sec. 34-435. - Electric danger signals; flagperson at crossings. 
Every railroad shall establish and maintain electric danger or warning signals at all places ordered by the public service commission, and of a type ordered by such commission, and shall maintain flagperson or other type of protection at such times and places as shall be ordered by such commission, and shall take all steps necessary to make all crossings of highways by railroads safe. No such warning sign shall be placed in any portion of the traveled highway. 
(Code 1976, § 12.56.060)  
Sec. 34-436. - Railway engines and cars stopped in streets unlawful. 
(a)  It is unlawful to stop any railroad train, locomotive or railroad car upon or across any highway or street crossing, or to cause obstruction of vehicular traffic on public streets at street crossings by stopping, leaving, standing, switching, or otherwise maintaining constant railway use at such crossing longer than five continuous minutes, or for more than seven minutes out of any 12 continuous minutes. 
(b)  Any conductor, engineer, switchperson, brakeman or other employee or agent in charge of such offending railroad locomotive or car, or otherwise responsible therefor, who violates the provisions of this section shall pay the City a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such violation, plus the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment shall be imprisoned not less than five days nor more than 15 days in the county jail. A violation for each 12-minute period constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 12.56.070; Ord. No. 81-229, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 34-437. - Violation; penalty. 
Any railroad company which fails to comply with the requirements of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City, a penalty of not to exceed $100.00 for each such failure or violation, together with the costs of prosecution, and each day's continuance of such failure or violation constitutes a separate offense. Any other person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not to exceed $100.00 for each such violation, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment shall be imprisoned not to exceed 30 days. Section 34-436 is excluded from the provisions of this penalty. 
(Code 1976, § 12.56.080)  
Secs. 34-438—34-457. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - FINANCIAL GAINS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY NOT ALLOWED 
 
Sec. 34-458. - Financial gain on public property not allowed; exceptions. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically allowed by some other provision of these ordinances, no person, firm, corporation, society, or organization shall use any public property, public park, park facility, bathing beach, playground, greenbelt, or open space for the purpose of financial gain, return or any types or business or financial activity. 
(b)  Exempted from the provisions of this article are those organizations and activities which have been granted specific permission by the City Council, or the Recreation Director in the manner set forth in this article, those concessions operating under the authority of the park division, and those activities conducted within the Janesville ice arena, golf courses, and tennis facilities which have the permission of the City Council. 
(c)  The use or closure of any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right of way is subject to the approval, permit, and other requirements of the Chief of Police as set forth in Article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 12.62.010)  
Sec. 34-459. - Financial gain; definition. 
The term "financial gain," for the purposes of this article, includes, but is not limited to, events or activities at which any type of concession or sales occur, a registration fee is charged, an admission fee is paid, or donations are solicited. 
(Code 1976, § 12.62.020)  
Sec. 34-460. - Permission request procedure. 
(a)  Applicants requesting permission to use public property for financial gain shall complete and file a written application and require supporting documents with the Recreation Director in such form, content, and manner as the Recreation Director may, from time to time, prescribe. 
(b)  The Recreation Director or his or her designee may grant or deny financial gain permission under this article without the necessity of further City Council review, action, or approval to those persons, firms, corporations, societies, organizations and activities who currently satisfy each and every requirement set forth in this article. Any application denied by the Recreation Director may be appealed to the City Council. 
(c)  The City Council may affirm, amend, or modify any application denial decision by the Recreation Director and may withdraw permission and/or revoke any issued permit at any time and without cause, though cause may include, but is not limited to, violation of this section, any 
other ordinance or law, or any order of the Chief of Police, Recreation Director, Fire Chief, City Manager, Public Works Director, or their representatives. 
(Code 1976, § 12.62.030)  
Sec. 34-461. - Indemnification requirement. 
Applicants shall fully and completely indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all liability of whatever kind and nature for any and all personal injury, death, and property damage directly and indirectly arising from such use. 
(Code 1976, § 12.62.040)  
Sec. 34-462. - Insurance/bond requirement. 
The Recreation Director may require a policy of insurance, bond, or other surety, naming the City as the insured, in an amount established, from time to time, by the Recreation Director, and with regard to the particular location, circumstances, and activities proposed. 
(Code 1976, § 12.62.050)  
Sec. 34-463. - Responsibilities; applicant. 
An applicant who is issued a permit allowing him or her to use public property, public park, park facility, bathing beach, playground, greenbelt, or open space for the purpose of financial gain shall: 
(1)  At all times maintain adequate, sufficient, and properly operating warning signs, lights, barricades, fences, and other warning and public safety devices, trash receptacles, and such other warning and safety devices as may be required by the Chief of Police, City Manager, Director of Public Works, Fire Chief, or any of their representatives. 
(2)  Take all precautions necessary to make the public property affected safe for all users. 
(3)  Take all precautions necessary to make the public property affected safe for all abutting and nearby property owners and possessors. 
(4)  Not later than the expiration date and time of the permit, remove all litter, rubbish, trash, garbage and refuse, clean, clear and make sightly the entire closure and all abutting private and public property affected by the applicant's activities, and return the property in the same or better condition than that in which it was at the time of closure. 
(5)  Immediately cease all use and remove any and all obstructions as soon as the need for such obstruction ceases, but not later than the expiration date and time of the permit. 
(6)  Immediately and fully comply with any and all written and oral order of the Chief of Police, City Manager, Fire Chief, Recreation Director, Director of Public Works, or their representatives. 
(Code 1976, § 12.62.060)  
Sec. 34-464. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall pay to the City a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a separate and additional offense. In default of the payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not less than one day nor more than 30 days for each offense. 
(Code 1976, § 12.62.070)  
Secs. 34-465—34-481. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - PUBLIC WATERS 
 
Sec. 34-482. - Rock River—Boundaries. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the boundaries of Rock River, which lie between the Fourth Avenue Bridge and the north line of the Court Street Bridge are located and established as shown by red lines on the plat of Rock River made by C.V. Kerch, City Engineer, and filed in the office of the City Clerk on April 2, 1906, with the exception that the boundary line on the west bank of Rock River from the south line of the Milwaukee Street Bridge to the north line of Dodge Street extended easterly is as shown on a map filed in the office of the City Clerk on July 12, 1943, attached to Ordinance 71 passed July 12, 1943. The boundaries of Rock River between the north line of the Court Street Bridge and the south line of the original Racine Street Bridge are as shown on a map filed in the office of the City Clerk on January 20, 1934, attached to Ordinance 8 passed January 15, 1934. The boundaries of Rock River located near the sewage disposal plant are as follows: that portion of the north river boundary of Rock river lying between the Wisconsin Power and Light Company's lower plant No. 2 and the west line of fractional Lot 2, Section 2, Township 2, Range 12 East, described as follows: commencing at the north one-quarter corner of Section 2-2-12, thence south along the north-and-south centerline of said section 1514.92 feet; thence south 87°33' west 383.85 feet to a point of beginning; thence westerly continuing along the same line 412.2 feet to a point 250 feet south of the centerline of the Chicago and Northwestern Railway by the shortest line between those points, thence on a line parallel to and 250 feet southerly of the centerline of the Chicago and Northwestern Railway south 69°18' west to the intersection of the west line of said fractional Lot 2, all as shown by a map filed in the office of the City Clerk on October 16, 1933, attached to Ordinance 6 passed December 4, 1933. The boundaries of Rock River, easterly shore, between Centerway and Traxler Park are as follows: beginning 4.50 feet westerly from the northwesterly corner of the easterly abutment of the Centerway Bridge, which point is 135 feet westerly from the westerly right-of-way line of North Main Street, as measured along the northerly right-of-way line of Centerway, and running thence northwesterly in a direct line 510.90 feet, more or less, to the northwesterly corner of the easterly abutment of the railway bridge used jointly by the Chicago and Northwestern Railway and the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railway, which latter point is 175 feet, more or less, westerly from the westerly right-of-way line of North Main Street; thence continuing northwesterly in a direct line 820.10 feet, more or less, to a point on the southerly line of vacated Sheldon Street, which latter point is 235.63 feet westerly from the westerly line of North Main Street, as measured along the southerly line of said vacated Sheldon Street; thence continuing northwesterly in a direct line 442.30 feet, more or less, to a point on the southerly line of Traxler Park, which line is also the westerly extension of the southerly right-of-way line of Hyatt Street, said latest point being 432.63 feet westerly from the easterly right-of-way line of North Main Street, as measured along the southerly line of Traxler Park, and which is the terminus of said bulkhead line, all as shown on a map filed in the office of the City Clerk annexed to Ordinance 179 adopted May 16, 1966. The lines of ordinary watermark in said river shall be deemed its boundaries at all other places within the City. 
(b)  Bulkhead line along the northwesterly shore: commencing at the point of intersection of the centerline of Afton Road, a surveyed and dedicated highway, with the west line of Section 2, Township 2 North, Range 12 East of the 4th Principal Meridian, said west line being the existing City limit line at this location, and running thence south 1°10'25" east along the west line of said Section 2, 405.5 feet to a point on the northwesterly shore of-Rock River from the place of beginning of this bulkhead line description; thence north 51°28'05" east 399.7 feet; thence north 68°39'15" east 1,380 feet to a terminal point at the westerly end of the sewage treatment plant site. 
(c)  Bulkhead line along the southeasterly and easterly shore: beginning at a point on the southeasterly shore of Rock River, which point is south 21°20'45" east 275 feet from the terminal point described in Subsection (b) of this section, and running thence south 66°44'42" west 750.4 feet; thence south 64°16'45" west 526.3 feet; thence south 53°44'45" west 400 feet; thence south 51°28'05" west 259.6 feet; which latter point is south 1°10'25" east 427.7 feet from the place of beginning of the bulkhead line on the northwesterly shore described in Subsection (b) of this section; thence continuing south 51°28'05" west 538.8 feet; thence south 60°35'35" west 382.7 feet; thence south 54°31'20" west 80 feet; thence 120.03 feet along a circular arc to the left, said arc having a central angle of 32°47'50," a radius of 209.70 feet, a tangent length of 61.71 feet; and a main chord of 118.40 feet bearing south 38°97'25" west; thence south 21°43'30" west 1,042.5 feet; thence south 39°09'05" west 1,079.5 feet; thence south 24°16'10" west 389.4 feet; thence south 46°18'35" west 467.3 feet; thence south 33°08'55" west 200.6 feet; thence south 10°43'30" west 355.2 feet; thence south 6°42'20" west 201.2 feet; thence south 5°45'35" east 498.7 feet; thence south 0°54'40" east 552.3 feet; thence south 16°31'45" west 259.3 feet; thence south 14°45'50" west 276.6 feet; thence south 4°00'30" west 811.7 feet; thence south 3°34'30" west 55 feet, more or less, to the south line of the north half of the south half of Section 10, Township 2 North, Range 12 East of the 4th Principal Meridian, which is the existing southerly City limit line at this location. 
(Code 1976, § 12.64.010)  
Sec. 34-483. - Rock River—Construction and refuse unlawful when. 
No person shall drive any piles, lay any foundation, construct any wall, or build or maintain any building, platform or other structure in or over any part of Rock River without the permission of the Council. No person shall place or deposit in said river any earth, stone, ashes, paper boxes, tin cans, glass products, broken glass, oil or petroleum products, brush, refuse, rubbish or other substance whatsoever tending to pollute said river, or to obstruct its flow or to render the same unsightly or unsafe. 
(Code 1976, § 12.64.020)  
Sec. 34-484. - Rock River—Sanitary regulations. 
No person shall erect or maintain any privy on the bank or over Rock River, or any headrace connected therewith, or drain any sanitary sewer in said river in such manner that filth from such privy or sewage from such sanitary sewer shall fall, flow or drain into said river at any place within the City limits. No person shall place or deposit in Rock River, or in any headrace connecting therewith, any carcass, carrion, offal or other substance which is, or is likely to become unwholesome or offensive. 
(Code 1976, § 12.64.030)  
Sec. 34-485. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of Sections 34-482 through 34-484 shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such penalty shall be imprisoned not to exceed 90 days. 
(Code 1976, § 12.64.040)  
Sec. 34-486. - Rock River and Lions Beach Lake—Regulation applicability. 
The provisions of Sections 34-487 and 34-488 shall apply to that part of Rock River which is within the City limits, and to Lions Beach Lake. 
(Code 1976, § 12.64.050)  
Sec. 34-487. - Rock River and Lions Beach Lake—State boating and water safety laws adopted. 
The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to water traffic, boats, boating, and related water activities in the following enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed or the punishment for violation of said statutes, are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by the provision of any statute incorporated by reference herein is required or prohibited by this section. 
(1)  Wis. Stats. § 30.50—Definitions. 
(2)  Wis. Stats. § 30.51—Operation of unnumbered boats prohibited; exemptions. 
(3)  Wis. Stats. § 30.53—Identification number to be displayed on boat; certificate to be carried. 
(4)  Wis. Stats. § 30.60—Classification of motorboats. 
(5)  Wis. Stats. § 30.61—Lighting equipment. 
(6)  Wis. Stats. § 30.62—Other equipment. 
(7)  Wis. Stats. § 30.64—Patrol boats exempt from certain traffic regulations. 
(8)  Wis. Stats. § 30.65—Traffic rules. 
(9)  Wis. Stats. § 30.66—Speed restrictions. (Paragraph (1) only adopted.) 
(10)  Wis. Stats. § 30.67—Accidents and accident reports. (Paragraphs (1) and (3)(a)only.) 
(11)  Wis. Stats. § 30.68—Prohibited operation. 
(12)  Wis. Stats. § 30.69—Water skiing. 
(13)  Wis. Stats. § 30.71—Boats equipped with toilets. 
(14)  Wis. Stats. § 30.76—Deposit of money to obtain release from arrest. 
(Code 1976, § 12.64.060)  
Sec. 34-488. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any provision adopted by reference in Section 34-487, which is described in either Wis. Stats. § 30.67(l) or 30.68(l), shall be fined not more than $200.00 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, unless the fine is paid sooner. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating any other provision of Sections 34-486 and 34-487 shall be fined not more than $50.00 for the first offense, or not more than $100.00 on conviction of the same offense a second or subsequent time within one year. In case such fine is not paid, the person convicted may be imprisoned not more than 30 days in case of the first offense, and 90 days in case of the second offense, unless in each instance the fine is paid sooner. 
(Code 1976, § 12.64.070)  
Chapter 36 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinances governing the subdivision or other division of land, Wis. Stats. § 236.45. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. The regulations in this chapter are designed to lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to further the orderly layout and use of land; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public requirements; and to facilitate the further resubdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. These regulations are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of the City with a view of conserving the value of the buildings placed upon land, providing the best possible environment for human habitation, and for encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City. 
(Prior Code, § 24.01; Code 1976, § 17.04.010)  
Sec. 36-2. - Scope. 
(a)  Any division of land within the City or its extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction shall be surveyed, and a plat or certified survey thereof approved and recorded as required by this chapter and Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order; 
(2)  Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages or easements; 
(3)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if the parcel transferred is less than 50 feet wide at the building setback line, and if the resulting lots are not reduced below the minimum sizes of new lots required by this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 24.02; Code 1976, § 17.04.020; Ord. No. 74-390, § 1, 1974)  
Sec. 36-3. - General requirements. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall divide any land located within the City limits, or within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the City, which shall result in a subdivision or certified survey, as defined in this chapter, without complying with the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The proposed subdivision or certified survey shall take into consideration the following: 
(1)  All applicable ordinances of the City, and of governing jurisdictions; 
(2)  The master plans of the City and area, and such plans as the City Planner may be preparing for the Plan Commission; 
(3)  The official map of the City, and the adopted Janesville Area Long Range Transportation Plan as amended from time to time; 
(4)  The rules of the State Board of Health relating to lot size and lot elevation if the subdivision is not served by a public sewer and provision for such service has not been made; 
(5)  The rules of the State Highway Commission relating to safety of access and the preservation of the public interest and investment in the streets in the subdivision, or any lot contained therein abutting on a state trunk highway or connecting street; 
(6)  Whenever a parcel to be platted or divided by certified survey embraces any part of a street, highway or greenbelt designated in the master plan or official map, such part of such proposed public way shall be dedicated by the subdivider in the location, and at a width indicated in the approved Janesville Area Long Range Transportation Plan, or the master neighborhood plan. 
(Code 1976, § 17.04.030)  
Secs. 36-4—36-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 36-25. - Alley. 
Alley means a strip of land, dedicated to public use, primarily to provide vehicular service access to the side or rear properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(1); Code 1976, § 17.08.010)  
Sec. 36-26. - Certified survey. 
Certified survey means a map intending to create parcels of land or building sites. In any area zoned residence district, not more than four parcels may be created by certified survey in any five-year period from the same lot, parcel, or tract of land. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(2); Code 1976, § 17.08.020; Ord. No. 74-387, § 2, 1974)  
Sec. 36-27. - City datum. 
City datum means elevations relative to monument at East Court Street and South Main Street, which is elevation 100.00 and 776.58 feet above sea level (Sandy Hook Datum). 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(3); Code 1976, § 17.08.030)  
Sec. 36-28. - Commission. 
Commission means the City Plan Commission established in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(4); Code 1976, § 17.08.040)  
Sec. 36-29. - Cul-de-sac. 
Cul-de-sac means a local street with only one outlet, and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(5); Code 1976, § 17.08.050)  
Sec. 36-30. - Easement. 
Easement means a grant by the owner of the use of land by the public, corporations, or persons for specific uses and purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(6); Code 1976, § 17.08.060)  
Sec. 36-31. - Easement, scenic. 
Scenic easement means a public easement for the purpose of preserving natural scenic-beauty by restricting construction. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(7); Code 1976, § 17.08.070)  
Sec. 36-32. - Easement, utility. 
Utility easement means a public easement for the purpose of locating utilities such as electricity, telephone, gas, water service, cable TV, and the right to maintain such. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(8); Code 1976, § 17.08.080)  
Sec. 36-33. - Extraterritorial plat jurisdiction. 
Extra-territorial plat jurisdiction means the unincorporated area within three miles of the City limits, but does not include any area in which the City Council has specifically waived its right to approve plats and has filed with the register of deeds a map or legal description describing the area in which approval is waived. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(9); Code 1976, § 17.08.090; Ord. No. 81-255, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 36-34. - Floodplain. 
Floodplain means the land adjacent to a body of water which has been or may be covered by floodwaters. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(10); Code 1976, § 17.08.100)  
Sec. 36-35. - Frontage road. 
Frontage road means a road auxiliary to and located parallel to an arterial street for control of access and for service to abutting properties. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(11); Code 1976, § 17.08.110)  
Sec. 36-36. - Greenbelt. 
Greenbelt means an open area of land the primary purpose of which is to carry storm sewer on the ground surface in lieu of an enclosed storm sewer. Greenbelts may serve multiple purposes including vehicular or pedestrian traffic, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewer, stormwater or floodwater retention basins, park development, or other related uses. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(12); Code 1976, § 17.08.120)  
Sec. 36-37. - Janesville Area Long Range Transportation Plan. 
Janesville Area Long Range Transportation Plan means the long range transportation plan which encompasses the City and the Towns of Janesville, Harmony, La Prairie and Rock. 
(Code 1976, § 17.08.130)  
Sec. 36-38. - Lot. 
Lot means an area of land less than 15 acres resulting from the division of a tract of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(13); Code 1976, § 17.08.140)  
Sec. 36-39. - Lot, flag. 
Flag lots means a parcel of land which, due to unusual conditions, cannot meet the requirements for frontage on a dedicated street. Where such conditions exist, the lot may be provided access by way of a "stem" extending from the main body of the lot to the street. Said "stem" shall be a part of the subject lot, and not a separate parcel or an easement across adjoining property. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(14); Code 1976, § 17.08.150)  
Sec. 36-40. - Master plan. 
Master plan means the comprehensive plan for guiding and shaping the growth and development of the Janesville area, including all of its component parts as set forth in the various maps, plats, charts, and written matter adopted and certified by the City Council and City Plan Commission. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(16); Code 1976, § 17.08.160)  
Sec. 36-41. - Official map. 
Official map means the map indicating the location, width and/or extent of existing and proposed streets, highways, parkways, parks and playgrounds as adopted by the City Council pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(6). 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(17); Code 1976, § 17.08.170)  
Sec. 36-42. - Planned development. 
Planned development means a development pattern and technique wherein structures are arranged in closely related groups to enable building at higher densities in certain areas while preserving natural features in others. A planned development would normally incorporate private common open space areas and give emphasis to the pedestrian as opposed to the automobile in its design. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(18); Code 1976, § 17.08.180)  
Sec. 36-43. - Preliminary plat. 
Preliminary plat means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision or certified survey as described in Sections 36-69, 36-71, and 36-105 through 36-107, submitted to the secretary of the City Plan Commission for the purposes of preliminary consideration prior to the final plats. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(19); Code 1976, § 17.08.190)  
Sec. 36-44. - Reserve strip. 
Reserve strip means a strip of land reserved mainly for the purpose of controlling access to a public street. It is also referred to as a spite strip. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(20); Code 1976, § 17.08.200)  
Sec. 36-45. - Street. 
Street means a public way for pedestrian and vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, arterial, collector, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated. 
(1)  Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the system of major streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development, and streets for the circulation within such a development, and as designated as collectors on the functional classification map in the Janesville Area Long Range Transportation Plan. 
(2)  Frontage roads are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to major streets and highways, and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(3)  Major streets and highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic and are designated as arterials on the functional classification map in the Janesville Area Long Range Transportation Plan. 
(4)  Minor streets are those which are primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(21); Code 1976, § 17.08.210)  
Sec. 36-46. - Subdivider. 
Subdivider means a person or certified survey or plat. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(22); Code 1976, § 17.08.220)  
Sec. 36-47. - Subdivision. 
(a)  Except as provided in Subsection (b) of this section, the term "subdivision" means a division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by the owner thereof or the owner's agent for the purpose of sale or of building development, and to which any of the following applies: 
(1)  The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of 1½ acres each or less in area. 
(2)  Five or more parcels or building sites of 1½ acres each or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of five years. 
(b)  The term "subdivision" does not include a division of land into five or more parcels or building sites by a certified survey map in accordance with an ordinance enacted or a resolution adopted under Wis. Stats. § 236.34(1)(ar)1. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04(23); Code 1976, § 17.08.230; Ord. No. 74-387, § 1, 1974)  
Secs. 36-48—36-67. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 
 
Sec. 36-68. - Preliminary consultation—Topographic map. 
(a)  Previous to filing a preliminary plat, the subdivider should consult with the City Planner or secretary of the Plan Commission for advice or assistance. 
(b)  When requested by the Plan Commission as being necessary, the subdivider must provide a topographic map of the area to be platted, with a two-foot contour interval. Contours shall be referred to the City's established datum as identified by the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 17.12.010)  
Sec. 36-69. - Preliminary consultation—Information required. 
The following information shall be provided at the time of or prior to the filing of the preliminary plat: 
(1)  Information including data on existing covenants, information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, business areas, playgrounds, park areas, and other public areas, tree or screen planting, proposed protective covenants, and proposed utilities and street improvements; 
(2)  A digitally rendered sketch plan showing the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch must be drawn in the coordinate system approved by the City Engineer and submitted on disk or via electronic transfer in a CADD or GIS format approved by the City of Janesville. 
(Code 1976, § 17.12.020)  
Sec. 36-70. - Water pressure investigation. 
At the time the information required by Section 36-69 or 36-114 is provided, the City Planner shall check with the director of public services to determine the water pressure that is available to the area to be included in the plat or certified survey. It is desirable that at least 55 pounds per square inch at the main be available for all newly divided areas. No preliminary plat or preliminary certified survey of land located in the City shall be approved unless the Janesville Water Utility has the present capability of providing water to all of such area at the main. This requirement may be waived by the City Plan Commission and City Council if there is included upon the plat or certified survey a statement to the effect that the Janesville Water Utility cannot supply adequate water pressure to the area covered by the plat or certified survey and that provision for water will have to be done by the individual lot owner. 
(Code 1976, § 17.12.025; Ord. No. 77-26, § 1, 1977)  
Sec. 36-71. - Drawing; requirements. 
The preliminary plat shall be submitted as an electronic copy that is capable of clearly legible reproduction, not to exceed 36 inches in width and a map scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch. Where more than one page is used to show the entire area to be platted at the required scale, then a single page shall be submitted at any scale that shows the entire area to be platted. The preliminary plat shall show correctly on its face the information listed below in this section. 
(1)  Description. 
a.  Date, graphic scale and north point arrow; 
b.  The proposed subdivision name, which shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in Rock County; 
c.  The name and address and telephone number of the owner, the subdivider and the surveyors preparing the plat; 
d.  Location of the proposed subdivision by government lot quarter-quarter section, section, township, range and county; 
e.  A small-scale drawing of the section or governmental subdivision of the section in which the subdivision lies, with the location of the subdivision indicated thereon; 
f.  Location map showing the relationship between the preliminary plat and surrounding area. 
(2)  Existing conditions. 
a.  Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land; 
b.  Existing land use and zoning on land adjacent to the subdivision; 
c.  Location, width, elevations and names of all existing platted streets, alleys or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, watercourses, natural springs, drainage ditches, permanent buildings, bridges, and other pertinent data as determined by the Plan Commission. This may include large trees that may have a bearing on the location of the streets; 
d.  Type and width of any adjacent existing street pavements, together with any legally established centerline elevations for streets located outside the City limits; 
e.  The water elevations of adjoining bodies of water at the date of the survey, and known or determined high and low water elevations and boundaries of the 100-year flood-fringe, floodway, and/or general floodplain. All elevations shall be referred to the City's established datum as identified by the City Engineer. 
(3)  Proposed improvements. 
a.  The length of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision; 
b.  Layout and dimensions of an area of all lots, proposed lot and block numbers, and number of dwelling units if different than number of lots; 
c.  Note indicating the on-site location and elevation of the plat benchmark referred to in the City established datum as identified by the City Engineer; 
d.  Layout, approximate dimensions and names (as applicable) of all new streets and rights-of-way, such as alleys, highways, easements for sewers, water mains and other public utilities; 
e.  Location and approximate dimensions and size of any sites to be reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds, greenbelts, drainageways, or other public use or open space; 
f.  Location and approximate dimensions and size of any sites reserved for the private use of subdivision or condominium development residents and the conditions and terms of all applicable deed restrictions applying to these sites; 
g.  Approximate radii of all curves and length of tangents; 
h.  Contours at vertical intervals of two feet as required by the City Engineer; 
i.  The boundaries of each phase of platting for the proposed subdivision. 
(Code 1976, § 17.12.030)  
Sec. 36-72. - Preliminary grading and drainage plan. 
The preliminary grading plan shall be submitted as a digital rendering prepared on reproducible paper or film not to exceed 36 inches in width and a map scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch. The preliminary grading and drainage plan must include: 
(1)  Elevation of existing structures, existing ground contours and/or spot elevations. 
(2)  Off-site drainage basins that flow through the plat. 
(3)  Existing and proposed regional and local flood elevations. 
(4)  Arrows indicating the direction of proposed overland drainage flow. 
(5)  Drainage easements as necessary to accommodate the grading plan. 
(6)  Location and approximate configuration of proposed on-site drainage basins after grading subdivision. 
(7)  Appropriate stormwater calculations to demonstrate that the facilities identified in Subsection (6) of this section are sufficient to meet all requirements of Article IV of Chapter 32. 
(8)  Plats for lands located outside the City of Janesville and within the City extraterritorial plat review jurisdiction area are not subject to the requirements above. 
(Code 1976, § 17.12.035)  
Sec. 36-73. - Plat approval procedure. 
(a)  Before submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall submit nine copies of a preliminary plat to the City Planner at least 12 days before the preliminary plat is scheduled to be reviewed by the City Plan Commission. 
(b)  After review of the preliminary plat and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable, and the kind and extent of public improvements which will be required, the Plan Commission shall, within ten days of its submission, approve, approve conditionally or reject the plat. The subdivider shall be notified in writing of any conditions of approval, or the reason for rejection. Failure by the Plan Commission to act upon the preliminary plat within 40 days of the submission shall constitute an approval of the preliminary plat. 
(c)  Approval of the preliminary plat shall entitle the subdivider to the approval of the layout shown by such plat if the final plat conforms substantially to such layout and conditions of approval have been met. 
(Prior Code, § 24.05(2); Code 1976, § 17.12.040; Ord. No. 74-424, § 1, 1974)  
Secs. 36-74—36-104. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINAL PLATS AND CERTIFIED SURVEYS 
 
Sec. 36-105. - Final plat—Wis. Stats. § 236.20 adopted. 
A final plat of subdivided land shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.20, which is adopted by reference. 
(Prior Code, § 24.15(3)(a); Code 1976, § 17.16.010)  
Sec. 36-106. - Final plat—Information required. 
In addition to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.20, the following information will be required: 
(1)  The subdivider shall provide accurate elevations to 0.10 foot at each lot corner iron monument on street lines. Elevations shall be referred to the City's established datum as identified by the City of Janesville Engineering Division. 
(2)  Curve data on plats should include major tangent lengths, deflection angles, and lengths of chords and arcs for each monument on curved streets. Where curved lots exceed 100 feet of arc frontage, intermediate points are required with said curve data provided for each said intermediate point. 
(3)  A table on the plat giving the total acreage, number of lot and streets created, a breakdown of street centerline lengths, and area of public land dedication and list of streets along which sidewalks are to be constructed (with an indication of which side if it is intended that sidewalks be installed on only one side of the street). 
(4)  Master site grading and drainage plan. The final plat must include a final master site grading plan which shall contain information as outlined in the master site grading plan handbook on file in the City Engineering Division. The subdivider shall submit a copy of the master site grading and drainage plan to the City as a digital file in a format specified by the City Engineer. 
(5)  Plats and certified survey maps for lands located outside the City of Janesville and within the City's extraterritorial plat review jurisdiction area are not subject to the requirements set forth in Subsection (4) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 17.16.020; Ord. No. 77-5, § 1, 1977)  
Sec. 36-107. - Final plat—Portion of preliminary plat to be final plat; planner approval. 
If a subdivider wishes to make a final plat of a portion of an approved preliminary plat, he or she must first secure the City Planner's approval of the boundaries of such portion. 
(Prior Code, § 24.15(3)(c); Code 1976, § 17.16.030)  
Sec. 36-108. - Final plat—Copies and filing fee submitted to City Planner; review procedure. 
Thirteen copies of the final plat and master site grading and drainage plan, including the required filing fee, shall be submitted to the City Planner at least 12 days before the final plat is scheduled to be reviewed by the City Plan Commission. The applicant shall also submit a copy of the final plat in digital format satisfactory to the City Engineer. If the final plat is not submitted within 36 months of the last approval of the preliminary plat, the Plan Commission may refuse to approve the final plat. 
(Prior Code, § 24.05(3)(a); Code 1976, § 17.16.040; Ord. No. 74-424, § 2, 1974)  
Sec. 36-109. - Final plat—Approval and rejection procedure. 
The Plan Commission shall refer the final plat with its recommendation to the City Council within 30 days of its submission, unless the time is extended by the Council. The Council shall approve or reject the final plat within 60 days of its first submission to the City Clerk, unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. Reasons for rejection shall be stated in the minutes of the council meeting, and a copy thereof or a written statement of such reasons shall be supplied by the subdivider. The City recommends that the subdivider or his or her agent shall forward copies of the plat to the Wisconsin Department of Administration under the option set forth in Wis. Stats. § 236.12. 
(Prior Code, § 24.05(3)(b); Code 1976, § 17.16.050)  
Sec. 36-110. - Final plat—True copy filed in lieu of original when; approval requirements. 
If the original of the final plat has been filed with another approving authority, the subdivider may file a true copy of such plat in lieu of the original. However, before approval of the Council will be inscribed on the original of the final plat, the surveyor or the subdivider shall certify the respects in which the original of the final plat differs from the true copy, and all modifications must first be approved. 
(Prior Code, § 24.05(3)(c); Code 1976, § 17.16.060)  
Sec. 36-111. - Final plat—City to receive digital copy. 
The surveyors, at no cost to the City, shall provide the City with an electronic copy of the final plat as processed by the Wisconsin Department of Administration. Upon recording, the surveyor shall submit a copy of the final plat in digital format satisfactory to the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 17.16.070)  
Sec. 36-112. - Certified survey—Purpose. 
All acts of dividing land within the City limits or within the extraterritorial plat jurisdiction must be regulated in the public interest, for in no other way can the City hope to ensure a comprehensive and coordinated program of good physical development. 
(Prior Code, § 24.16(part); Code 1976, § 17.16.080)  
Sec. 36-113. - Certified survey—Requirements. 
Every division of land that results in a subdivision, as defined under this chapter, must be done by certified survey to be filed by the subdivider for record with the Rock County register of deeds after meeting all of the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34 which is adopted by reference. 
(Prior Code, § 24.16(1); Code 1976, § 17.16.090)  
Sec. 36-114. - Certified survey—Preliminary. 
Before submitting a final certified survey for approval, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary certified survey to the City Planner if the proposed land division is located within the City. If the proposed land division is outside the City limits, the preliminary certified survey is submitted to the Rock County Zoning Administrator. No final certified survey will be accepted for review which has not been preceded by an approved preliminary certified survey. The applicant shall also submit a copy of the preliminary certified survey to the City Planner in digital format satisfactory to the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 17.16.100)  
Sec. 36-115. - Certified survey—Preliminary grading and drainage plan. 
The preliminary grading plan shall be submitted as an electronic copy that is capable of legible reproduction, not to exceed 36 inches in width and a map scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch. The preliminary grading and drainage plan must include: 
(1)  Elevation of existing structures, existing ground contours and/or spot elevations. 
(2)  Off-site drainage basins that flow through the plat. 
(3)  Existing and proposed regional and local flood elevations. 
(4)  Arrows indicating the direction of proposed overland drainage flow. 
(5)  Drainage easements as necessary to accommodate the grading plan. 
(6)  Location and approximate configuration of proposed on-site drainage basins after grading subdivision if necessary as determined by the City Engineer. 
(7)  Appropriate stormwater calculations, if determined necessary by the City Engineer, to demonstrate that the facilities identified in Subsection (6) of this section are sufficient to meet all requirements of the City of Article IV of Chapter 32. 
(8)  Surveys for land located outside the City of Janesville and within the City's extraterritorial plat review jurisdiction area are not subject to the above requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 17.16.105)  
Sec. 36-116. - Certified survey—Final. 
Before recording a final certified survey of a land division located within three miles of the City limits, it shall be approved by the City Plan Commission and the City Council where dedication of land within the City is involved. Twelve copies of the final certified survey shall be submitted to the City Planner 12 days before the survey is scheduled to be reviewed by the City Plan Commission. Upon recording the final survey, the surveyor shall submit a copy of the final plat in digital format satisfactory to the City Engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 17.16.110)  
Sec. 36-117. - Certified survey—Standards. 
(a)  This certified survey shall comply with Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
(b)  The map shall indicate all existing buildings, structures, watercourses, and drainage facilities and other physical features. 
(c)  The certificate of approval of the secretary of the Plan Commission or Planning Director shall be placed on it, unless dedication of lands within the City is required, then the certificate of the City Clerk would be reproduced on the map. 
(d)  The map shall be filed for record with the register of deeds and two copies of such shall be given to the City Planning Division within 30 days of such recording. 
(e)  The map shall indicate all areas where sidewalks are to be constructed. The Council or Plan Commission may approve the certified survey subject to such changes as are deemed necessary. 
(f)  Master site grading and drainage plan. The final survey must include a final master site grading plan which shall contain information as outlined in the master site grading plan handbook on file in the City Engineering Division. The final master site grading plan must be submitted to the City as a digital file in a format specified by the City Engineer. 
(g)  Surveys located within the City's extraterritorial plat review jurisdiction area and outside of the City of Janesville and are not subject to the requirements of Subsection (f) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 24.16(3); Code 1976, § 17.16.120; Ord. No. 77-5, § 2, 1977)  
Sec. 36-118. - Certified survey—Utility easement dedications. 
Unless adequate provision has already been made in the area by dedication of land for utility easements, no certified survey can be approved until an adequate dedication is made for utility easements in the certified survey. 
(Prior Code, § 24.16(4); Code 1976, § 17.16.130)  
Sec. 36-119. - Certified survey—Approval or rejection. 
The City Plan Commission shall, within 40 days of the filing of an application under Section 36-113, approve, approve conditionally, or reject the certified survey and notify the applicant of any conditions of approval or reasons for rejection. 
(Prior Code, § 24.16(5); Code 1976, § 17.16.140)  
Sec. 36-120. - Certified survey—Special assessment lands; regulations. 
No person, firm or corporation shall divide lands by certified survey or subdivision plat within the City on which special assessments have been levied without first, paying such special assessments in full, or without first, securing an agreement in writing by the parties to the division specifying the division of the assessment, and a separate description of the parcels to which the divided portions of the assessment shall apply. 
(Prior Code, § 24.16(6); Code 1976, § 17.16.150)  
Sec. 36-121. - Certified survey—Map requirements waived when. 
In the case of lot splits, or the sale of land between adjoining owners, the Plan Commission may waive the requirements of the certified survey map if it will not be in conflict with the intent of this article. In addition, in the case of lot splits or the sale of land between adjoining owners, the City Planner may waive the requirements of the certified survey map if the land being transferred is less than 50 feet wide at the building setback line and if the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum size of new lots required by this section, providing that evidence is given to the City Planner that the new lot line has been staked by a registered land surveyor. This evidence shall be in the form of either a plat of survey or a print of the area marked to show the new lot line stakes and stamped by the surveyor, and such evidence shall be submitted not later than 30 days following the recording of the instrument which transfers the land. 
(Prior Code, § 24.16(7); Code 1976, § 17.16.160; Ord. No. 76-491, § 1, 1976)  
Sec. 36-122. - No sales until final plat or certified survey is recorded. 
No subdivider or his or her agent shall offer or contract to convey, or convey any subdivision, as defined in this article, or lot or parcel which lies in a subdivision as defined in this title, or lot or parcel regulated by Sections 36-112 through 36-121, knowing that the final plat thereof or certified survey thereof has not been recorded; except that where the preliminary or final plat of the subdivision or certified survey has been filed for approval with the City, an offer or contract to convey may be made if that offer or contract states on its face that it is contingent upon approval of the final plat. Such offer or contract shall be void if such plat is not approved. 
(Prior Code, § 24.17; Code 1976, § 17.16.170)  
Sec. 36-123. - Fees. 
Subdividers shall pay all fees in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 17.16.180)  
Sec. 36-124. - Special assessment split fee. 
For administrative work to analyze and assign existing assessments to the new parcels, based upon the proposed land division, including, but not limited to, complication by many factors, including remainder parcels, resurveying of previously certified parcels, overlap, or other factors, the City of Janesville will charge a minimum fee, based on staff time required to fulfill such requests. The fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 17.16.190)  
Secs. 36-125—36-146. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 36-147. - Business and industrial districts; requirements; exceptions. 
Alleys shall be provided in all business and industrial districts, except that the Plan Commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for fire protection and refuse disposal routes, and other service access such as off-street loading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(Prior Code, § 24.08(1); Code 1976, § 17.20.010)  
Sec. 36-148. - Residential areas. 
Alleys shall not be approved in residential areas, unless necessary because of topography or other exceptional circumstances. 
(Prior Code, § 24.08(2); Code 1976, § 17.20.020)  
Sec. 36-149. - Width requirement. 
The width of alleys shall be not less than 30 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 24.08(3); Code 1976, § 17.20.030)  
Secs. 36-150—36-166. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BLOCKS 
 
Sec. 36-167. - Regulations, generally. 
The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 1,500 feet nor be less than 600 feet between street lines, unless special approval is given for variations by the Plan Commission. 
(Prior Code, § 24.10(1); Code 1976, § 17.24.010)  
Sec. 36-168. - Pedestrian walkways required when. 
Pedestrian walkways not less than ten feet wide with a five-foot pavement may be required by the Plan Commission through the center of blocks more than 900 feet long where it is deemed essential. A note shall be placed upon the final plat stating that such pedestrian walkway shall be constructed and maintained entirely by the adjacent property owners. 
(Prior Code, § 24.10(2); Code 1976, § 17.24.020)  
Sec. 36-169. - Size determination. 
In general, the following things should be taken into consideration in determining the size of a block: 
(1)  The planned use of the land should be taken into consideration. Business and industrial uses require different sized blocks and lots than do residential areas. 
(2)  Need for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic should be taken into consideration. Whenever practicable, blocks along arterial and collector streets should not be less than 1,000 feet long. 
(3)  Limitations and advantages of topography should be taken into consideration. 
(Prior Code, § 24.10(3); Code 1976, § 17.24.030)  
Secs. 36-170—36-191. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - EASEMENTS 
 
Sec. 36-192. - Requirements, generally. 
Easements shall be provided and dedicated for installation of utilities and drainageways, and when in the public interest, scenic easements may be required. Generally, a ten-foot utility easement is required off of the rear lot line and eight feet off of the side lot line. Utility easements shall be noted along with the required dimensions upon the final plat or certified survey map. 
(Prior Code, § 24.09(1); Code 1976, § 17.28.010)  
Sec. 36-193. - Underground utilities. 
All facilities for distribution of electricity (excluding lines of 12,000 volts or more), telephone utility service in residential subdivisions, cable television service installed within a newly platted area, mobile home parks, cluster development or planned development districts shall be placed underground, unless the newly created lots or units are served by preexisting systems. 
(Prior Code, § 24.09(2); Code 1976, § 17.28.020)  
Sec. 36-194. - Watercourses. 
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, floodplain, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse, drainageway, floodplain, channel or stream, and adequate for the purpose, in the judgment of the City Plan Commission. 
(Prior Code, § 24.12; Code 1976, § 17.28.030)  
Secs. 36-195—36-211. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - LOTS 
 
Sec. 36-212. - Requirements, generally. 
The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision, and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
(Prior Code, § 24.11(1); Code 1976, § 17.32.010)  
Sec. 36-213. - Dimensions. 
(a)  Lots zoned residence shall have a minimum width of 70 feet at the building line, a minimum depth of 100 feet, and a minimum area of 7,700 square feet. Lots 65 feet in width may be allowed in locations where in the judgment of the Plan Commission such narrower lots are deemed advisable. However, no building permit shall be issued for any building which will be used primarily for residential purposes on any lot whose size was reduced below the above criteria after January 1, 1976. 
(b)  Residential lots to be served by private sewerage disposal facilities shall comply with the rules of the appropriate state and county agencies. 
(c)  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by this Code. 
(d)  Residential lots, fronting on major streets and highways, should be platted with extra depth to permit generous distances between the building and such traffic ways. 
(e)  Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A proportion of 2½ to one shall be considered as a desirable maximum for a width of 70 feet or more. 
(Prior Code, § 24.11(2); Code 1976, § 17.32.020; Ord. No. 76-506, § 1, 1976; Ord. No. 76-6, § 1, 1977)  
Sec. 36-214. - Corner lots. 
Corner lots shall be made large enough so that setback lines thereon can fully conform with the setback lines regularly established for the plat, thus precluding the necessity of encroaching beyond the normal setbacks, notwithstanding any variations permitted by applicable zoning ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 24.11(3); Code 1976, § 17.32.030)  
Sec. 36-215. - Public street access. 
Every lot shall front or abut on a public street. 
(Prior Code, § 24.11(4); Code 1976, § 17.32.040)  
Sec. 36-216. - Arrangement. 
Lots shall be so arranged that side lines abutting rear lines or other lots shall be avoided wherever possible, especially in residential areas. 
(Prior Code, § 24.11(5); Code 1976, § 17.32.050)  
Sec. 36-217. - Side lot lines. 
Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(Prior Code, § 24.11(6); Code 1976, § 17.32.060)  
Sec. 36-218. - Size; resubdivision when. 
In case a tract is subdivided into parcels containing one or more acres, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the resubdivision of any parcels into normal lots in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 24.11(7); Code 1976, § 17.32.070)  
Sec. 36-219. - Municipal boundaries. 
Lots shall follow municipal boundary lines and shall not cross them. 
(Prior Code, § 24.11(8); Code 1976, § 17.32.080)  
Sec. 36-220. - Double frontage. 
Double frontage on parallel streets shall be avoided, except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(Prior Code, § 24.11(9); Code 1976, § 17.32.090)  
Sec. 36-221. - Flag lots. 
Flag lots shall not be allowed unless, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, there is no other reasonable alternative. The stem of any flag lot shall be a minimum width of 30 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 24.11(10); Code 1976, § 17.32.100)  
Sec. 36-222. - Flood areas. 
No platting shall take place within the floodway district of the City, as delineated in the City floodplain overlay district. Within practical limits, all lands of a subdivision living within the floodway shall be dedicated to the public. 
(Prior Code, § 24.11(11); Code 1976, § 17.32.110)  
Sec. 36-223. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Before the City Treasurer signs any plat or certified survey, the subdivider shall list or show on the plat or certified survey the streets along which sidewalks are to be constructed, pursuant to Section 36-113 or 36-117(e). Such sidewalk placement is to be determined based on approved neighborhood plans for the area. 
(b)  Sidewalks listed or shown on plats or certified surveys may be constructed by the subdivider or by the owner of the property. If so constructed, sidewalks shall comply with the standards set forth in Sections 12-166 and 12-167. 
(c)  When 80 percent or more of the lots included in the certified survey have been developed or when 80 percent or more of the lots along any street in one block have been developed, the City Engineer shall place all the lots in the certified survey or all the lots along the one block of the street on the next occurring public works program for construction of any required sidewalk not yet constructed, but only if such proposed sidewalk would connect to an existing sidewalk unless pedestrian generators and destinations are both present in a localized area. The order for and cost of such construction shall be as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 66.615, as from time to time amended. If any such sidewalk is placed on a City Council agenda and is defeated, then the administration shall not place such sidewalk on a City Council agenda for the following two years. 
(Code 1976, § 17.32.120)  
Secs. 36-224—36-254. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES 
 
Sec. 36-255. - Generally. 
(a)  Every owner of land who desires to subdivide such land shall be required to provide land to the City for public sites and open spaces, or money in lieu of such land. If the master plan, master neighborhood plan, or official map indicates that public land, other than for streets or greenbelts, is proposed for the land within the subdivision, the owner shall dedicate such land to the City. The City shall not reimburse the owner for any land so dedicated, unless such dedication is for more than five percent of the total plat area. If such required dedication is less than five percent of the total plat area, the owner shall pay to the City a sum of money equal to five percent of the value of the total plat area less any land so dedicated. The City may accept, in lieu of such sum of money, land within the subdivision of equal value. 
(b)  Subdividers who desire approval of a certified survey may be required to dedicate as set out in Subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any funds received by the City under this section shall be spent by the City solely for improvements in, acquisition of, changes or additions to public park lands, neighborhood parks or greenbelts in the area of the subdivision or in a community or regional City park wheresoever located. Any land accepted in lieu of such monies under this section may be sold by the City, and monies therefrom shall be spent by the City for improvements in, acquisition of, changes, or additions to any public park lands, neighborhood parks or greenbelts in the area of the subdivision or in a community or regional City park, wheresoever located. 
(Code 1976, § 17.36.010)  
Secs. 36-256—36-273. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - STREETS 
 
Sec. 36-274. - Requirements, generally. 
The streets shall be designated and located in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions and natural terrain features such as streams and existing tree growth, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(1); Code 1976, § 17.40.010)  
Sec. 36-275. - Conformance. 
The arrangement, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the master neighborhood plans, official sidewalk plans, official maps, and Janesville Area Long Range Transportation Plan of the City. 
(Code 1976, § 17.40.020)  
Sec. 36-276. - Janesville Area Long Range Transportation Plan; conformance. 
The right-of-way width of all proposed streets shall conform to the adopted Janesville Area Long Range Transportation Plan. 
(1)  Major streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of major streets and highways. 
(2)  Collector streets shall be properly related to the mass transit system, to special traffic generating from facilities such as schools, churches and shopping centers, to population densities, and to major streets into which they feed. 
(3)  Minor streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and sewer systems, and to require the minimum amount of street necessary to provide convenient, safe access to property. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(3); Code 1976, § 17.40.030)  
Sec. 36-277. - Frontage roads. 
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the Plan Commission may require a 50-foot-wide street parallel to and on either or both sides of such right-of-way, for purposes of conveying traffic between individual driveways and designated access points to the highway. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(4); Code 1976, § 17.40.040)  
Sec. 36-278. - Major streets. 
Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed major street, the Plan Commission may require that frontage roads be provided. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(5); Code 1976, § 17.40.050)  
Sec. 36-279. - Right-of-way width requirements. 
The right-of-way and road way of all streets shall be of the width specified in the Janesville Area Long Range Transportation Plan, on the official map or master plan, or if no width is specified in the Janesville Area Long Range Transportation Plan, on the official map or master plan, they shall be not less than the width specified below: 
(1)  Primary and standard arterials, 100 feet; 
(2)  Collector streets, 80 feet; 
(3)  Minor and local streets, 70 feet except that right-of-way widths of 60 feet may be permitted when recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the Plan Commission; 
(4)  Alleys, 30 feet; 
(5)  Frontage roads, 30 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(6); Code 1976, § 17.40.060)  
Sec. 36-280. - Street width applications. 
(a)  Streets having widths of 28 feet measured from face of curb to face of curb may be approved as determined appropriate by the City Engineer. Parking should be restricted on one side of the street and designated at the time of preliminary plat approval. 
(b)  Street widths less than 28 feet measured from face of curb to face of curb may be permitted when recommended by City Engineering and approved by the Plan Commission if on-street parking is restricted, access is limited and physical or topographic constraints make such a lesser width appropriate. 
(Code 1976, § 17.40.065)  
Sec. 36-281. - Grades established. 
Grades shall be established by the City Engineer. The grade of major and collector streets shall not exceed six percent, and the grade of all other streets shall not exceed 12 percent. The minimum grade of all streets shall be four-tenths percent. The standards in this section may be varied when necessitated by exceptional topography when the variation is approved by the City Plan Commission. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(7); Code 1976, § 17.40.070)  
Sec. 36-282. - Horizontal curves. 
The minimum radii or curvature on the centerline shall be not less than the following, unless necessitated by unusual or special conditions subject to the approval of the City Engineer: 
(1)  Arterial streets, 350 feet; 
(2)  Collector streets, 200 feet; 
(3)  Minor streets, 150 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(8); Code 1976, § 17.40.080)  
Sec. 36-283. - Vertical curves. 
All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves. The length and elevations of such vertical curves shall be determined by the City Engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(9); Code 1976, § 17.40.090)  
Sec. 36-284. - Tangents. 
A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on major streets, and 25 feet on minor streets, and at all block corners. Where there is a deflection angle of more than ten degrees in the alignment of a street, a curve shall be introduced with the required radius. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(10); Code 1976, § 17.40.100)  
Sec. 36-285. - Names. 
(a)  All dedication for street purposes shall bear a street name approved by the City Plan Commission and City Council. 
(b)  Street names within the jurisdictional limits of the City shall not duplicate or sound similar to existing street names. 
(c)  No new street name may be used to honor any living person. 
(d)  Existing street names shall be projected wherever possible. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(11); Code 1976, § 17.40.110; Ord. No. 75-472, § 8, 1975)  
Sec. 36-286. - Cul-de-sacs. 
(a)  The use of cul-de-sacs will not be allowed unless the Plan Commission grants special permission and finds that due to unusual shape, size, location or topography, the development may be better served by cul-de-sacs than by continuous streets. 
(b)  Cul-de-sacs shall be no longer than 600 feet. The radius of the right-of-way of the end of a cul-de-sac shall be at least 60 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(12); Code 1976, § 17.40.120)  
Sec. 36-287. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips controlling access to streets and public property shall be prohibited, except where their control is definitely placed in the City under conditions approved by the Plan Commission. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(13); Code 1976, § 17.40.130)  
Sec. 36-288. - Half streets. 
Half streets shall not be permitted. Where a half street is proposed by the subdivider, the other half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider or adjacent owner. 
(Prior Code, § 24.06(14); Code 1976, § 17.40.140)  
Sec. 36-289. - Intersections—Right angles required. 
Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, the block angle shall not be less than 75 degrees, and not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point. 
(Prior Code, § 24.07(1); Code 1976, § 17.40.150)  
Sec. 36-290. - Intersections—Special conditions. 
Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded only on special conditions, and where the Plan Commission considers it necessary. Such special conditions shall be when streets intersect at an acute angle of 85 degrees or less, and the radii of such special curves shall be of such length as required by the City Engineer. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of 20 feet or more, as required by the City Engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 24.07(2); Code 1976, § 17.40.160)  
Sec. 36-291. - Street jogs not permitted when. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. 
(Prior Code, § 24.07(3); Code 1976, § 17.40.170)  
Secs. 36-292—36-315. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - STORM SEWERS 
 
Sec. 36-316. - Construction fees. 
(a)  It is found and declared that division and subdivision of land in the City has necessitated and will necessitate the construction of storm sewers to transport stormwater and other surface runoff; requires construction of increasingly larger trunks as runoff is collected from various areas and brought together to be disposed of; that such a plan requires construction in areas removed from the immediate land being divided and served by the storm sewer; that the benefit to each division of land is substantially equal no matter where on the storm sewer system that land happens to exist; that this required construction is specifically and uniquely attributable to the activities of subdividers; that the ordinance codified in this section is enacted in order to facilitate adequate provision for the transportation of this water; that storm sewers are necessary to the public health, safety and welfare; that the cost for storm sewers is one that should be borne by those that create the need for the storm sewers; and that the necessity in the public interest for the provisions enacted in this section is declared as a matter of legislative determination. 
(b)  (1)  At the time any plat, certified survey or other subdivision is presented for approval, or at the time a building permit is requested for any parcel that has not paid storm sewer assessment, other than for those areas specifically defined or designated elsewhere in this article, the developer shall deposit with the City Clerk-Treasurer a sum of money to be used to pay for the design and construction of storm sewers and storm drainage improvements. Except as set forth elsewhere in this article, the City shall charge and developers shall pay to the City for the design and construction of storm sewers and storm drainage improvements per acre. The charge shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. No such money shall be spent for any purpose except to pay for the design and construction of storm sewers and storm drainage improvements. The total cost shall be computed by multiplying the cost per acre by the total number of acres included in the plat, certified survey or other subdivision. The assessment rate will be evaluated annually and a new rate established each year to assure recovery of not less than 100 percent of the cost of storm sewer design and construction. The City Council shall be advised of the new rate and the City Council hereby authorizes the adjustment and assessment of such rates. 
(2)  a.  The northeast drainage basin is a specifically defined area northeast of and including part of the City of Janesville that due to unique topographic, drainage and related characteristics and factors requires a large 60-acre drainage pond and related extensive and expensive stormwater drainage and sewer work specific to that area and not typical for other areas in and immediately surrounding the City at this time. The northeast drainage basin is defined in Subsection (b)(2)b of this section. At the time any plat, certified survey or other subdivision is presented for approval, or at the time a building permit is requested for any parcel in the northeast drainage basin, the developer shall deposit with the City Clerk a sum of money to be used to pay for the design and construction of storm sewers and storm drainage improvements in the northeast drainage basin. For this specifically defined area, the City shall charge and developers shall pay to the City an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code per acre to be used to pay for the design and construction of storm sewers and storm drainage improvements therein. No such money shall be spent for any purpose except to pay for the design and construction of storm sewers and storm drainage improvements. The total cost shall be computed by multiplying the cost per acre by the total number of acres included in the plat, certified survey or other subdivision. The assessment rate will be evaluated annually and a new rate established each year to ensure recovery of not less than 100 percent of the cost of storm sewer design and construction. The City Council shall be advised of the new rate and the City Council hereby authorizes the adjustment and assessment of such rates. 
b.  The term "northeast drainage basin" means and includes the following areas set forth in the attached map labeled Exhibit A, which map is incorporated herein as if fully set forth verbatim. 
c.  Such deposit shall be made before the involved plat, certified survey or other subdivision will be approved by the City. 
d.  Waiver procedure for storm sewer and stormwater facility charges. 
1.  The City Council may, following recommendation by the Plan Commission, accept and approve a waiver of assessment procedure for the cost of storm sewer and stormwater facilities for a particular subdivision plat or certified survey in lieu of a cash payment at the time of land division approval (Ref. Ordinance No. 71-237). This requires that each individual situation be examined upon its own merits as to whether or not such privilege is in the City's best interest. 
2.  The waiver of special assessment procedure must be requested by the owner, subdivider, or developer in writing at least 14 days prior to the scheduled Council meeting at which the final plat, certified survey, or land division is to be approved. 
3.  Upon request for the waiver procedure, the staff shall calculate the total cost of the storm sewer and stormwater charges according to the prevailing rate per acre. This total charge shall be divided equally to each parcel or lot in the subdivision or certified survey or shall be divided according to parcel area if appropriate because of oversized lots or large sites. The waiver document shall be prepared listing both the total cost and the individual lot or parcel cost. 
4.  The owner of each parcel so affected by the storm sewer and stormwater charges shall sign the waiver document which shall be properly notarized as called for in the document. One hundred percent of the individual owners, and developer must sign the waiver document agreeing to the special assessments to be levied. 
5.  The City Council, prior to approving the subdivision plat, certified survey, or land division should review the storm sewer and stormwater charges and determine whether or not they will require the cash deposit or allow the waiver procedure as requested. If the Council, following recommendation of the Plan Commission, allows the waiver procedure, the subdivision plat, certified survey, or land division can be approved. Immediately following such approval, the Council shall approve the waiver of assessment procedure, thereby levying the special assessments for storm sewer as listed thereon. 
6.  Those lands which fall outside or beyond the provisions of said Ordinance No. 71-237 establishing storm sewer charges, are subject to the charges at the same rate per acre to be levied in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.60. 
7.  Exception. An exception to this policy may be made relative to the proposed charges, rates, and waiver procedure when in the judgement of the Council there will be a substantial economic gain to the City. 
(c)  No charge shall be made for any plat, certified survey or other subdivision which receives no benefit whatsoever from storm sewers paid for by such deposits. 
(d)  The Plan Commission shall be the agency which shall review any initial determination made pursuant to this section. 
(d)  This article shall take effect upon adoption, the public health, welfare and good order so requiring. 
 
(Code 1976, § 17.44.010)  
Secs. 36-317—36-335. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 36-336. - Construction; new installation. 
(a)  It is found and declared that division and subdivision of land in the City has necessitated and will continue to necessitate and construction, installation, maintenance and use of sidewalks to provide the safe, effective and appropriate movement of pedestrians, including, but not limited to, the elderly, children, persons with special physical attributes as well as residents and property owners of all kinds and nature; that the safe movement of vehicular traffic requires the installation and maintenance of sidewalks; that new areas of development provide the most efficient, effective and low cost means for installation; that the City has adopted a comprehensive plan and one or more other policies providing for sidewalk installation; that such plans require construction of sidewalks in new development areas, occasionally in areas removed from improved properties; that the ordinance codified in this section is enacted in order to facilitate the legitimate and pressing health, welfare and safety of pedestrian and vehicular needs and responsibilities of the City; that sidewalks are necessary and beneficial to the health, welfare and safety of the City, its residents and general public; and the necessity in the public interest for the provisions enacted in this article is declared a matter of legislative determination. 
(b)  The Plan Commission shall be the agency which shall review any initial determination made pursuant to this article. 
(c)  The City Engineer shall, consistent with Wisconsin Statutes and without the necessity for additional action by the City Council, order and/or cause the installation/construction of sidewalks within 12 months of issuance of occupancy permit or in the event that 80 percent or more of an existing or future subdivision, tract, plat, survey or area becomes developed, whichever occurs first. Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting any individual property owner from requesting or effectuating installation of a sidewalk in front of such owner's property. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this article, each and every property owner shall comply with each and every other code provision pertaining to sidewalks, including, but not limited to, maintenance and sidewalk installation. 
(e)  Any plat, certified survey, or other division of land presented to the City for approval, and as a condition of approval, shall be required to contain and construct sidewalks on both sides of each street including cul-de-sacs set forth in and applied to all areas of the proposed plat, certified survey, or other land division. Sidewalk installation on both sides of the street in all new subdivisions is subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Where an existing street ends at mid-block with no existing or designated sidewalks, and a certified survey map or plat is proposed to extend that street, no sidewalk shall be required for said new street portion to block corner unless authorized by the City Council. 
(2)  The City Council may modify this section where the sidewalk placement is not physically practical. 
(Code 1976, § 17.46.010)  
Secs. 36-337—36-360. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - STREET LIGHTING 
 
Sec. 36-361. - Construction; new installation; cost satisfaction by subdivider. 
(a)  It is found and declared that division and subdivision of land in the City has necessitated and will continue to necessitate the construction, installation, maintenance and use of street lights to facilitate traffic flow, pedestrian safety, and property security; that this required installation of new street lights is specifically, uniquely, fairly and appropriately attributable in necessity and cost to the activities of subdividers; that the ordinance codified in this section is enacted in order to facilitate the legitimate and pressing health, welfare and safety of citizens and responsibilities of the City; that street lights are necessary and beneficial to the health, welfare and safety of the City, its residents and the general public; that the cost of initial street lighting is one that should be borne by those who create the need for the subdivision and/or land use; and the necessity in the public interest for the provisions enacted in this article is declared a matter of legislative determination. 
(b)  The Plan Commission shall be the agency which shall review any initial determination made pursuant to this article. 
(c)  New streetlight installations under this article shall be constructed as is customary for public works projects of this kind in accordance with applicable law. 
(Code 1976, § 17.47.010)  
Secs. 36-362—36-380. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - MONUMENTS 
 
Sec. 36-381. - Requirement, generally. 
The subdivision shall be monumented as required by Wis. Stats. § 236.15, which is adopted by reference. 
(Prior Code, § 24.14; Code 1976, § 17.48.010)  
Secs. 36-382—36-405. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 36-406. - Generally. 
When, in the judgment of the Plan Commission or the City Council, it would be inappropriate to apply literally a provision of this article because the subdivision is located outside the corporate limits, or because extraordinary hardships would result, it may waive or vary such provisions so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that in no event shall the requirement of filing and recording the plat or survey maps be waived. 
(Prior Code, § 24.18; Code 1976, § 17.52.010)  
Sec. 36-407. - Planned developments. 
Proposed developments that require major variances from these standards shall be submitted as planned developments. 
(Prior Code, § 24.19; Code 1976, § 17.52.020)  
Secs. 36-408—36-427. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 36-428. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00, and the costs of prosecution, for each violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation exists or continues constitutes a separate offense. In addition, the remedies provided by Wis. Stats. §§ 236.30 and 236.31(2), shall be available to the City. 
(Prior Code, § 24.21; Code 1976, § 17.56.010)  
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Vehicles and traffic, generally, Wis. Stats. chs. 340—350; powers of local authorities, Wis. Stats. ch. 349; authority of local authorities to adopt traffic regulations in conformity with state law, Wis. Stats. § 349.06 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - State traffic laws adopted. 
Except as prohibited by law, all provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 340—348, inclusive, describing and defining regulations and procedures with respect to vehicles and traffic are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute so incorporated by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated by this chapter are also adopted and incorporated in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic in Wisconsin. 
(Code 1976, § 10.04.010; Ord. No. 82-298, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 38-2. - Wisconsin Administrative Code adopted. 
Except as prohibited by law, all provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code describing and defining regulations and procedures with respect to vehicles and traffic are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by the Wisconsin Administrative Code so incorporated by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the provisions incorporated by this chapter are also adopted and incorporated in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic in Wisconsin. 
(Code 1976, § 10.04.015; Ord. No. 82-298, § 1(part), 1982)  
Sec. 38-3. - Violation; penalty. 
The penalty for violating Sections 38-1 and 38-2 shall be a forfeiture as provided in the applicable penalty provisions of Chapters 340—348 of the Wisconsin Statutes (Wis. Stats. chs. 340—348), together with the costs and disbursements of the action. In default of payment, the violator shall be imprisoned according to the applicable provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 340—348, but for not less than five days. 
(Code 1976, § 10.04.020; Ord. No. 82-298, § 1(part), 1982)  
Secs. 38-4—38-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 38-25. - Generally. 
In this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning designated in this chapter unless a different meaning is expressly provided or the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Code 1976, § 10.08.010; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-26. - Bus loading zone. 
Bus loading zone means the area adjacent to the curbline of any street in which no person shall park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle except a motor bus, as defined by Wisconsin Statutes. Such bus loading zone shall be indicated by official traffic signs or markers stating "bus loading zone" or "bus stop." 
(Code 1976, § 10.08.020; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-27. - Leased parking. 
Leased parking means a parking stall or area that is leased from the City to a specific individual or business and which entitles such individual or business to exclusive use of such stall or area at all times during the term of the lease. 
(Code 1976, § 10.08.030; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-28. - Loading zone. 
Loading zone means the area adjacent to the curbline of any street in which no person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle for any purpose or length of time unless actually engaged in unloading and delivery or receipt and loading of merchandise, material or passengers. 
(Code 1976, § 10.08.040; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-29. - Official traffic signs or markers. 
Official traffic signs or markers means all signs, signals, markings and devices placed or erected by authority of the public body having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating traffic or parking. A curb painted yellow, whether solidly or intermittently, shall be considered an official marker indicating that the parking of vehicles is prohibited in the street immediately adjacent to such painted curb. 
(Code 1976, § 10.08.050; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-30. - Parallel parking. 
Parallel parking means a method of parking in which a vehicle shall be parked facing in the direction of traffic with the wheels that are nearest the curb or edge of the street within 12 inches of such curb or edge of the street. The vehicle shall be parked at least two feet from the nearest vehicle unless a different parking space or system of parallel parking is clearly indicated. 
(Code 1976, § 10.08.060; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Secs. 38-31—38-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 38-49. - Purpose. 
To promote the public safety and general welfare, and to provide more flexibility in the use of public streets and public parking lots, and to increase speed of adaption to changing conditions, and to decrease the cost of publishing ordinances, this delegation of authority, as set out in this article, has been established for the purpose of utilizing the authority which may be delegated by the City Council pursuant to Chapter 349 of the Wisconsin Statutes (Wis. Stats. ch. 349). 
(Code 1976, § 10.12.010; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-50. - Delegation of duties to City Manager. 
The City Council delegates to the City Manager, or his or her designee, such authority as may be delegated by Chapter 349 of the Wisconsin Statutes (Wis. Stats. ch. 349) to control the public streets and parking lots of the City, and to establish, alter or repeal rules and regulations concerning such areas. No such rule or regulation shall be made in contravention of any ordinance, and in case of conflict between any such rule or regulation and an ordinance, the ordinance shall control. No rule or regulation shall be adopted pursuant to this section until the City Manager, or his or her designee, has first consulted with the Director of Public Works, the Chief of Police, and the City Engineer. No rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this section shall be effective unless official traffic signs or markers have been placed or erected indicating the particular prohibition, limitation or restriction. A list of all current rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be kept on file in the City Engineer's office and shall be open to public inspection during regular office hours. 
(Code 1976, § 10.12.020)  
Sec. 38-51. - Designation of areas. 
Pursuant to the authority delegated to the City Manager in this article, the City Manager shall designate and cause to be appropriately signed the areas on the streets and in public parking lots with specific time limitations, the areas reserved for leased parking, and the areas in which specific rules or regulations apply, including, but not limited to, bus loading zones, handicapped parking areas, loading zones and no parking areas. 
(Code 1976, § 10.12.030; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-52. - Leased parking fees. 
The City Manager shall provide for leasing stalls in leased parking areas. The fee for a leased stall may vary depending upon the location of such stall. The fee for a leased stall shall be established by the City Manager as part of the rules and regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 10.12.040; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-53. - Temporary parking regulation. 
The City Manager or the Chief of Police is authorized to make temporary parking regulations to provide for unusual conditions or to test the feasibility of such regulations. No such temporary parking regulations shall be valid unless such regulations have been reviewed by the City Engineer and the area affected is posted with official traffic signs or markers. No such temporary parking regulations shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. A list of such regulations shall be placed on file in the City Engineer's office and shall be open to public inspection during regular office hours. 
(Code 1976, § 10.12.050; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Secs. 38-54—38-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - THROUGH HIGHWAYS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions authorizing local authorities to declare any highway under its jurisdiction a through highway, see Wis. Stats. § 349.07. 
 
Sec. 38-80. - Through arterial streets. 
The following are declared to be through arterial streets: 
Arterial Street 	Except at 
Afton Road (Rockport Road to south City limits) 	Traffic moving westerly on Rockport Road need not stop and traffic moving southwesterly from Rockport Road onto the Afton Road may proceed without stopping 
South Arch Street (Rockport Road to West Court Street) 	
Atwood Avenue East Court Street to East Milwaukee Street/Milton Avenue 	
Beloit Avenue (south City limits to South Main Street) 	
Benton Avenue (Harding Street to Milton Avenue) 	
Black Bridge Road (North Parker Drive to Milton Avenue) 	
Center Avenue (West Court Street to south City limits) 	
East and West Centerway (West Court Street to Garfield Avenue) 	
East and West Court Street (Atwood Avenue to west City limits) 	
South Crosby Avenue (Rockport Road to West Court Street) 	
East and West Delavan Drive (Center Avenue to east City limits) 	Beloit Avenue 
Elida Street (at North Martin Road) 	
Foster Avenue (Kennedy Road to Norwood Road) 	
North Franklin Street (North Washington Street to Centerway) 	
Glen Street (North Parker Drive through Harding Street) 	
Harding Street (Glen Street through Benton Avenue) 	East Memorial Drive 
North and South Jackson Street (Mineral Point to West Court Street and West Racine Street to Kellogg Avenue) 	Traffic moving northerly on South Jackson Street shall be required to stop at Reuther Way 
Kellogg Avenue (South Jackson Street to Center Avenue) 	
Kennedy Road (Milton Avenue to U.S. Highway 14) 	
Linden Avenue (at North Pine Street) 	
North and South Main Street (Beloit Avenue to, and including Hyatt Street) 	
East and West Memorial Drive (Milton Avenue to west City's limits) 	
Midvale Drive (at Deerfield Drive) 	
Milton Avenue (north city limits to East Milwaukee Street) 	
East Milwaukee Street (east City limits to East Centerway) 	
East and West Milwaukee Street (Center Avenue/Centerway to East Centerway) 	
Mt. Zion Avenue (Milton Avenue to Milwaukee Street) 	
Norwood Drive (Kennedy Road through Foster Avenue) 	
North Parker Drive (East Milwaukee Street to north City limits) 	
Pearl Street (Rockport Road to North Washington Street) 	Court Street Ravine Street (4-way) 
East and West Racine Street (I39/90 to east City limits and South Main Street through South River Street) 	
Reuther Way (Beloit Avenue to South Jackson Street) 	Traffic moving northerly on South Jackson Street shall be required to stop at Reuther Way 
South River Street (West Court Street to Rockport Road) 	
Rockport Road (South Jackson Street to South River Street and Center Avenue to west City limits) 	Afton Road (1) Westbound traffic on Rockport Road shall be required to stop at South Franklin Street and (2) at Afton Road, eastbound Rockport and northbound to westbound Afton traffic shall be required to stop 
North Washington Street (northwest City limits through North Franklin Street/North Pearl Street) 	
Wright Road (Mt. Zion Avenue to Humes Road (U.S.H. 14)) 	
South Wright Road (East Racine Street to south City limits) 	
 
(Code 1976, § 10.16.010)  
Sec. 38-81. - Connecting arterial streets. 
The following are declared to be connecting arterial streets: 
Connecting Arterial Streets 	Except at 
North and South Academy Street (Rockport Road to Ravine Street) 	Centerway West, Court Street, West Racine Street 
North Arch Street (West Court Street to Mineral Point Avenue) 	Ravine Street 
Atwood Avenue (Oakland Avenue to East Court Street and East Milwaukee Street/Milton Avenue to Prospect Avenue) 	
Austin Road (West Court Street to Mineral Point Avenue) 	
Bell Street (Humes Road to dead end north of Morse Street) 	
Black Bridge Road (Milton Avenue to North Pontiac Drive) 	North Randall Avenue, Liberty Lane 
Blackbridge Road (U.S.H. "51 [N. Parker Dr.]—C.T.H. "F") 	
Bond Place (North Crosby Avenue through Waveland Road) 	
Brunswick Lane (At Princeton Road) 	
Burbank Avenue (At South Chatham Street) 	
Caroline Street (Prospect Avenue to East Memorial Drive) 	Glen Street, East Centerway 
Centerway 	
Clark Street (at Northbound South Garfield Avenue) 	
Conde Street (South Willard Avenue to South Oakhill Avenue) 	
East Court Street (Atwood Avenue to East Milwaukee Street) 	
Creston Park Drive (North Randall Avenue to Milton Avenue) 	
North Crosby Avenue (West Court Street to Highland Avenue) 	
South Crosby Avenue (Rockport Road to Crosby-Willard Bridge) 	
Curry Lane (Morningside Drive to North Wright Road) 	
Deerfield Drive (Kettering Street/East Rotamer Road to Midvale Drive) 	
Eastwood Avenue (at South Martin Road) 	
Elm Lane (at Glen Street) 	
Forest Park Boulevard (at Oakland Avenue) 	
North and South Franklin Street (Centerway through Dodge Street and West Court Street to Rockport Road) 	Traffic moving westerly on West Wall Street may proceed without stopping; traffic moving northerly and southerly on North Franklin Street shall be required to stop at West Wall Street; traffic moving westerly on Rockport Road shall be required to stop Dodge Street (all-way) 
South Fremont Street (East Racine through Tyler Street) 	Traffic moving east on Tyler Street turning north or south onto South Fremont Street may proceed without stopping 
South Fremont Street (at Oakland Avenue) 	
North and South Garfield Avenue (East Memorial Drive to East Racine Street) 	Walker Street (4-way), Oakland E., Court Street (Ruger Avenue), Milwaukee Street 
South Garfield Avenue (Tyler Street to Clark Street) 	
Glen Street (North Garfield Avenue to Harding Street) 	Milton Avenue 
North Grant Avenue (at Bond Place) 	
North Grant Avenue (West Court Street to West Memorial Drive) 	Ravine Street, Mineral Point Avenue, Highland Avenue 
South Grant Avenue (at Burbank Avenue) 	
North and South Harmony Drive (Harmony Circle to Hillcrest Drive) 	East Milwaukee Street, Ruger Avenue 
Hawthorne Avenue (Milton Avenue to Harmony Circle) 	Ringold Street and North Randall Avenue 
Hedberg Public Library, East-West Access Driveway [Private] (At Water Street) 	
South High Street (Centerway to West Court Street) 	West Milwaukee Street 
Highland Avenue (North Washington Street through Marion-Crosby Avenue) 	North Pearl Street, North Oakhill Avenue, traffic northbound on Crosby Avenue to northbound on Marion Avenue shall stop for westbound Highland Avenue traffic turning left to go south on Crosby Avenue and then shall yield to westbound Highland Avenue traffic turning right to go north on Marion Avenue. Traffic southbound on Marion Avenue to southbound on Crosby Avenue may proceed without stopping but shall yield to traffic on Highland Avenue 
Holiday Drive (Kennedy Road to Pontiac Drive) 	Milton Avenue 
Holly Drive (at Saratoga Drive) 	
Holmes Street (at South Locust Street) 	
Holmes Street (Randall Avenue to Main Street) 	Garfield Avenue, Ringold Street (4-way), Atwood Avenue 
Humes Road Crossover to Access Roads (both sides), 500 feet West of Milton Avenue 	
Humes Road Crossover to Access Road, south side of Humes Road at Bell Street 	
I&M Rail Link Railroad Crossing (at West Racine Street between South Pine Street and South Palm Street) 	
I&M Rail Link Railroad Crossing (at Jerome Avenue between West State Street and Delavan Drive) 	
I&M Rail Link Railroad Crossing (At Putnam Avenue Between West State Street and Delavan Drive) 	
North Jackson Street (Mineral Point Avenue to West Milwaukee Street) 	
South Jackson Street (West Milwaukee Street to Rockport Road and Kellogg Avenue to the south City limits) 	
Joliet Street (Center Avenue to South River Road) 	South Oakhill Avenue, Willard Avenue 
John Paul Road (Milton Avenue/ST Hwy 26 to north City limits) 	
Kellogg Avenue (Reuther Way to South Jackson Street and Center Avenue through River Road) 	Northbound traffic on South River Road may proceed without stopping 
Kennedy Road (U.S. Highway 14 to north City limits) 	
Kettering Street (Deerfield Drive/East Rotamer Road through Whitney Street) 	
King Street (South River Road to South Willard Avenue and at Chatham Street) 	
LaFayette Street (at Conde Street) 	
Lapham Street (at South Pine Street) 	Westbound Lapham traffic shall also stop 
Lapham Street (at South Walnut Street) 	
Laurel Avenue (North Oakhill Avenue to North Pearl Street and at North Washington Street) 	
Lexington Drive (Mohawk Road to Holiday Drive) 	Mt. Zion Avenue, East Milwaukee Street, Ruger Avenue, Black Bridge Road 
North Lexington Drive (Holiday Drive to Humes Road) 	
Liberty Lane (Mt. Zion Avenue to Holiday Drive) 	Randolph Road 
Marion Avenue (Highland Avenue to Memorial Drive) 	
Martin Road (the crosswalk in front of the Craig High School which runs east and west and is in line with an extension easterly of Oakland Avenue) 	
Mayfair Drive (At Hoover Street) 	
McKinley Street (At South Cherry Street) 	
East Memorial Drive (Milton Avenue to Harmony Drive) 	Ringold Avenue (4-way), Randall Avenue 
East Memorial Drive (Milton Avenue to Harmony Drive) 	
Midvale Drive (at Greenwood Drive) 	
Milton Avenue Crossover to Access Road, west side of Milton Avenue 600 feet south of the Crossover of Humes Road (USH 14) 	
Milton Avenue Crossover to Access Road, west side of Milton Avenue at Lodge Drive 	
Milton Avenue Crossover to Access Road, east side of Milton Avenue at Lodge Drive 	
Milton Avenue Crossover to Access Road, east side of Milton Avenue 600 feet south of the Crossover of Humes Road (USH 14) 	
Milton Avenue Crossover to Access Road (west side) 600 feet north of Humes Road 	
Mineral Point Avenue (North Franklin Street to west City limits) 	Terrace Street (4-way), North Oakhill Avenue (4-way), Pearl Street (4-way), North Grant Avenue (4-way) 
Mohawk Road (Palmer Drive to South Lexington Drive) 	
Morningside Drive (East Milwaukee Street Curry Lane) 	Mt. Zion Avenue 
Morse Street (North Pontiac Drive—Milton Avenue [S.T.H. 26]) 	
Mt. Vernon Avenue (at South Huron Drive) 	
Mt. Zion Avenue (at Woodman Road) 	
Newville Road (Humes Road/U.S. Hwy 14 to north City limits) 	
Norwood Drive (Foster Avenue to Hoover Street) 	
South Oakhill Avenue (West State Street to south City limits) 	State Street (4-way), Kellogg Avenue 
North Oakhill Avenue (West Court Street to Hamilton Avenue) 	Mineral Point Avenue (4-way), Ravine Street (4-way) 
Oakland Avenue (South Main Street to Forest Park Boulevard) 	
South Palm Street (At Mill Street) 	
Palmer Drive (Beloit Avenue to Wright Road) 	East Racine Street 
Parkside Drive (North Washington to the south right-of-way line of Riverside Park) 	
Park View Drive (North Wright Road—Wuthering Hills Drive) 	
Pond Road/vacated South Randall Avenue (at Sharon Road) 	Northbound Sharon Road may proceed without stopping 
Pontiac Drive (Mt. Zion Avenue to Humes Road [U.S. Highway 14]) 	
Pontiac Drive (Mt. Zion Avenue to Lexington Drive) 	Milwaukee Street, Ruger Avenue 
North Pontiac Drive (U.S. Highway 14 Morse Street) 	
East and West Racine Street (South River Street through South Washington Street and South Main Street to I-39/90) 	
North and South Randall Avenue (Tyler Street to Randolph Road) 	Racine Street, Holmes Street (4-way), Ruger Avenue (4-way), Milwaukee Street (4-way), Mt. Zion Avenue (4-way) 
Randolph Road (Milton Avenue to North Pontiac Drive) 	Lexington Drive 
Randolph Road (Morningside Drive through Holly Drive) 	Wright Road 
Ravine Street (North Franklin Street to Madison schoolground) 	Jackson Street, North Pearl Street (4-way) 
North and South Ringold Street (East Racine Street to Creston Park) 	Mt. Zion Avenue, Memorial Drive (4-way), East Milwaukee Street, Ruger Avenue, East Holmes Street (4-way) 
South River Road (West State Street to south City limits) 	Kellogg Avenue (northbound traffic on South River Road may proceed without stopping 
North and South River Street (Mineral Point Avenue to West Court Street) 	Centerway traffic moving east on Ravine Street turning south onto North River Street may proceed without stopping 
Riverside Street (at Northbound South Palm Street) 	
Rockport Road (Center Avenue to South Jackson Street) 	
East Rotamer Road (Milton Avenue to east City limits) 	
West Rotamer Road (Whitney Street to north corporate limits) 	
Ruger Avenue (East Court Street to east City limits) 	Randall Avenue (4-way), Wright Road (4-way) 
Sandhill Drive (North Wright Road to North Harmony Town Hall Road) 	Sandstone Drive Roundabout 
St. Lawrence Avenue (Rock River to Atwood Avenue) 	Main Street 
Sharon Road (at Pond Road and vacated South Randall Avenue) 	
Skyview Drive (south Wright Road to Wuthering Hills Drive) 	
West State Street (Center Avenue to River Road) 	South Oakhill Avenue (4-way) 
East State Street (Jackson Street to Beloit Avenue) 	
North Terrace Street (Mineral Point Avenue to North Washington Street and at its intersection with Laurel Avenue) 	Mineral Point Avenue (4-way) 
South Terrace Street (at its intersection with South Pearl Street) 	
Tripp Road (Afton Road to Hayner Road) 	
Tyler Street (South Main Street to Randall Avenue) 	Except that traffic moving south on South Fremont Street may turn onto Tyler Street without stopping 
U.S.H. 14 (at Access Road east side of Milton Avenue) 	
Van Buren Street (at South Parker Drive) 	
Walker Street (at Sutherland Avenue) 	
Walker Street (at Thomas Street) 	
North Washington Street (North Terrace Street to North Franklin Street/North Pearl Street) 	
Whitney Street (West Rotamer Road through Kettering Street) 	Northbound Whitney Street at Kettering Street and Westbound Kettering Street to Northbound Whitney Street 
South Willard Avenue (Riverview Drive to Kellogg Street) 	State Street 
South Wisconsin Street (at East Van Buren Street) 	
Woodman Road (at Lowell and Newman Streets) 	
Wright Road (East Racine Street to East Milwaukee Street) 	Ruger Avenue 
Wright Road (U.S. Highway 14 to East Rotamer Road) 	Wright Road to stop at East Rotamer Road 
Wuthering Hills Drive (S.T. Hwy 11/E. Racine Street through Prairie Fox Drive) 	
 
(Code 1976, § 10.16.020)  
Secs. 38-82—38-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS 
 
Sec. 38-106. - Signalized intersection. 
The following intersections shall be controlled by traffic-control signals: 
(1)  North Wright Road and Brunswick Lane; 
(2)  North Wright Road and Parkview Drive; 
(3)  North Crosby Avenue and Mineral Point Avenue. 
(Code 1976, § 10.18.010)  
Sec. 38-107. - All-way stop sign intersections. 
The following intersections shall be controlled by stop signs: 
(1)  North Garfield Avenue and Walker Street; 
(2)  North Ringold Street and Memorial Drive; 
(3)  South Ringold Street and East Holmes Street; 
(4)  South Randall Avenue and East Holmes Street; 
(5)  South Randall Avenue and Ruger Avenue; 
(6)  Arbor Drive and South Harmony Drive; 
(7)  Mohawk Road and South Lexington Drive; 
(8)  West State Street and South Oakhill Avenue; 
(9)  Mineral Point Avenue and North Oakhill Avenue; 
(10)  Mineral Point Avenue and North Terrace Street; 
(11)  Ravine Street and North Oakhill Avenue; 
(12)  Ravine Street and North Pearl Street; 
(13)  Mineral Point Avenue and North Pearl Street; 
(14)  North Pontiac Drive and Mt. Zion Avenue; 
(15)  South Crosby Avenue and Rockport Road; 
(16)  South Willard Avenue and West State Street; 
(17)  North Lexington Drive and Holiday Drive; 
(18)  Liberty Lane and Holiday Drive; 
(19)  East Wall and North Wisconsin Street; 
(20)  Ruger Avenue and Wright Road; 
(21)  Lincoln Street and West Holmes Street; 
(22)  Black Bridge and North Randall Avenue; 
(23)  Black Bridge Road and Liberty Lane; 
(24)  Ruger Avenue and South Lexington Drive; 
(25)  North Pontiac Drive and Holiday Drive; 
(26)  Liberty Lane and Randolph Road; 
(27)  Ravine Street and North Arch Street; 
(28)  Park View Drive and Thornecrest Drive; 
(29)  Ravine Street and North Grant Avenue; 
(30)  North Lexington Drive and Randolph Road; 
(31)  North Lexington Drive and Black Bridge Road; 
(32)  East Holmes Street and South Garfield Avenue; 
(33)  Mineral Point Avenue and North Grant Avenue; 
(34)  North Garfield Avenue and Blaine Avenue; 
(35)  South Pontiac Drive and Ruger Avenue; 
(36)  Ruger Avenue and Wuthering Hills Drive; 
(37)  Mohawk Road and Palmer Drive; 
(38)  Memorial and North Randall Avenue; 
(39)  Deerfield Drive and Midvale Drive; 
(40)  Garfield Avenue and East Memorial Drive; 
(41)  Dodge Street and South Franklin Street; 
(42)  North Jackson Street and Madison Street; 
(43)  North Franklin Street/Highland Avenue/North Pearl Street/North Washington Street. 
(Code 1976, § 10.18.020)  
Sec. 38-108. - Yield signs. 
Standard yield signs shall be installed directing traffic on the following streets to yield to the designated street: 
(1)  McKinley Street yields to High Street; 
(2)  Laurel Avenue yields to Madison Street; 
(3)  McKinley Street yields to Locust Street; 
(4)  East Court Street yields to East Milwaukee Street; 
(5)  Pearl Street yields to Riverside Street; 
(6)  South Ringold Street yields to Vista Street; 
(7)  Elida Street yields to North Fremont Street; 
(8)  Tamarack Lane yields to Greenwich Lane and Camden Square; 
(9)  North Marion Avenue (southbound to North Crosby Avenue) yields to Highland Avenue; 
(10)  North Crosby Avenue (northbound to North Marion Avenue) yields to Highland Avenue; 
(11)  Mayfair Drive yields to Hawthorne Avenue; 
(12)  North Fremont Street yields to Sherman Avenue; 
(13)  Roosevelt Avenue yields to South Chatham Street; 
(14)  West Court Street (eastbound Court Street to southbound Center Avenue) yields to Center Avenue; 
(15)  West Memorial Drive (westbound on Memorial Drive to northbound on Parker Drive and eastbound on Memorial Drive to southbound on Parker Drive, and eastbound on Memorial Drive to northbound on Parker Drive) yields to North Parker Drive; 
(16)  North High Street yields to Madison Street; 
(17)  Linn Street yields to McKinley Street; 
(18)  Ashland Avenue yields to North Pine Street; 
(19)  Peterson Avenue yields to North Pine Street; 
(20)  North Sumac Drive yields to Hawthorne Avenue; 
(21)  Bostwick Avenue yields to Forest Park Boulevard; 
(22)  Huron Drive yields to Wesley Avenue; 
(23)  South Parker Drive yields to East Van Buren Street; 
(24)  Excalibur Drive yields to LaMancha Drive; 
(25)  Excalibur Drive yields to LaMancha Drive; 
(26)  Lincoln Street/Monterey Park yield to Riverside Street; 
(27)  Hoover Street yields to Mayfair Drive; 
(28)  Harvard Drive yields to Sunset Drive; 
(29)  Grace Street yields to Forest Park Boulevard; 
(30)  Nantucket Drive yields to Alpine Drive; 
(31)  South Huron Drive yields to Mt. Vernon Avenue; 
(32)  Danbury Drive yields to Amhurst Road at both north and south intersections; 
(33)  Lodge Drive yields to Woodland Drive; 
(34)  Johnson Street yields to South Locust Street; 
(35)  Lodge Drive yields to Woodland Drive; 
(36)  Johnson Street yields to South Locust Street; 
(37)  West Wall Street and Bemis Street yield to Sunset Drive; 
(38)  North Garfield Avenue yields to Sherman Avenue; 
(39)  North Adams Street yields to Walker Street; 
(40)  Clover Lane yields to Lucerne Drive; 
(41)  Rutledge Avenue yields to North Sumac Drive; 
(42)  South Sumac Drive yields to Wesley Avenue; 
(43)  Newman Street yields to North Harmony Drive; 
(44)  Randolph Road yields to Green Valley Drive; 
(45)  Pine View Lane (south) yields to Green Valley Drive; 
(46)  Pine View Lane (north) yields to Green Valley Drive; 
(47)  Margate Drive and Wilshire Lane yield to Brunswick Lane; 
(48)  South Washington Street yields to Nicolet Street; 
(49)  Menard Street yields to South Pearl Street; 
(50)  Alexandria Place yields to Sunset Drive; 
(51)  Adel Street yields to Conde Street; 
(52)  Nantucket Drive (south) yields to Alpine Drive; 
(53)  Plainfield Avenue yields to Barberry Drive; 
(54)  Alden Road yields to Newman Street; 
(55)  South Walnut Street yields to Nicolet Street; 
(56)  South Wisconsin Street yields to East Van Buren Street; 
(57)  South Sumac Drive yields to Mt. Vernon Avenue; 
(58)  King Street yields to South Grant Avenue; 
(59)  Stonefield Lane yields to Curry Lane; 
(60)  Laramie Lane yields to LaMancha Drive; 
(61)  Adel Street yields to West Burbank Avenue; 
(62)  Wall Street yields to North Washington Street; 
(63)  Woodcrest Drive yields to Tanglewood Drive; 
(64)  Spaulding Avenue yields to Sandhill Drive; 
(65)  Saratoga Drive yields to Alpine Drive; 
(66)  West Holmes Street yields to Linn Street; 
(67)  Rock Street yields to South High Street; 
(68)  Acorn Drive yields to Walnut Grove Road; 
(69)  Richardson Street yields to Sherman Avenue; 
(70)  North Osborne Avenue yields to Bond Place; 
(71)  North Marion Avenue yields to Bond Place; 
(72)  North Willard Avenue yields to Bond Place; 
(73)  Division Street yields to East Van Buren Street; 
(74)  Woodman Road yields to Mayfair Drive; 
(75)  Hoover Street yields to Hawthorne Avenue; 
(76)  Monroe Street yields to Walker Street; 
(77)  Lapidary Lane yields to Balmoral Drive; 
(78)  South Terrace Street yields to West Burbank Avenue; 
(79)  Braxton Drive yields to Huntinghorne Drive. 
(Code 1976, § 10.18.030)  
Secs. 38-109—38-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ONE-WAY STREETS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions authorizing local authorities to designate highways under their jurisdiction as one-way, Wis. Stats. § 349.10. 
 
Sec. 38-130. - Designation. 
The following streets are designated as one-way streets, and traffic shall proceed thereon as indicated in this section: 
(1)  Traffic on Wisconsin Street between Court and East Milwaukee Streets shall be in a northerly direction toward East Milwaukee Street. 
(2)  a.  West Milwaukee Streets from its intersection with Centerway and West Court Street easterly to a point 80 feet west of the west line of Locust Street; and 
b.  East Milwaukee Street from its intersection with Atwood Avenue to its intersection with Garfield Avenue are designated as one-way streets on which traffic shall move in a southwesterly direction only at all times. 
(3)  West Court Street from its intersection with Center Avenue and West Milwaukee Street easterly to the west side of Academy intersection and East Court Street from east of the intersection with Adams Street easterly to the intersection of Ringold Street are designated as one-way streets on which traffic shall move in an easterly direction only at all times. 
(4)  Traffic on Jefferson School Drive is to move from North Harmony Drive westerly, and then southerly to Mt. Zion Avenue. 
(5)  On North Jackson Street, traffic shall be in a southeasterly direction only, between Mineral Point Avenue and Madison Street. 
(6)  On North Washington Street, traffic shall be in a southeasterly direction only, between Highland Avenue and North Terrace Street. 
(7)  On North Terrace Street, traffic shall be in a southerly direction only, between North Washington Street and Mineral Point Avenue. 
(8)  On Parker Place, traffic shall be in a southerly direction only, between East Wall Street and East Milwaukee Street. 
(9)  On Cherry Street, traffic shall be in a southerly direction only, between Court Street and McKinley Street. 
(Code 1976, § 10.20.010; Ord. No. 2018-711, 2-26-2018 )  
Sec. 38-131. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $20.00 nor more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail for a period of not more than 60 days. 
(Code 1976, § 10.20.020; Ord. No. 83-335, § 4(part), 1983)  
Secs. 38-132—38-160. - Reserved. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.11(5), 349.10(1)(b) and (d), 349.10 (1). The department, county highway committees and local authorities in regard to highways under their respective jurisdictions.  
ARTICLE VII. - SPEED LIMITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions authorizing a local authority to modify speed restrictions under certain conditions on highways under their control, see Wis. Stats. § 349.11. 
 
Sec. 38-161. - Generally. 
Irrespective of the requirements in Section 38-1, as to fixed speed limits, the Council declares and determines, pursuant to the authority given it by state statutes, that the maximum permissible speed limits set out in this article shall be in effect in the designated area. 
(Code 1976, § 10.24.010)  
Sec. 38-162. - Thirty-five miles per hour. 
The following designated areas shall have a speed limit of 35 miles per hour: 
(1)  North Parker Drive from a point one-tenth of a mile north of the intersection of East Memorial Drive to the north City limits; 
(2)  Center Avenue from Nicolet Street to Kellogg Avenue; 
(3)  The westerly side of Milton Avenue from the north line of Black Bridge Road to the north line of Kennedy Road, and the easterly side of Milton Avenue from the north line of Black Bridge Road extending easterly, to the north line of Randolph Road; 
(4)  East Racine Street (State Highway 11 and U.S. Highway 14) from a point 1,000 feet east of the east line of South Randall Avenue to the east City limits; 
(5)  South Jackson Street from Elliott Street to Kellogg Avenue; 
(6)  Beloit Avenue from a point 1,150 feet north of the south line of Kellogg Avenue south to the south City limits; 
(7)  Afton Road from Rockport Road west to the City limits; 
(8)  East Milwaukee Street from Shannon Drive to U.S.H. 14; 
(9)  Delavan Drive from Beloit Avenue to East corporate limits; 
(10)  Kennedy Road from Newport Avenue to the north City limits; 
(11)  Black Bridge Road from North Parker Drive to 400 feet west of Mayfair Drive; 
(12)  Beloit Avenue from a point 1,150 feet north of the south line of Kellogg Avenue to Elliott Street; 
(13)  Kennedy Road from Milton Avenue to Newport Avenue; 
(14)  Memorial Drive from Washington Street to Harding Street; 
(15)  Parker Drive from Hyatt Street to a point one-tenth of a mile north of the intersection of East Memorial Drive; 
(16)  Wright Road from Racine Street to Palmer Drive; 
(17)  Ruger Avenue from South Wright Road to U.S.H. 14; 
(18)  Austin Road from West Court Street to Mineral Point Road; 
(19)  John Paul Road, from Milton Avenue/St. Hwy 26 to north City limits; 
(20)  Newville Road from Humes Road/U.S. Hwy 14 to north City limits. 
(Code 1976, § 10.24.020)  
Sec. 38-163. - Thirty miles per hour. 
The following designated areas shall have a speed limit of 30 miles per hour: 
(1)  Centerway from Court Street to Milton Avenue; 
(2)  Court Street from Sunset Drive to Center Avenue; 
(3)  Court Street from Main Street to Milwaukee Street; 
(4)  Delavan Drive from Center Avenue to Beloit Avenue; 
(5)  Franklin Street from Rockport Road to Court Street; 
(6)  Jackson Street from Elliott Street to Court Street; 
(7)  Kellogg Avenue from South River Road to Beloit Avenue; 
(8)  Milton Avenue from Centerway to the north line of Black Bridge Road; 
(9)  East Milwaukee Street from Garfield Avenue to Shannon Drive; 
(10)  Mt. Zion Avenue from Pontiac Drive to Milwaukee Street; 
(11)  Pontiac Drive from Mt. Zion Avenue to U.S.H. 14; 
(12)  Parker Drive from Centerway to Hyatt Street; 
(13)  Racine Street from Randall Avenue to a point 1,000 feet east of the east line of South Randall Avenue; 
(14)  River Street from Franklin Street to Washington Street; 
(15)  Rotamer Road from Milton Avenue to east City limits; 
(16)  South River Road from south City limits to Kellogg Avenue; 
(17)  Wright Road from Palmer Drive to East Rotamer Road; 
(18)  Center Avenue from Nicolet Street to Court Street; 
(19)  Crosby Avenue from the north end of the Crosby-Willard Bridge to Court Street; 
(20)  Crosby-Willard Bridge from Willard Avenue to Crosby Avenue; 
(21)  West Rotamer Road from Whitney Street to north City limits; 
(22)  Whitney Street from Kettering Street to Pheasant Run/West Rotamer Road; 
(23)  Tripp Road from Hayner Road to Afton Road; 
(24)  Mineral Point Road from Austin Road to 1,250 feet east of Austin Road; 
(25)  Deerfield Drive (U.S. Highway 14 to Kettering Street/East Rotamer Road); 
(26)  Kettering Street (Whitney Street to Deerfield Drive/East Rotamer Road). 
(Code 1976, § 10.24.025)  
Sec. 38-164. - Fifty miles per hour. 
Reserved. 
(Code 1976, § 10.24.030)  
Sec. 38-165. - Fifteen miles per hour. 
The following designated area shall have a speed limit of 15 miles per hour: 
(1)  Sharon Road from South Fremont Street to Palmer Drive. 
(Code 1976, § 10.24.035)  
Sec. 38-166. - Fifteen miles per hour—April to November. 
The following designated areas shall have a speed limit of 15 miles per hour from April 15 of each year up to and including November 1 of each year: Palmer Drive from its intersection with East Racine Street, northeasterly to its intersection with Mohawk Drive; and Mohawk Road from its intersection with Palmer Drive, northerly to the south line of Black Hawk Meadows, a recorded subdivision. 
(Code 1976, § 10.24.040)  
Sec. 38-167. - Fifteen miles per hour—Exceptions. 
There shall be a speed limit of 15 miles per hour on any City street, except a state trunk highway or connecting street, within, contiguous to or adjacent to a public park or recreation area when children are present, and when such areas are properly signed in accordance with the latest manual of traffic control devices of the state. 
(Code 1976, § 10.24.050)  
Sec. 38-168. - Twenty-five miles per hour. 
There shall be a speed limit of 25 miles per hour on the following designated areas: 
(1)  Access roads, both sides of Milton Avenue from 935 feet north of Kennedy-Randolph Roads to U.S. Highway 14; 
(2)  Access road, south side of U.S. Highway 14 from Milton Avenue to 900 feet east. 
(Code 1976, § 10.24.055)  
Sec. 38-169. - Forty miles per hour. 
The following designated areas shall have a speed limit of 40 miles per hour: 
(1)  Milton Avenue, east side, from the north line of Randolph Road north to a point two-tenths of a mile north of its intersection with U.S. Highway 14; 
(2)  Milton Avenue, west side, from the north line of Kennedy Road north to a point two-tenths of a mile north of its intersection with U.S. Highway 14; 
(3)  Humes Road, from the west property line of Kennedy Road, east to a point two-tenths of a mile east of North Wright Road; 
(4)  Center Avenue, from Kellogg Avenue to the south corporate limits; 
(5)  Milton Avenue, from a point two-tenths of a mile north of its intersection with U.S. Highway 14 to John Paul Road. 
(Code 1976, § 10.24.060)  
Sec. 38-170. - Forty-five miles per hour. 
The following designated areas shall have a speed limit of 45 miles per hour: East Racine Street from Palmer Drive to 200 feet east of South Wright Road. 
(Code 1976, § 10.24.065; Ord. No. 87-508, § 1, 1987)  
Sec. 38-171. - Violation; penalty. 
The penalty for violating any provision of this article shall be the same as that set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes, as from time to time amended, for similar violations. 
(Code 1976, § 10.24.070; Ord. No. 87-508, § 2, 1987)  
Secs. 38-172—38-195. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PROHIBITED TURNS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— See Wis. Stats. §§ 349.10(1)(c) and 349.10(1). The department, county highway committees and local authorities in regard to highways under their respective jurisdictions, may: (c) By order, ordinance or resolution and by the erection of appropriate signs, prohibit right or left turns at intersections by all vehicles or by certain types of vehicles. 
 
Sec. 38-196. - Certain U-turns; left and right turns; prohibited. 
(a)  The operator of a vehicle may not back the vehicle at an intersection controlled by an official traffic control device for the purpose of making a U-turn and shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon a highway at any of the following places: 
(1)  At any intersection at which traffic is being controlled by a traffic officer unless instructed by the officer to make a U-turn; 
(2)  In mid-block on any street in a business district; 
(3)  In mid-block on any through highway in a residence district; 
(4)  On any one-way street; 
(5)  At any place where signs prohibiting a U-turn have been erected by the city; 
(6)  At any place where a U-turn cannot be made safely or without interfering with other traffic; 
(7)  At any one of the following median openings: 
a.  In the 3000 block of Milton Avenue located approximately 665 feet south of the centerline of U.S. Highway 14. 
b.  In the 3300 block of Milton Avenue located approximately 575 feet north of the centerline of U.S. Highway 14. 
c.  In the 2000 block of U.S. Highway 14 located approximately 545 feet west of Milton Avenue. 
(b)  The operator of a vehicle westbound on West Milwaukee Street shall not make a left turn at the intersection of Milwaukee Street, Court Street, Center Avenue and Centerway so as to go eastbound on West Court Street. 
(c)  The operator of a vehicle southbound on the easterly leg of South Jackson Street shall not make a right turn at the intersection of Kellogg Avenue so as to go westbound on Kellogg Avenue. 
(d)  The operator of a vehicle southbound on the westerly leg of South Jackson Street shall not make a left turn at the intersection of Kellogg Avenue so as to go eastbound on Kellogg Avenue. 
(Code 1976, § 10.28.010)  
Sec. 38-197. - Certain left and right turns; times; prohibited 
(a)  The operator of a vehicle shall not make a left turn between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. when such turn is prohibited by official sign: 
(1)  From Milwaukee Street onto Parker Drive. 
(2)  From Milwaukee Street onto Main Street. 
(3)  From Milwaukee Street onto River Street. 
(4)  From Milwaukee Street onto Jackson Street. 
(5)  From Milwaukee Street onto High Street. 
(6)  From Milwaukee Street onto Academy Street. 
(7)  From Milwaukee Street onto Locust Street. 
(8)  From Court Street onto Franklin Street. 
(9)  From Court Street onto River Street. 
(10)  From Court Street onto Parker Drive. 
(b)  The operator of a vehicle shall not make a right turn between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. when such turn is prohibited by official sign: 
(1)  From Milwaukee Street onto Parker Drive. 
(2)  From Milwaukee Street onto Main Street. 
(3)  From Milwaukee Street onto River Street. 
(4)  From Milwaukee Street onto Franklin Street. 
(5)  From Court Street onto Academy Street. 
(6)  From Court Street onto Cherry Street. 
(7)  From Court Street onto High Street. 
(8)  From Court Street onto Jackson Street. 
(9)  From Court Street onto River Street. 
(Code 1976, § 10.28.020)  
Sec. 38-198. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeiture of not less than $20.00 nor more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of the forfeiture payment, shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail for a period of not more than 60 days, or the court may suspend such defaulting violator's Wisconsin motor vehicle operator's privilege in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 10.28.030)  
Secs. 38-199—38-219. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CROSSWALKS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning the rights and duties of drivers and pedestrians at crosswalks, see Wis. Stats. § 346.23 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-220. - Designation. 
(a)  An official crosswalk 18 feet in width is established across South Main Street between East Milwaukee Street and East Court Street, the south line of said crosswalk being approximately 175 feet north of the north line of East Court Street. 
(b)  An official pedestrian walkway six feet in width is established on the east side of the parking plaza (Parking Lot 1) running from East Court Street to five feet north of the north line of Lot 3, Block 44 and adjacent to the west side of Lots 3, 4, 5 and 6 of Block 44 of the original plat of the City. Four five-foot-wide crosswalks shall also connect the aforedesignated pedestrian walkway to the east ends of the meter aisles. 
(c)  An official crosswalk six feet in width is established across Newman Street between North Randall Avenue and Milton Avenue, the west line of said crosswalk being located 330 feet west of the west curbline of North Randall Avenue. 
(d)  An official crosswalk six feet in width is established across East Memorial Drive at Adams Grade School from the driveway at 1145 East Memorial Drive (Lot 16, Terrace Subdivision) to the driveway along the east side of Adams School. 
(e)  An official crosswalk six feet in width is established across Black Bridge Road between Milton Avenue and North Randall Avenue, the west line of said crosswalk being located 500 feet east of the east curbline of Milton Avenue. 
(f)  An official crosswalk ten feet in width is established across Princeton Road between Parkview Drive and Brunswick Lane, the north line of said crosswalk being located 430 feet south of the south curbline of Parkview Drive. 
(g)  An official crosswalk six feet in width is established across Liberty Lane, the north line of said crosswalk being located 313 feet south of the south curbline of Holiday Drive. 
(h)  An official crosswalk six feet in width is established across Mineral Point Avenue between Waveland Avenue and Austin Road, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 410 feet west of the west right-of-way line of Waveland Avenue. 
(i)  An official crosswalk eight feet in width is established across South Wuthering Hills Drive between Ruger Avenue and Capital Circle, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 675 feet south of the south right-of-way line of Ruger Avenue. 
(j)  An official crosswalk six feet in width is established across North Terrace Street between Elizabeth Street and Mineral Point Avenue, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 315 feet south of the south right-of-way line of Elizabeth Street. 
(k)  An official crosswalk six feet in width is established across Venture Drive (south leg) east of Beloit Avenue, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 1,550 feet east of the east right-of-way line of Beloit Avenue. 
(l)  An official crosswalk ten feet in width is established across North Wright Road, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 180 feet north of the north right-of-way line of Skyview Drive. 
(m)  An official crosswalk ten feet in width is established across Brunswick Lane, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 385 feet east of the east right-of-way of Princeton Court. 
(n)  An official crosswalk ten feet in width is established across Park View Drive, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 330 feet east of the east right-of-way line of Columbia Drive. 
(o)  An official crosswalk ten feet in width is established across East Milwaukee Street, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 370 feet west of the west right-of-way line of Shannon Drive. 
(p)  An official crosswalk ten feet in width is established across Randolph Road, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 220 feet east of the east right-of-way line of Savanna Drive. 
(q)  An official crosswalk ten feet in width is established across Curry Lane, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 250 feet east of the east right-of-way line of Savanna Drive. 
(r)  An official crosswalk ten feet in width is established across Beloit Avenue, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 370 feet north of the north right-of-way line of East Delavan Drive. 
(s)  An official crosswalk ten feet in width is established across South Main Street, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 370 feet north of the north right-of-way line of East Delavan Drive. 
(t)  An official crosswalk six feet in width is established across North Franklin Street east of North Washington Street, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 330 feet east of the east right-of-way line for the south leg of North Washington Street. 
(u)  An official crosswalk ten feet in width is established across Sharon Road northwest of Palmer Drive, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 290 feet northwest of the north right-of-way line of Palmer Drive. 
(v)  An official crosswalk ten feet in width is established across Jatco Drive, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 200 feet west of the centerline of South Jackson Street. 
(w)  An official crosswalk six feet in width is established across North Wright Road, the centerline of said crosswalk being located approximately 460 feet south of the south right-of-way line of East Rotamer Road. 
(Code 1976, § 10.32.010)  
Sec. 38-221. - State regulations applicable. 
All regulations of Section 38-1 adopting Wis. Stats. § 346.24 shall apply to pedestrians and vehicle operators at crosswalks. 
(Code 1976, § 10.32.020; Ord. No. 75-472, § 2, 1975)  
Sec. 38-222. - Obedience to crossing guards; violation; penalty. 
(a)  No operator of a vehicle shall fail or refuse to stop for a crossing guard when, in the performance of his or her duties, he or she so directs by use of sign or signal. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $20.00 nor more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail for a period of not more than 60 days. 
(Code 1976, § 10.32.030; Ord. No. 83-335, §§ 2(part), 4(part), 1983)  
Secs. 38-223—38-252. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING REGULATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning restrictions on stopping, standing and parking, see Wis. Stats. § 346.50; for provisions concerning unlicensed vehicles, see Wis. Stats. § 341.04. For provisions concerning drinking in an automobile, see Wis. Stats. § 947.045; for provisions concerning noise and motor vehicles, see Wis. Stats. § 347.38 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-253. - Prohibited acts. 
It is unlawful to block, hinder or retard any street traffic, whether it is vehicular or otherwise, by any of the following methods: 
(1)  By driving into an intersection when traffic signal lights are changing in color to denote a directional change in legal traffic flow; 
(2)  By driving into an intersection when such action will block said intersection to cross-traffic; 
(3)  By parking in a lane designed for the movement of traffic; 
(4)  By receiving or discharging passengers from a vehicle in a lane designed for the movement of traffic; 
(5)  By parking or stopping a car, truck or other vehicle in a lane designed for the movement of traffic for the purpose of receiving or delivering goods, merchandise or other articles to any shop, store, apartment or other building when such shop, store, apartment or other building has a public alley or an available private alley or areaway to its side or rear from which deliveries and pickups can be safely made; 
(6)  By depositing or storing construction materials or equipment in a lane designed for the movement of traffic unless a permit for this specific purpose is granted by the City Manager or by another legal authority as designated by the City Manager; 
(7)  By depositing excavated material, waste material, debris, junk, branches, brush or other litter in a lane designed for the movement of traffic; 
(8)  By standing, sitting down, lying down or loitering in any way in a lane designed for the movement of traffic; 
(9)  By stopping a railway car or a locomotive across a railway road crossing or street crossing for an interval of more than five minutes; 
(10)  By the erection of signs or barricades without proper legal authorization; and 
(11)  By any other irregular or nefarious means or disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1976, § 10.36.010)  
Sec. 38-254. - Unnecessary vehicle noises prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall make unnecessary and annoying noise with a motor vehicle by squealing tires, excessive acceleration of the engine, emitting unnecessary and loud muffler noises, or having a modified or inadequately maintained exhaust or braking system. 
(b)  Excessive noise caused by emergency situation maneuvers will not be ticketed when the operator is attempting to avoid a collision with a pedestrian, animal, fixed object, or any other motor vehicle. 
(c)  The term "emergency situations" is defined as circumstances which could not reasonably be foreseen by an alert motor vehicle operator. Emergency vehicles are exempt from this section. 
(Code 1976, § 10.36.020)  
Sec. 38-255. - Unlicensed vehicles on sidewalks and roadways prohibited; exception. 
No person shall ride or operate go-carts, snowmobiles or any other unlicensed motorized vehicle upon the sidewalks or roadways, except for purposes of removing snow on sidewalks. 
(Code 1976, § 10.36.030)  
Sec. 38-256. - Drinking in vehicles unlawful; not applicable when. 
It is unlawful for any person to drink from or to open a container of fermented malt beverage on any public street, parking, or park, and upon all premises held out for public use of their motor vehicles, whether such premises are publicly or privately owned. This section does not apply to a motor bus as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(31). 
(Code 1976, § 10.36.040)  
Sec. 38-257. - Sleeping in vehicles unlawful. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sleep in a parked vehicle while on any public street, public parking lot or park, from the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., unless otherwise posted. The extension of the authorization of allowing sleeping in parked vehicles between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. is approved; and such extension shall only apply and be extended to the Municipal Lot located at 105 North Jackson Street, Janesville, WI, USA; and that such extension of this parking privilege shall expire and be revoked on March 31, 2020, or sooner if so ordered. The City Manager shall immediately commence discussions with Rock County Government and/or such other agencies of the City Manager's choosing, for purposes of transferring overnight parking responsibilities to such agencies who have either the legal or mission-authorizing corporate provisions to provide such parking privileges and necessary support services, including, but not limited to, case management and other such related services that they would deem necessary. If in the event these negotiations between the City Manager and said agencies and/or organizations fails to result in the consummation of their acceptance of responsibility, such parking privilege provided for herein shall cease in any event on March 31, 2020, or before such a date if so authorized by the City Council or by Order of the Chief of Police of the City of Janesville. 
(b)  It is unlawful to sleep in a parked vehicle on private property, at any time, without the consent of the owner or lessee. 
(Code 1976, § 10.36.050; Ord. No. 2019-755, § 10.36.050, 7-22-2019; Ord. No. 2019-775, § I, 10-28-2019)  
Sec. 38-258. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of Section 38-253, 38-255 or 38-257 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $20.00 nor more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail for a period of not more than 60 days. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of Section 38-254 or 38-256 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the cost of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail for a period of not more than 90 days. 
(Code 1976, § 10.36.060; Ord. No. 83-335, § 4(part), 1983)  
Secs. 38-259—38-279. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - DYNAMIC BRAKING NOISE PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 38-280. - Purpose and intent. 
The City Council of the City of Janesville, Wisconsin, finds that the use of motor vehicle brakes which are activated or operated by the compression of the engine (dynamic braking devices) of a motor vehicle creates noise and disturbs and disrupts the public peace and quiet and, therefore, finds that it would be in the best interest of public health, safety and general welfare to prohibit the use of such brakes within the City limits of the City of Janesville. 
(Code 1976, § 10.37.010)  
Sec. 38-281. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dynamic braking device (commonly referred to as "Jake Brakes™"; "Jacobs Brakes™"; engine brake, or compression brake) means a device or procedure primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. 
(Code 1976, § 10.37.020)  
Sec. 38-282. - Prohibition. 
It is unlawful for any person to cause unreasonable, loud, or excessive noise within the City of Janesville by operating any motor vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged (including "Jake™"; braking, engine braking, or compression braking devices), except for the aversion of imminent danger to persons or property. 
(Code 1976, § 10.37.030)  
Sec. 38-283. - Emergency vehicles. 
Emergency vehicles shall be exempt from this article. 
(Code 1976, § 10.37.040)  
Sec. 38-284. - Signs. 
Signs shall be installed at the main arterial highways and truck routes leading into the City of Janesville that shall state that such ordinance is in effect. The Director of Public Works and his or her designees are authorized and directed to gain appropriate approval from the State of Wisconsin to post appropriate signs consistent with the provisions of this article and in accordance with state law and Administrative Code. 
(Code 1976, § 10.37.050)  
Sec. 38-285. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the cost of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail for a period of not more than 60 days. 
(Code 1976, § 10.37.060)  
Secs. 38-286—38-303. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - ANTI-CRUISING ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 38-304. - Findings and purpose. 
It is hereby found by the City Council that a threat to the public health, safety and welfare arises from the congestion created by the repetitive and unnecessary driving of motor vehicles, also known as cruising, at certain times upon certain highways within the City of Janesville. The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Reduce dangerous traffic congestion. 
(2)  Facilitate safer streets with less vehicular traffic volume. 
(3)  Facilitate the movement, as well as the safe movement, of vehicular traffic upon certain streets and throughout the City. 
(4)  Reduce noise pollution and disturbance. 
(5)  Reduce air pollution. 
(6)  Reduce the obstruction of streets, sidewalks and parking lots. 
(7)  Facilitate and increase the safe, ready and easy public ingress and egress to parking lots, shops, buildings and businesses open to the public upon certain City streets. 
(8)  Reduce the impediment and interferences with the use of public and private property resulting from cruising. 
(9)  Facilitate and ensure safer, easier and more ready access for emergency vehicles to and through said highways. 
(Code 1976, § 10.38.010)  
Sec. 38-305. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cruising means driving a motor vehicle past a traffic control point in the designated area more than twice in any two-hour period between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Passing a designated control point a third time under the aforesaid conditions shall constitute unnecessary repetitive driving and cruising. 
Designated area means and includes: 
(1)  All of that portion of Milwaukee Street, within the limits of the City, bounded by Atwood Avenue on the east and Locust Street on the west. 
(2)  All of that portion of Court Street, within the limits of the City, bounded by Atwood Avenue on the east and Locust Street on the west. 
Traffic control point means a reference point within or adjacent to a designated area selected by a police officer for the purpose of determining unnecessary repetitive driving and cruising. 
(Code 1976, § 10.38.020)  
Sec. 38-306. - Cruising prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in cruising. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, the person having control and/or ownership of a motor vehicle shall be considered the person cruising, without regard as to whether that person was actually driving the motor vehicle each time it passed the traffic control point. 
(c)  Having control or ownership of a motor vehicle shall mean either the owner of the vehicle, if present in the vehicle at the time of the violation, or, if the owner is not present, the person operating the vehicle at the time of violation. 
(Code 1976, § 10.38.030)  
Sec. 38-307. - Exemptions. 
Excepted from the prohibitions set forth in this article shall be: 
(1)  Any publicly owned vehicle of any City, county, state, federal or other governmental unit or agency, while such vehicle is being operated for official purposes of the governmental unit. 
(2)  Any authorized emergency vehicle. 
(3)  Any taxicabs for hire, public transit buses, and other vehicles being operated for business purposes. 
(4)  Events, uses, and activities sponsored, permitted, and/or authorized by the Janesville City Council, and then only occurring within the express permission, terms, conditions, restrictions, limitations, and requirements set by the Council, from time to time, for each such event, use, and/or activity. The City Council may not sponsor, permit, or authorize an event, use, and/or activity unless it is deemed by the Council to be beneficial to the community and is limited to between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. midnight. 
(Code 1976, § 10.38.040)  
Sec. 38-308. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to and shall pay the following applicable forfeiture, to which shall be added the costs of prosecution: 
(1)  Not less than $50.00 nor more than $250.00 if the person has not committed a previous violation of this article within 12 months of the violation. 
(2)  Not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 if the person has committed one previous violation of this article within 12 months of the violation. 
(3)  Not less than $150.00 nor more than $500.00 if the person has committed two or more violations of this article within 12 months of the violation. 
(b)  In default of the payment of a forfeiture imposed for violation of any provision of this article, such defaulting convicted violator shall be confined in the Rock County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed 60 days, or the court may suspend such defaulting violator's Wisconsin motor vehicle operator's privilege in the manner and for the time provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 10.38.050)  
Secs. 38-309—38-334. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning restrictions on stopping and parking, see Wis. Stats. § 346.50 et seq.; for provisions authorizing local authorities to regulate the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, see Wis. Stats. § 349.13. 
 
Sec. 38-335. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply in all public streets and in all City-owned parking lots within the City unless otherwise specified. 
(b)  The definitions and applicable provisions contained elsewhere in this chapter shall apply in this article. 
(c)  Whenever in this article parking regulations, restrictions, limitations or prohibitions are established, such regulations, restrictions, limitations or prohibitions shall apply to and shall be enforceable against the operator of the vehicle and also against the registered owner of the vehicle who permits another to operate such vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.010; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-336. - Parking prohibitions; exceptions for temporary stopping. 
No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle in any of the following places, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading or in receiving or discharging passengers and while the vehicle is tended by a licensed operator so that it may promptly be moved in case of an emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic: 
(1)  Within 15 feet of an intersection; 
(2)  Closer than 15 feet to the near limits of a crosswalk; 
(3)  On a terrace or sidewalk area, except in a permanent paved location approved by the City Council; 
(4)  Within four feet of the entrance to an alley or private driveway; 
(5)  In a public alley within a business district; 
(6)  In a loading or bus loading zone; 
(7)  Within ten feet of a fire hydrant; 
(8)  In front of or within five feet of any curbside mail box; 
(9)  In any public park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.; 
(10)  On the left side of a street, except as otherwise provided in this article or permitted by official traffic signs and markers; 
(11)  On any bridge in the City (except the East/West Court Street Rock River bridge); 
(12)  Closer than 30 feet to the approach to any flashing beacon, yield sign, stop sign or traffic-control signal, except during regular traffic movement; 
(13)  In any place so as to obstruct traffic. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.020)  
Sec. 38-337. - No parking, stopping or standing contrary to official traffic or parking sign or marker; no exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle at any location when in contravention of an official traffic or parking sign or marker which has been placed at that location and indicates the particular prohibition, limitation or restriction applicable. 
(b)  The prohibitions of Subsection (a) of this section shall not be subject to any exceptions elsewhere set forth in this Code, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Section 38-336. The prohibition of Subsection (a) of this section shall apply to any and all vehicles even if such vehicle is engaged in loading or unloading or in receiving or discharging passengers. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.025)  
Sec. 38-338. - How to park on a street. 
Upon streets where stopping or parking is authorized or permitted, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Upon a street where traffic is permitted to move in both directions simultaneously, and where angle parking is not clearly designated by official traffic signs or markers, a vehicle shall be parked parallel to the edge of the street, headed in the direction of traffic on the right side of the street. 
(2)  Upon a one-way street or divided street where parking on the left side of the roadway is clearly authorized by official traffic signs or markers, a vehicle shall be parked parallel to the edge of the street, headed in the direction of traffic on the left or right side of the street or as otherwise indicated by such markers. 
(3)  Upon a street where angle parking is clearly authorized by official traffic signs or markers, a vehicle shall be parked at an angle, within the spaces indicated and not backed into such spaces. 
(4)  No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle backed against the curbline except while actually loading or unloading. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.030; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-339. - Parking restrictions on streets and public parking lots. 
(a)  No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle on any street or in any public parking lot: 
(1)  For more than 15 consecutive minutes in a 15-minute parking area; 
(2)  For more than 60 consecutive minutes in a one-hour parking area; 
(3)  For more than 90 consecutive minutes in a 90-minute parking area; 
(4)  For more than 120 consecutive minutes in a two-hour parking area; 
(5)  For more than 24 hours in any free parking area; 
(6)  In a leased stall without the permission of the lessee. 
(b)  No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended and whether temporarily or otherwise, upon any portion of a street, public parking lot or private parking lot reserved for handicapped persons by official traffic signs or markers. 
(c)  No person shall park any vehicle on any street or in a public parking lot except in an area in which parking is permitted and within the boundaries of a designated parking stall, where such boundaries are indicated, and in the manner indicated as proper. 
(d)  No person shall move a vehicle from a parking stall within a public parking lot to a different parking stall within the same lot without first leaving the lot. 
(e)  The time limit restrictions of this section do not apply to a vehicle while such vehicle is actually being loaded or unloaded. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.040; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-340. - Prohibitions, limitations and restrictions; when applicable. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, rule or regulation, or posted by official traffic signs or markers, the time limitations of Section 38-339 shall apply only from 8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday and from 9:00 a.m. until 1:00 p.m. on Saturday. Such time limitations shall not apply on Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. 
(b)  The prohibition against parking in a bus loading zone shall apply only from 6:00 a.m. until 6:30 p.m. on Monday through Saturday. Such prohibition shall not apply on Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, rule or regulation, or posted by official traffic signs or markers, all other prohibitions, limitations, and restrictions in this article shall apply 24 hours a day, every day of the year. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.050; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-341. - Parking permits or stickers. 
A vehicle displaying a parking permit or sticker issued under the authority of the City Manager is authorized to park at locations designated by the City Manager and is exempt from time limit restrictions at such designated locations. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.0260; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-342. - Additional parking restrictions on public or private property. 
(a)  No person may leave or park any motor vehicle on private property without the consent of the owner or lessee of the property. 
(b)  Owners or lessees of public or private property may permit parking by certain persons and limit, restrict or prohibit parking as to other persons if the owner or lessee posts a sign on the property indicating parking is permitted, limited, restricted or prohibited. No person may park, stop or leave standing any vehicle on public or private property contrary to such sign. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.070; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-343. - Parking during and after snowstorms; restrictions. 
No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle on any street or public parking lot after a snowfall of at least two inches in depth until after the snow from such street has been removed or plowed to the curbline or the snow from such parking lot has been removed. The City Council declares that an emergency exists during and following such snowstorm until the snow has been removed or so plowed. For that reason, the foregoing regulations of this section shall be controlling over any other ordinance which might be in any way conflicting. In case any vehicle is parked, stopped or left standing on any street or public parking lot in violation of this section, it may be removed by or under the direction of the Police Department or the Street Department, after one of such departments has attempted to notify the owner to remove such vehicle, and it has not been removed. In case such vehicle is removed by or at the direction of the Police Department or the Street Department, the expense of such removal may be charged against the owner of the vehicle. The removal of a vehicle shall not prevent prosecution under this section. The City Manager or Street Superintendent may waive the provisions of this section for specific streets or parking lots, or parts thereof, for specific periods of time. Such waiver may include the provision that parking is allowed on the side of the street with even house numbers on even-numbered days of the month and on the side of the street with odd house numbers on odd-numbered days of the month. Such odd-even parking shall not permit parking, standing or stopping where otherwise restricted or prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.080; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-344. - Storage on streets and public property prohibited. 
No person shall use any street, public alley or public parking lot for storage of vehicles. As used in this section, the term "storage" means to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle for sale purposes, for hire of any kind, for longer than 24 consecutive hours, or any other purpose other than that of ordinary use for transportation. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.090; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-345. - Parking large vehicles on residential streets prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in Subsection (b) of this section, no person shall park, stop or leave standing any large vehicle more than 20 feet in length or registered at more than 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight for more than two consecutive hours on any street where adjacent property is residentially zoned, unless it is so parked because of commercial or construction operations in the immediate area or because it is being loaded or unloaded. 
(b)  No person shall park, stop or leave standing any mobile recreational equipment more than 20 feet in length or more than 8,000 pounds gross vehicle weight for more than 24 consecutive hours within a single street address block on any street where adjacent property is residentially zoned. The owner or operator of any mobile recreational equipment meeting the minimum length or weight as noted in this section may request in writing a waiver allowing the equipment to be parked in one location for a period of up to 72 consecutive hours. Waiver requests shall be submitted to the Police Department and shall include a street address where the equipment is to be parked. The Police Department shall issue no more than three waivers for mobile recreational equipment to be parked adjacent to the same street address or for the same piece of equipment, owner, or operator in one calendar year. In this section, the term "mobile recreational equipment" includes, but shall not be limited to, mobile homes, motor homes, camping trailers, private buses, boats and boat trailers. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.100; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-346. - Parking trucks in Central Business District; restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall park, stop or leave standing any truck on any street in the Central Business District of the City for the purpose of receiving or delivering goods, merchandise or other articles to any apartment or business if such apartment or business has a public alley or an available private alley in the rear or on the side of such apartment or business and an entrance from such alley to such apartment or business so that receipt or delivery of goods, merchandise or other articles can be safely made through the use of such alley. 
(b)  If no public or private alley is available, a truck may be parked, stopped or left standing on the street or in a public parking lot near an apartment or business for the purpose of receiving or delivering goods, merchandise or other articles as long as such truck does not obstruct traffic. During actual loading or unloading, the time limits of such parking locations shall not apply. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.110; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-347. - Parking of motor buses prohibited; exception. 
No person shall park, stop or leave standing on any street any motor bus or vehicle for hire used for the transportation of passengers between Janesville and other cities except that such motor bus or vehicle may stop for not more than ten consecutive minutes when actually loading or unloading passengers. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.120; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-348. - Vehicle left with motor running prohibited. 
No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle on any street or public parking lot with the motor running, except when such vehicle is attended by some person competent and licensed to operate the same. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.140; Ord. No. 83-33, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-349. - Exceptions to parking and stopping prohibitions, limitations or restrictions. 
(a)  The prohibitions, limitations and restrictions of this article against parking, stopping or leaving any vehicle do not apply when: 
(1)  The vehicle becomes disabled while on the street or public parking lot in such a manner or to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping or temporarily leaving the vehicle in the prohibited place or contrary to the limitations or restrictions and when the owner or operator of such disabled vehicle has reported the vehicle disability to the Police Department; 
(2)  The stopping of the vehicle is necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with traffic regulations or the directions of the traffic officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
(b)  A vehicle bearing a special registration plate or displaying a special identification card issued to a disabled person pursuant to state law is exempt from time limitations of 30 minutes or more imposed on any street or public parking lot and is exempt from all prohibitions, limitations or restrictions regarding parking on streets or in public or private parking lots in spaces reserved for handicapped parking. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.150; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-350. - Officer to move vehicle parked illegally on street. 
Whenever a police officer finds a vehicle parked, stopped or left standing upon a street in violation of any prohibition, limitation or restriction of this article, such officer is authorized to move the vehicle or to require the operator or owner to move the vehicle to a position where parking is permitted or to either private or public parking or storage premises. The removal may be performed by or under the direction of the officer or may be contracted for by local authorities. The operator or owner of the vehicle removed shall pay the reasonable charges for moving or towing or any storage involved. The removal of the vehicle shall not prevent prosecution for violation of a prohibition, limitation or restriction of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.160; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-351. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates Section 38-336(7), parking within ten feet of a fire hydrant, shall pay a forfeiture to the City of $50.00. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of Section 38-339(a) or (c) or 38-344, except Section 38-339(a)(6), shall pay a forfeiture to the City of $15.00. 
(c)  Any person who violates Section 38-339(a)(6), regarding parking in a leased stall, shall pay a forfeiture to the City of $30.00. 
(d)  Any person who violates Section 38-339(b), regarding parking in handicap parking stalls and spaces, shall pay a forfeiture to the City of $120.00. 
(e)  Any person who violates Section 38-343, parking during and after snowstorms, shall pay a forfeiture to the City of $50.00. 
(f)  Any person who violates any provision of this article and who fails to pay a $30.00 parking ticket to the City within five working days of issuance of the ticket shall forfeit and pay to the City $15.00 in addition to the $30.00 parking ticket forfeiture. 
(g)  Any person who violates any provision of this article for which a different penalty is not otherwise specified shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $30.00 nor more than $300.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail for a period of not more than 60 days. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.170; Ord. No. 84-417, §§ 1—3, 1985; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-352. - Participation in Wisconsin Department of Transportation Non-Moving Traffic Violation and Registration Program. 
(a)  The City of Janesville hereby elects to participate in the State of Wisconsin Department of Transportation Non-Moving Traffic Violation and Registration Program (hereinafter Program), pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 345.28 and 85.13 and Wisconsin Administrative Code Transportation Chapter 128, as from time to time amended or re-numbered. 
(b)  The City of Janesville Police Department is hereby appointed the delegated agency of the City of Janesville for all matters pertaining to and/or arising from the Program, and shall, from time to time, promulgate and implement the provisions and requirements of participation in the Program. 
(c)  The City shall notify the Wisconsin Department of Transportation of this election in the manner required by law and periodically pay the participation costs established and charged by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 85.13. 
(d)  The City shall charge, assess and collect the costs of Program participation, implementation and operation against persons charged with non-moving traffic violations. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any requirement, provision, penalty or remedy set forth otherwise in this or any other chapter or section of the City of Janesville Code of General Ordinances, state statutes, Administrative Codes, or law. 
(f)  This article shall take effect the day after publication. 
(g)  Participation in the program and applicability to non-moving traffic violations shall become effective in the manner set forth in Wis. Stats. § 345.28 and Wisconsin Administrative Code Transportation Section 128.03. 
(Code 1976, § 10.40.180)  
Secs. 38-353—38-379. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - PUBLIC PARKING LOTS 
 
Sec. 38-380. - City-owned parking lots. 
A list of all City-owned parking lots shall be kept on file in the City Engineer's office and shall be open to public inspection during regular office hours. 
(Code 1976, § 10.44.010; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-381. - Courthouse parking lots; additional restrictions. 
In the upper and lower courthouse parking lots, the following restrictions shall apply in addition to all others provided by this article: 
(1)  No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in any space specifically designated for a particular person, official or type of vehicle, unless such person is that particular person or official or is driving that type of vehicle. 
(2)  The limitations regarding parking in the courthouse parking lots shall apply only from 7:30 a.m. until 5:30 p.m. on Monday through Friday. Such limitations shall not be applicable on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays on which the courthouse is not open for the transaction of official business. 
(3)  The courthouse parking lots shall be closed for all purposes between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except by specific permission of the Police Department. 
(Code 1976, § 10.44.020; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-382. - River Parking Plaza; additional restrictions. 
In the River Parking Plaza, the following restrictions shall apply in addition to all others provided by this chapter: 
(1)  No person shall operate any vehicle on the River Parking Plaza if the gross weight of such vehicle exceeds three tons. The term "gross weight," as used in this section, means the weight of the vehicle equipped for service, plus the weight which the vehicle is equipped to carry as a load. 
(2)  The River Parking Plaza shall be closed for all purposes between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except by specific permission of the Police Department. 
(Code 1976, § 10.44.030; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-383. - Parking in school lots restricted. 
No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle in a public or vocational school parking lot unless such person is a student at the school, personnel of the school or is otherwise authorized to be on school premises. 
(Code 1976, § 10.44.030; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-384. - Speed limit in parking lots. 
No person shall operate a vehicle in any public parking lot in the City at a speed of more than ten miles per hour. 
(Code 1976, § 10.44.030; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-385. - Operating violations in parking lots. 
The provisions of state law and this Code dealing with operating under the influence of intoxicants, reckless driving, and hit and run shall apply in any parking lot in the City held out to the public for use of their vehicles, whether such lot is publicly or privately owned. 
(Code 1976, § 10.44.030; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-386. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $30.00 nor more than $150.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail for a period of not more than 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 10.44.030; Ord. No. 83-335, § 1(part), 1983)  
Secs. 38-387—38-415. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - ABANDONED, UNLICENSED OR NONOPERABLE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning vehicle abandonment, see Wis. Stats. § 342.40; for provisions authorizing any municipality to enact ordinances governing the removal of abandoned vehicles, see Wis. Stats. § 342.40(3). 
 
Sec. 38-416. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle which remains in one location on public property for more than 48 hours. Also included in the term "abandoned motor vehicle" is a motor vehicle which remains in one location on private property without any permission of the occupant of the private property for more than one hour. Any substantial part of a motor vehicle are included in the above definition. 
Nonoperable motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or any substantial part thereof which is incapable of being operated. 
Unlicensed motor vehicle means a motor vehicle which does not have affixed thereto a current motor vehicle license. 
(Code 1976, § 10.52.010; Ord. No. 79-155, § 1(part), 1979)  
Sec. 38-417. - Prohibition. 
No person who owns or possesses or has custody of a motor vehicle shall allow the same or any substantial part thereof to become an abandoned motor vehicle. No person being the owner or occupant of private property, shall allow an unlicensed motor vehicle or non-operable motor vehicle to remain on such private property for more than ten calendar days. Such allowance is a public nuisance and may be abated or removed and penalties imposed as set forth in this article. Any such vehicle may be disposed of as set out in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 10.52.020)  
Sec. 38-418. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to an automobile sales or repair enterprise operating a properly zoned area for such enterprises; provided there is, upon such premises, an inside storage area sufficient to accommodate five or more motor vehicles at one time. Such exempt business enterprises shall include auto junkyards, auto repair shops, or accessory, tire and battery sales stores, or vehicles stored inside a suitable building. 
(Code 1976, § 10.52.030; Ord. No. 79-155, § 1(part), 1979)  
Sec. 38-419. - Owner notification. 
Upon determination that the time limits specified in Sections 38-416 and 38-417 have run out, removal proceedings may commence. The commencement of such proceeding shall be by service, personally or by first class mail, of a notice on the record owner and all lienholders of record that such vehicle is in violation of this article. At the same time, a notice containing the word "abandoned" shall be placed in a conspicuous place on the vehicle specifying that the vehicle is in violation of this article and that the vehicle must be removed within 48 hours of the affixing of the notice. 
(Code 1976, § 10.52.040; Ord. No. 79-155, § 1(part), 1979)  
Sec. 38-420. - Re-inspection fee. 
A re-inspection fee shall be charged by the City against and paid by the property owner for every violation that is not corrected by the re-inspection date. An additional re-inspection fee shall be charged by the City for each subsequent re-inspection per violation until full compliance is achieved. The re-inspection fee and additional re-inspection fee shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 10.52.045)  
Sec. 38-421. - Removal. 
After two days after personal service or four days after mailing, as specified in Section 38-419, the Chief of Police or his or her designee is authorized to remove or to direct the removal of the vehicle that has remained beyond the applicable time limit. 
(Code 1976, § 10.52.050; Ord. No. 79-155, § 1(part), 1979)  
Sec. 38-422. - Disposal. 
Upon removal the vehicle shall be disposed of as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 342.40. 
(Code 1976, § 10.52.060; Ord. No. 79-155, § 1(part), 1979)  
Sec. 38-423. - Towing cost. 
Upon conviction for violating this article, the amount of the towing expense shall be added to the amount of forfeiture imposed. 
(Code 1976, § 10.52.070)  
Sec. 38-424. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article is subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution and the costs of removal of the motor vehicle as provided in this article. In default of payment, the violator shall be imprisoned in the Rock County jail for a period of not less than five days, nor more than 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 10.52.080; Ord. No. 79-155, § 1(part), 1979)  
Secs. 38-425—38-446. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - PEDESTRIANS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions authorizing a City to designate by ordinance a pedestrian mall, see Wis. Stats. § 66.298. 
 
Sec. 38-447. - Malls designated; violation; penalty. 
(a)  The following streets are designated as pedestrian malls, and vehicular traffic thereon in any form is entirely prohibited: Wells Street from South Garfield Avenue easterly to Forest Park Boulevard. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $20.00 nor more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Rock County Jail for not more than 60 days. 
(Code 1976, § 10.56.010; Ord. No. 83-335, §§ 2(part), 4(part), 1983)  
Sec. 38-448. - Traffic-control signals. 
The City Manager is authorized to install a pedestrian traffic control signal at the following locations: 
(1)  North Washington Street at the intersections of Maple Avenue; 
(2)  Mt. Zion Avenue at the location of the Jefferson School. 
(Code 1976, § 10.56.020)  
Secs. 38-449—38-479. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - MOTOR-PROPELLED VEHICLE 
 
Sec. 38-480. - Regulations; generally. 
In order to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens, and to regulate vehicles inherently dangerous to life and limb, and to further provide for abatement of noise pollution, the provisions of this article are enacted upon all public and private lands within the City. 
(Code 1976, § 10.60.010)  
Sec. 38-481. - Use; area allowed. 
All vehicles, as defined by Wis. Stats. § 340.01(74), and which are licensable under the Vehicle Code of the state, may only be driven on public roadways dedicated for public travel, and to and from any place of parking on private property by the shortest distance to such public roadways. 
(Code 1976, § 10.60.020)  
Sec. 38-482. - Unlicensed vehicles; use prohibited when; exceptions. 
(a)  All vehicles, as defined in Section 38-481, which are not licensable under the Vehicle Code of the state are expressly prohibited from being operated within the City, whether on public or private property, between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless excepted by Section 38-483 or 38-484, or 38-485. 
(b)  No person shall operate any such unlicensable vehicle on any land zoned R1 or R2 by this Code at any time, except that a person may operate an ATV and other unlicensable vehicles upon land zoned R1 or R2 solely for the following purposes, and then only during such times as set forth in Subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  To and/or from a garage, storage shed or similar structure upon property which is such person's principal residence or where such ATV or other unlicensable vehicle is customarily stored to load upon or unload from a truck or other vehicle for transport and use off site, but only by means of the shortest distance, and in no event longer than five minutes at any one time nor more often than twice per day. 
(2)  To haul a boat trailer for storage purposes upon property which is such person's principal residence or where such trailer is customarily stored, but only by means of the shortest distance, and in no event longer than five minutes at any one time nor more often than twice per day. 
(3)  To plow snow upon paved driveways or sidewalks. 
(Code 1976, § 10.60.030)  
Sec. 38-483. - Exceptions to Section 38-481. 
Excepted from Section 38-481 shall be any vehicles operated by employees of or incidental to the function of any federal, state or municipal governmental body or any subdivision thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 10.60.040)  
Sec. 38-484. - Exceptions to Section 38-482. 
Excepted from Section 38-482 shall be vehicles as described in Wis. Stats. §§ 341.26(3), (4) and 341.266: powered lawn mowers, garden tractors, and agricultural equipment; golf carts and golf course maintenance equipment, when operated on golf courses; equipment being directly used in construction, removal, renovation or demolition of any property, or such equipment when in transit; any vehicles operated by employees of or incidental to the function of any federal, state or municipal governmental body or any subdivision thereof; and vehicles operated inside of buildings, power-driven equipment actually being used in manufacturing, processing or warehousing or such equipment when in transit. 
(Code 1976, § 10.60.050)  
Sec. 38-485. - Limitation of vehicles operating in certain areas. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this article, all vehicles specifically allowed to operate in certain areas by Sections 26-24 through 26-35 are permitted to operate within those limitations. 
(Code 1976, § 10.60.060)  
Sec. 38-486. - Violation; penalty. 
The penalty for violation of this article shall be the same as that prescribed in Section 38-580. 
(Code 1976, § 10.60.070)  
Secs. 38-487—38-510. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - BICYCLES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions authorizing cities to regulate the operation of bicycles, see Wis. Stats. § 349.18. 
 
Sec. 38-511. - Reserved. 
(Code 1976, § 10.64.010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-704 , § I, adopted November 27, 2017, repealed § 10.64.010, which pertained to registration—required.  
Sec. 38-512. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-704 , § I, adopted November 27, 2017, repealed § 10.64.020, which pertained to description—form—constitutes registration—serial number—file kept by police.  
Sec. 38-513. - Reserved. 
(Code 1976, § 10.64.030) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-704 , § I, adopted November 27, 2017, repealed § 10.64.030, which pertained to identification tag and derived from Ord. No. 79-169, 1979.  
Sec. 38-514. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-704 , § I, adopted November 27, 2017, repealed § 10.64.040, which pertained to police notification of non-operation or change of ownership.  
Sec. 38-515. - Feet required to be on pedals. 
No bicycle shall be allowed to proceed on any street in the City by inertia of momentum with the feet of the rider removed from the pedals. 
(Code 1976, § 10.64.050)  
Sec. 38-516. - Leaving or parking to create a hazard unlawful. 
No person shall leave or park a bicycle at such a place or in such a way as to create a hazard to pedestrians, automobile operators, or to anyone else. 
(Code 1976, § 10.64.060)  
Sec. 38-517. - Driving rules applicable; exceptions. 
Subject to the special provisions applicable to bicycles, every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway is granted all the rights, and is subject to all the duties, which this chapter, except Articles XV, XVII, and XX, grants or applies to the operator of a motor vehicle, except those provisions which by their express terms, apply only to motor vehicles, or which, by their very nature, would have no application to bicycles. 
(Code 1976, § 10.64.070)  
Sec. 38-518. - Riding on sidewalks—Unlawful when. 
Bicyclists exercising due care may drive and operate their bicycles upon the sidewalk, except sidewalks in the Central Business Districts, in outlying Business Districts, pedestrian paths, within one block of school grounds, or public playgrounds, when such riding shall jeopardize the safety of pedestrians thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 10.64.080)  
Sec. 38-519. - Riding on sidewalks—Passing regulations; pedestrians to have right-of-way. 
It is unlawful for any person driving a bicycle on the sidewalk to attempt to pass another person going in the same direction on the sidewalk, without giving a warning, and until it becomes evident that the person so warned is aware of the approach of such person driving the bicycle. Pedestrians shall at all times have the right-of-way upon the sidewalks, and if necessary, the person driving such bicycle shall dismount and vacate the sidewalk to prevent a collision. Any such person driving a bicycle upon the sidewalk must have the bicycle under control at all times. 
(Code 1976, § 10.64.090)  
Sec. 38-520. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates the provisions of Sections 38-511 through 38-519 shall pay a forfeiture or fine in the amount of $5.00 and the costs of prosecution. For the second or subsequent offense, the violator shall pay a forfeiture in the amount of $10.00 and the costs of prosecution. 
(Code 1976, § 10.64.100)  
Sec. 38-521. - Parent or guardian responsibility; generally. 
No parent or guardian of any child under the age of 18 years shall authorize or knowingly permit such child to violate any of the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 346.78, 346.79, 346.80 or 347.489, adopted by reference in Section 38-1, or Sections 38-511 through 38-520. 
(Code 1976, § 10.64.110)  
Sec. 38-522. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates Section 38-521 shall pay a forfeiture of no more than $20.00 and the costs of prosecution, or in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the Rock County jail for not more than five days. 
(Code 1976, § 10.64.130)  
Secs. 38-523—38-554. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - BICYCLES AND OTHER FOUND PROPERTY; DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 38-555. - Disposal of bicycles and other found property. 
(a)  The City may, from time to time, dispose of any and all found personal property, including, but not limited to, bicycles, which has been abandoned or remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days after the City takes possession of the property by any means determined by the City Manager to be in the best interests of the City. 
(b)  The found, abandoned or unclaimed property may be disposed of by public auction or by sale open to the public. 
(c)  If the found, abandoned or unclaimed property is not disposed of in a sale open to the public or by public auction, the City shall maintain: 
(1)  An inventory of such property. 
(2)  A record of the date of method of disposal, including the consideration received for the property, if any. 
(3)  The name and address of the person taking possession of the property. 
(4)  Such inventory shall be kept as a public record for a period of not less than two years from the date of disposal of the property by the City. 
(d)  For bicycles, any means of disposal other than public auction or sale open to the public is hereby permitted by this article. 
(e)  If the disposal is in the form of a sale, all receipts from the sale, after deducting the necessary expenses of keeping the property and conducting the sale, shall be paid to the City Treasurer who shall deposit same into the City's general fund. 
(Code 1976, § 10.66.010)  
Sec. 38-556. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)  This article hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference as if fully set forth Wis. Stats. § 66.0139 as from time to time amended or modified. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this article is in conflict with state law, the provisions of state law shall govern. 
(Code 1976, § 10.66.020)  
Secs. 38-557—38-575. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - SNOWMOBILES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions concerning snowmobile regulations, see Wis. Stats. ch. 350. 
 
Sec. 38-576. - State regulations adopted. 
Wis. Stats. ch. 350 is adopted by reference, incorporated in this article as set forth in its entirety, including the applicable penalty provisions. 
(Code 1976, § 10.68.010; Ord. No. 75-472, § 5, 1975)  
Sec. 38-577. - Prohibitions; exceptions. 
Snowmobiles are specifically prohibited from operating on public lands within the City, or upon any public lands owned by the City, except those areas and time periods approved by the City Council and designated on an official map in the office of the Director of Public Services. 
(Code 1976, § 10.68.020)  
Sec. 38-578. - Stock mufflers required. 
Stock mufflers are required on all machines. 
(Code 1976, § 10.68.030)  
Sec. 38-579. - All-terrain vehicle regulations. 
All-terrain vehicles shall be subject to all snowmobile regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 10.68.040)  
Sec. 38-580. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article where a penalty is not provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 350 shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $25.00 and not to exceed $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense. In default of the payment of such penalty, the violator shall be imprisoned not less than five days nor more than 30 days in the county jail. 
(Code 1976, § 10.68.060)  
Secs. 38-581—38-610. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI. - SKATEBOARD REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 38-611. - Prohibition; public property restriction. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, ride, ride upon, or propel a skateboard: 
(1)  Upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, or other public property of any kind within the following specifically defined area: the area bounded by North Academy Street from Centerway to Dodge Street, Dodge Street from North Academy Street to North River Street, North River Street from Dodge Street to West Court Street, Court Street from North River Street to the east bank of the Rock River, the east bank of the Rock River from East Court Street to St. Lawrence Avenue, St. Lawrence Avenue from the east bank of the Rock River to South Wisconsin Street, South Wisconsin Street from St. Lawrence Avenue to Prospect Avenue, Prospect Avenue from South Wisconsin Street to North Parker Drive, North Parker Drive from Prospect Avenue to Centerway, and Centerway from North Parker Drive to North Academy Street. 
(2)  City parking lots wherever located. 
(3)  The only exception to the above prohibitions shall be City-owned bike trails. 
(Code 1976, § 10.70.010)  
Sec. 38-612. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Propel means the use of force to move or push forward. 
Ride means to be carried or travel on a vehicle. 
Skateboard means a play vehicle consisting of a board mounted on small wheels used for coasting or performing athletic stunts. 
(Code 1976, § 10.70.020)  
Sec. 38-613. - Private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, ride, or propel a skateboard upon any portion of private property unless permission has been received from the owner, lessee or person in control of that property. 
(Code 1976, § 10.70.030)  
Sec. 38-614. - Skateboarders to yield. 
Except as provided in Section 38-611, skateboarding is permitted on publicly owned sidewalks and bike trails, provided that operators or riders of skateboards shall yield the right-of-way to other pedestrians and shall not otherwise endanger or interfere with normal pedestrian traffic on those sidewalks and bike trails. 
(Code 1976, § 10.70.040)  
Sec. 38-615. - Violation; penalty. 
The penalty for violating Sections 38-611 through 38-614 shall be the payment to the City of a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $20.00 for the first offense, and not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00 for the second and subsequent offense. 
(Code 1976, § 10.70.050)  
Secs. 38-616—38-633. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXII. - LOW-SPEED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 38-634. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Low-speed vehicle (LSV). The term "low-speed vehicle means a motor vehicle: 
(1)  That is defined as a LSV under state law, as from time to time amended or renumbered (i.e., Wis. Stats. § 340.01(27h)); or 
(2)  That conforms to the definition and requirements for low-speed vehicles as adopted in the federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles under 49 CFR 571.3(b) and 571.500. The term "low-speed vehicle" does not include a golf cart. 
(Code 1976, § 10.71.010)  
Sec. 38-635. - Use permitted on City streets. 
(a)  The use of a LSV is prohibited except as expressly authorized by this article. 
(b)  The use of a LSV is hereby authorized on roadways within the City of Janesville upon which the speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less. 
(Code 1976, § 10.71.020)  
Sec. 38-636. - Operation. 
(a)  The operation of a LSV as permitted herein shall comply in all respects with this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code, as applicable to the operation of motor vehicles. 
(b)  No person may operate a low-speed vehicle at a speed in excess of 25 miles per hour. 
(Code 1976, § 10.71.030)  
Sec. 38-637. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Each violation of this article shall result in the issuance of a citation and the payment to the City of a forfeiture by the violator in an amount of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, together with applicable state penalty and other surcharges, and court costs. 
(b)  Each violation of a state or local traffic code not contained within this article shall subject the operator of the LSV to the citations and penalties set forth for such violations in the applicable state statutes and City ordinances. Such violations are cumulative to and not in lieu of those set forth for violations of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 10.71.040)  
Secs. 38-638—38-662. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXIII. - JANESVILLE TRANSIT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 38-663. - Bus fares—Authority to establish. 
The City Council shall have the authority to establish the fares to be charged by the Janesville Transit System for bus service. The regular fare rates may be modified by ordinance whenever the Council deems it necessary. However, a temporary variation (defined as no longer than six consecutive days) from the regular fare rates may be authorized by simple motion of the council. 
(Code 1976, § 10.76.010; Ord. No. 80-218, § 1(part), 1981)  
Sec. 38-664. - Bus fares—Regular fare rates. 
The regular fare rates that shall be charged by the Janesville Transit System shall be in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule which appears in this Code. The following are exempt from the regular fare rates: 
(1)  Senior citizens, defined as persons who are 65 years of age or older, Federal Medicare Card holders, and persons with disabilities when such individuals follow the procedures required by the Transit Director will be charged a reduced fare, in amounts as established by the City Council from time to time and as set out in the fee schedule which appears in this Code. When such procedures have not been followed, the charge shall be $1.50 per ride per passenger. 
(2)  No charge for a child under five years old when accompanied by a fare-paying passenger to a maximum of two children per fare-paying passenger. Organized groups of children under five years old must pay the regular fare. 
(3)  No charge for any transfer from one transit system bus to another. 
(4)  Paratransit service for those disabled individuals qualifying for this service under the provisions of the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) and the procedures required by the Transit Director. This fare shall also apply to any person traveling as a companion, as defined by the ADA, with the disabled passenger. Personal Care Attendants as defined by the ADA, and certified as required to accompany the disabled person in question, will not be charged a fare as required by the ADA. The fare shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and as set out in the fee schedule which appears in this Code. 
(5)  Semester pass based on bulk purchase or consignment to the School District of Janesville for distribution or sale to its students; and the District follows certain certification procedures established by the Transit Director as a condition of eligibility to sell said passes. When the procedures are not followed, semester pass purchases or consignment shall discontinue. The fare shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and as set out in the fee schedule which appears in this Code. 
(6)  Summer pass based on bulk purchase or consignment to the School District of Janesville for distribution or sale to its students; and the District follows certain certification procedures established by the Transit Director as a condition of eligibility to sell said passes. When the procedures are not followed, summer pass purchases or consignment shall discontinue. The fare shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time and as set out in the fee schedule which appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 10.76.020; Ord. No. 84-405, § 1, 1984; Ord. No. 83-344, § 1m, 1983; Ord. No. 81-272, § 1, 1981; Ord. No. 80-218, § 1(part), 1981; Ord. No. 2017-703, § I, 11-27-2017 )  
Sec. 38-665. - Bus fares—Penalty. 
Any individual who boards or rides a Janesville transit system bus, or other JTS transport vehicle for which payment of a fare is required, without first paying the fare required by this article shall pay a forfeiture of from $10.00 to $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution therefor, and in default of forfeiture payment, be subject to remedies provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 10.76.030; Ord. No. 80-218, § 1(part), 1981)  
Chapter 40 - WATER AND SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to construct and maintain sewer system, Wis. Stats. § 62.18; municipal public utilities, generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.0801 et seq.; authority of city to prescribe rules concerning the installation, alteration and inspection of plumbing, Wis. Stats. § 145.04; regulation of public utilities, generally, Wis. Stats. § 196.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 40-1—40-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 
 
Sec. 40-19. - Waterworks management. 
The Board of Water Commissioners, as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 66, has been abolished. The entire charge and management of the waterworks utility owned by the City, and all property used in connection therewith, shall be vested in the City Manager, subject, however, to the general control and supervision of the Council. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.010)  
Sec. 40-20. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director means the City Manager, the Director of Public Works or Services, the Utility Director and/or other duly authorized deputy, agent or representative as designated by the City Manager. 
PSC means Public Service Commission of Wisconsin. 
Water main andpublic water main means the principal pipes in a system of pipes for conveying potable water. Public water mains are provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City. The term "water main" and "public water main" also includes water mains within or outside the City boundaries that serve one or more persons, even though those mains may not have been constructed with City funds. All individual water services must be connected to a public water main. Private water mains cannot be constructed or connected to the water distribution system. 
Water service means the pipe running between the public water main and the water meter. The portion between the main and the curb stop is owned by the water utility and is the utility's responsibility to maintain. The portion between the curb stop and the meter is the customer's property and the customer's maintenance responsibility. 
(b)  See Section 40-143 for additional definitions. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.020)  
Sec. 40-21. - Rules and regulations, generally. 
The Director shall have the power, and it shall be his or her duty, to prepare rules and regulations governing the introduction, supply and consumption of water, the installation of plumbing in connection therewith, and fixing a schedule of rates for water service within the City. Such rules and regulations are subject to review by the Council. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.030)  
Sec. 40-22. - Billing. 
(a)  Residential bills shall be placed in the name of the property owner except as permitted in Subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Residential property owners may have the bill placed in the name of the tenant if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The owner of the rental dwelling unit notifies the utility in writing of the name and address of the owner. 
(2)  The owner of the rental dwelling unit notifies the utility in writing of the name and address of the tenant who is responsible for payment of the utility charges. 
(3)  If requested by the utility, the owner of the rental dwelling unit provides the utility with a copy of the rental or lease agreement in which the tenant assumes responsibility for the payment of the utility charges. 
(c)  In order to comply with the requirements of Subsection (b) of this section, the property owner must complete a written application in compliance with the operating policies of the Janesville Utility. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.035)  
Sec. 40-23. - Water treatment. 
To protect the public health, the water utility shall add chlorine and fluoride to the water supply prior to entering the distribution system in accordance with the State Administrative Code. The water utility shall conduct a monitoring and reporting program in compliance with the state requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.040)  
Sec. 40-24. - Service area. 
The water utility shall provide service within the corporate limits of the City. Service to properties or areas outside the City limits cannot be provided unless the property owners enter into an agreement with the City and a boundary agreement has been adopted between the City and the political jurisdiction in which the property is located. This agreement will, among other things, require the property owner, or the property owner's heirs or successors, to annex into the City when the City's corporate limits reach any side of the property. If the property owner fails to annex to the City, for any reason, service will be terminated until such time that annexation does occur. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.050)  
Sec. 40-25. - Underground work to be done by City; exception. 
(a)  The laying of water mains, the construction of service laterals in connection with water services, and also any and all necessary underground work in connection with the waterworks distribution system may be done directly by the City without submitting the same for bids. This provision shall continue in force, until otherwise provided by the Council by proper ordinance; however, the rules may provide that repairs and replacements of certain types of laterals shall be done by and at the expense of the abutting property owner subject to City supervision. All such work shall be done in accordance with the City and state plumbing codes. 
(b)  To protect the City and property owners, permits for laying of water services will be issued only to plumbers licensed in the State of Wisconsin. It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector to supervise the installation of water services and require said work and materials to be in accordance with SPS 382.40 and City ordinance. 
(c)  In addition to the Public Service Commission (PSC) Water Utility Operating Rules, no extension of the water supply service shall be made from one building to a separate building on the same lot or parcel and no division of water supply service shall be made at the curb to serve a separate building on the same lot or parcel, except as described in the following sentence. Buildings used in the same business, located on the same parcel, and served by a single lateral may have the customer's water supply piping installed to a central point so that volume can be metered in one place. 
(d)  All water service pipe laid underground between stop box and the meter of two inches in diameter or less shall be of the materials listed in SPS 384. All pipe laid underground between main and stop box shall be Type K soft copper. All pipe larger than two inches shall be PVC or ductile iron pipe meeting the standards of the American Water Works Association (AWWA) for water service. 
(e)  In addition to the PSC Water Utility Operating Rules, when the property requires a larger service lateral to replace an existing smaller diameter pipe, the smaller service must be disconnected at the main by removal of the corporation. The utility will remove the existing corporation and plug the main, but the owner is responsible for the excavation of the water main at the existing corporation and the street repair. In addition, the existing curb box (stop box) must be removed by the owner. The owner is also responsible for all costs associated with the installation of the new larger service lateral from the main to, and including, the curb box. Normally, two or more water services may not be connected together for the purpose of increasing the quantity of water available for a single premise. Two services will only be provided to one facility when required by the State Administrative Code (i.e., certain medical facilities). Existing facilities that do have more than one service to a single premises are required to provide adequate backflow prevention to ensure the safety of the public water supply. 
(f)  When the utility discovers two properties, dwellings, etc., which are fed from one service and the City is involved in reconstructing the street in front of these properties, the property owner, who does not have his or her own service, shall be instructed to connect to a new service provided by the water utility. The property owner shall be responsible for the service from the main to the meter. If two property owners share a water service and the property served by the service requests that the adjoining property be separated, the water utility shall provide a water service from the main to the curbline for the adjoining property and order the adjoining property owner to connect to the new water service. In both of the above two cases, the property owner must connect to this new water service within 12 months of being notified by the utility. 
(g)  Prior to razing any building, or portion thereof, the person to whom a razing permit has been issued shall cause all water services to be disconnected and capped at the curb stop if the service is to be reused, and is of copper, PVC or ductile iron, if, however, the service is not scheduled for reuse, or is of wrought iron, lead or cast iron it shall be disconnected at the main by the removal of the corporation stop unless otherwise approved by the Director, the service lateral shall be abandoned. The utility will remove the existing corporation and plug the main, but the owner is responsible for the excavation of the water main at the existing corporation and the street repair. In addition, the existing curb box (stop box) must be removed by the owner. 
(h)  Requests for the insertion of any corporation valve or tapping valve for a service connection to the utility mains, shall be made at least 24-hours in advance. Tapping for the installation of corporations or valves will not be undertaken when temperatures are 32 degrees Fahrenheit, zero degrees centigrade or below. 
(i)  All water service pipes shall be located within extended property lines of the property served, or on street right-of-way, or other public land, and so installed as not to interfere with other utility lines. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.060)  
Sec. 40-26. - Meters. 
(a)  All services connected to the water system shall be metered except for fire protection services larger than two inches which may be unmetered. 
(b)  In addition to the PSC Water Utility Operating Rules, all metered customers of the Janesville Water Utility shall allow the installation of a radio reading device. The radio reading device will allow the utility to obtain water meter reading on a regular basis without entering the customer's property. 
(c)  Meters shall be the same size as the service lateral; however, the water meter may be downsized in accordance with applicable City and state plumbing codes; if desired by the owner, provided the minimum meter size shall be three-quarter inch. The property owner and the utility shall confer on the type and size for the premises. The selection shall be based on the water use and be in accordance with City and state plumbing codes. 
(d)  In addition to the PSC Water Utility Operating Rules, all meters must be placed in the basement where a basement exists and shall be placed on the service pipe not to exceed two feet from just inside the building wall line nearest the street in which the connection is made to the utility main. When no basement exists the meter shall be placed in such a location as to meet the following requirements for meters in basements, and the meter location shall be as approved by the water utility. 
(e)  A copper meter horn shall be provided to receive the meter on all services up to and including one-inch services. Meters of 1½ inch and larger shall be provided with a bypass of equal size to the meter. No connection or fitting other than those necessary for the connection of the meter and a bypass, when required, shall be inserted between the curb valve and the meter valve. 
(f)  All meters shall have a stop valve on both the inlet and the outlet sides of the meter and all meter installations requiring a bypass shall also have a stop valve on the bypass. It is the customer's responsibility to maintain the valves in proper working order. Water must pass through a meter except as stated in Section 40-27. Diverting water around the meter via bypass constitutes a violation of this article. 
(g)  If a bypass valve is found open, the Director may require the installation of a locking device or other method of restricting unauthorized use of the bypass. If a locking device is not feasible a meter may be required to be installed on the bypass. 
(h)  No permit will be given to change from metered to flat rate service. 
(i)  The City Plumbing Inspector may at any time order the relocation of existing meter located in pits or extremely difficult areas to access. Water meters shall not be installed below plumbing fixtures nor shall any water meter be installed in a toilet room. Water meters shall not be installed below stairways, landings, showrooms, or other platforms. Water meter service to multi-residential building units shall be readily accessible to City personnel during normal working hours. All meters shall be installed in the common portion of the basement or common utility rooms not located in the individual living units. Where individual meters are desired per living units, the meters shall be clustered or banked together in a common accessible location as noted above. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.070)  
Sec. 40-26.5. - Replacement of lead service pipes. 
(a)  Purpose. Lead service lines have the potential to leach lead into drinking water. Disturbing or reconnecting to an existing lead service line may increase lead levels in drinking water. Elevated lead levels in drinking water have been determined to cause health problems in young children, pregnant women and their unborn children, and are also potentially harmful to adults. The Common Council, therefore, find it in the public interest to establish a comprehensive program for removing and replacing lead service lines within and connected to the City's water distribution system. 
(b)  Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 62.11(5), 66.0627(8), and 196.372. 
(c)  Definitions. This section shall be interpreted so that the intent and purpose described may be accomplished. Words and phrases shall be understood according to common meanings unless the contrary is clearly indicated. Definitions of terms used in this section are listed below: 
(1)  Distribution system. The network of water pipes, including mains and service lines, owned and operated by the utility. 
(2)  Housing Services Director. The Director or Manager of the City Housing Services Division or their designee. 
(3)  Lead service line or LSL. A Water Service Line constructed of lead. 
(4)  Neighborhood and Community Services Director. The Director of the City Neighborhood and Community Services Department or their designee. 
(5)  Non-compliance penalties. Penalties and other relief that may be imposed or implemented by the City for failure of a person to take action as required by this section as provided in Subsection (i). 
(6)  Plumbing Contractor. A person, firm, corporation, or other entity owned by or employing a person, who is licensed by the State of Wisconsin to perform plumbing work in Wisconsin. 
(7)  Pre-qualified Plumbing Contractor. A Plumbing Contractor that has been placed on the Utility's Pre-qualified Plumbing Contractor list, pursuant to pre-qualification standards and procedures established by the Utility. 
(8)  Private lead service line or private LSL. A private service line constructed of lead. 
(9)  Private LSL replacement costs. The labor and material costs incurred to remove and replace a private LSL, including, but not limited to, costs to excavate, backfill, and replace the turf over the excavation. private LSL replacement costs do not include costs for property modification needed to facilitate the replacement of the private LSL, including, but not limited to, interior or exterior renovations of buildings or structures to facilitate access to the private LSL or changes to interior plumbing past the inlet to the property owner's water meter; restoration of any foundation or any other surface that is disrupted as part of the replacement; or restoration or replacement of any trees, bushes, or any other landscaping damaged or removed as part of the replacement. 
10)  Private service line. The portion of a water service line or LSL owned by a property owner which extends from the outlet of the curb stop to the inlet of the property owner's water meter. The outlet joint of the curb stop is considered to be part of the private service line. 
(11)  Property. Real property as defined in Wis. Stat. § 70.03. 
(12)  Property owner. A person, partnership, association, or body politic or corporate, including an estate or trust, having an ownership interest, legal or equitable, in a property, except that a purchaser of a property under a legally recorded land contract shall be considered the property owner of the property. 
(13)  PSC. Public Service Commission of Wisconsin. 
(14)  Utility. The Janesville Water Utility, the City Utility responsible for operating the City's public water system. 
(15)  Utility lead service line or utility LSL. A utility service line constructed of lead. 
(16)  Utility Director. The Director of the Utility or their designee. 
(17)  Utility service line. The portion of a water service line owned by the utility which extends from the water main to the outlet of the curb stop, including the curb stop. 
(18)  Water service line. The water service line that extends from the utility's water main to the inlet of the property owner's water meter. a water service line includes both a private service line and a utility service line. 
(d)  Lead service line replacement requirement. 
(1)  As provided in this section, all existing lead service lines (LSLs) which are part of or connected to the distribution system shall be replaced with water service lines constructed of materials approved by the City. 
(2)  Where both a utility service line and a connected private service line are constructed of lead, the replacement of both sides of the water service line shall be completed at the same time following the process set out in Subsection (f). 
(3)  Where a private lead service line is not connected to a utility service line constructed of lead, the replacement of the private LSL shall be completed under a schedule established by the utility. 
(4)  As of the effective date of this section, no person, other than a utility employee or agent, may connect a private LSL to a non-lead utility service line, except as a temporary emergency repair. 
(e)  Identification of private lead service lines. 
(1)  Upon request, a property owner of property connected to the distribution system shall permit an authorized utility employee or representative access to the property to inspect the connection between the private service line and the property owner's water meter in order to confirm the private service line's material of construction. 
(2)  If a property owner does not provide access to the property for such inspection, the utility director is authorized to take the steps necessary to complete the inspection and confirm the private service line's material of construction, and to issue or seek the issuance of non-compliance penalties and/or other relief. 
(3)  As an alternative to the utility inspection, a property owner may arrange to have a Plumbing Contractor perform the inspection and provide inspection results to the utility. 
(4)  If the utility confirms that a private service line is constructed of lead, the utility will notify the property owner of the requirement to replace the private lead service line following the steps detailed in Subsections (f) or (g), depending on the circumstance. 
(5)  The utility shall create and maintain records of all inspected, identified, and replaced private service lines in the City, until such time that no lead service lines exist, and otherwise in compliance with Wisconsin's Public Records Laws. 
(f)  Replacement of private lead service lines in conjunction with replacement of utility lead service lines. 
(1)  Utility LSLs will be replaced as part of a City street reconstruction project, if possible. Before undertaking a project which will replace utility LSLs, the utility shall identify those properties that connect to the utility LSLs planned for replacement. 
(2)  Prior to scheduling the replacement of utility LSLs, a utility employee, proficient at determining lead service line materials, shall inspect each connected and affected private service line to determine whether it is constructed of lead. 
(3)  If a private service line is found to be constructed of lead, the utility will notify the property owner of that fact in writing. The utility will also notify the property owner that the property owner must replace the private LSL in conjunction with City's scheduled replacement of the utility LSL that is connected to that private LSL, and that failure to do so may subject the property owner to non-compliance penalties. This replacement will be at the sole cost and expense of the property owner. 
(4)  At least 90 days prior to the date of the scheduled replacement of a utility LSL, the utility shall notify the property owner with a connected private LSL in writing of the scheduled date of replacement of the utility LSL. 
(5)  The property owner must schedule the replacement of the private LSL to coincide with the scheduled replacement of the utility LSL. Within 30 days of receiving the replacement notice, the property owner shall notify the utility that the replacement of the private LSL has been scheduled and provide the name of the Plumbing Contractor who will complete the replacement work. 
(6)  Private LSL replacement work must be completed at the same time as the utility LSL is replaced. An extension of time may be allowed by the Utility Director only if the property owner demonstrates that there is a compelling need for an extension and that an extension will not create an imminent threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(7)  Failing to replace a private LSL as required by this section may result in the issuance of non-compliance penalties and/or implementation of other relief. 
(8)  A property owner who replaces a private LSL under this subsection may be eligible to receive financial assistance under the program described in Subsection (h). 
(g)  Replacement of private lead service line where only the private portion of the water service line is lead. 
(1)  If the utility confirms that a private service line is constructed of lead and notifies the property owner of that fact in writing as provided by Subsection (e), the property owner must, unless Subsection (f) applies, arrange for the replacement of the private LSL to be completed by the deadline established in Subsection (d)(3). An extension of time may be allowed by the Utility Director only if the property owner demonstrates that there is a compelling need for an extension and that granting an extension will not create an imminent threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(2)  Failing to complete the replacement of the private LSL within the required time period may result in the issuance of non-compliance penalties and/or implementation of other relief. 
(3)  A property owner who replaces a private LSL under this subsection may be eligible to receive financial assistance under the program described in Subsection (h). 
(h)  Financial assistance for private LSL replacements. 
(1)  Development of financial assistance program. The utility is authorized to establish a program to provide eligible property owners with financial assistance to replace private LSLs. The terms of the utility's financial assistance program must be consistent with this subsection. 
(2)  Janesville Utility Grant available. The utility may provide an eligible property owner with a grant to pay for a portion of the property owner's private LSL replacement costs as determined under Subsection (h)(7). The grant will be provided as long as funds are available. 
a.  Eligibility for financial assistance. A property owner is eligible for financial assistance under this subsection if the property owner satisfies each of the following three criteria: 
i.  The property owner alone, or collectively with others, either owns the entire fee simple title to, or else is the purchaser under a legally recorded land contract of, the property served by the private LSL. 
ii.  The property owner's private LSL is attached to either a utility service line that is not an LSL, or a utility LSL scheduled for replacement and for which the property owner has been notified by the utility of such scheduled replacement. 
iii.  The property owner must be current with their property taxes and Janesville municipal utility bill. 
(3)  Janesville Housing LSL Grant Available. The utility, in cooperation with the Janesville Housing Division, may provide additional need-based grant funding to eligible homeowners to pay for a portion of the homeowner's private LSL replacement costs as determined under Subsection (h)(7). Funding for this grant is provided through the Community Development Block Grant Program and is subject to an annual allocation of the Community Development Authority. The grant will be provided as long as funding is available. 
a.  Eligibility for financial assistance. A property owner is eligible for financial assistance under this subsection if the property owner satisfies each of the criteria listed in Subsection (2) above and each one of the following two criteria: 
i.  The property is a single family or two-family home that is owner occupied as the applicant's primary residence. 
ii.  The household's gross annual income must be at or below 80 percent of the Rock County median income level based upon household size and as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development income limits at the time of application. Income limits are adjusted annually. Limits currently in effect can be found at: https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/il.html 
(4)  Application for financial assistance. A written application for financial assistance must include all of the following: 
a.  A completed application on a form furnished by the utility signed by the eligible property owner. The completed application form shall include a certification by the property owner that attests that the property owner alone, or collectively with others, owns the entire fee simple title to the property served by the private LSL. 
b.  Applicants interested in applying for the Janesville Housing LSL Grant, will be required to answer additional questions regarding the household's income and assets and will be required to provide supporting documentation to determine whether the household is income eligible to receive additional grant funding. 
c.  Copies of all, but no less than two, written quotes obtained by the property owner from different pre-qualified Plumbing Contractors for the replacement of the property owner's private LSL. Quotes shall either be limited to, or otherwise clearly identify the amount related to, private LSL replacement costs as defined by this section. 
(5)  Limitations on amount of financial assistance. 
a.  A property owner will be eligible for financial assistance based on the lowest bid amount included in the written quotes submitted with the application. A property owner is responsible for and will not receive financial assistance for any private LSL replacement costs that exceed the amount of the lowest bid, unless an extraneous circumstance exists that will require the approval of the Utility Director. The Janesville Utility Grant and Janesville Housing LSL Grant amounts will be based on available funding. 
b.  Notwithstanding subsection a. above, the total amount of money provided through the Janesville Utility Grant and Janesville Housing LSL Grants may not exceed a property owner's actual private LSL replacement costs. 
(1)  Review of application. After a complete application for financial assistance is received, the utility shall review the application for completeness. The Housing Services Director will review applications and determine eligibility for the Janesville Housing LSL Grant. If the application is complete, the utility shall notify the property owner of the amount of financial assistance available. If the application is incomplete, the utility shall notify the property owner of that fact and the information needed to complete the application. 
(2)  Agreement. Financial assistance shall only be provided after a private lsl replacement agreement is entered into by the utility and the property owner, on a form provided by the utility. No reimbursement will be made for work completed prior to entering into an agreement. 
(3)  Payment of financial assistance. Upon completion of the private LSL replacement, the property owner shall provide the utility with a copy of the invoice from the Plumbing Contractor. Upon proof of completion satisfactory to the property owner and the utility, the utility shall directly pay the Plumbing Contractor, on behalf of the Property Owner, the amount of money approved by the utility for financial assistance for replacement of the private LSL. The utility shall provide the property owner with documentation of such payment. 
(4)  Appeal of adverse decision. In the event an application for the Janesville Housing LSL Grant Program is denied, an applicant may appeal the decision in writing within 14 calendar days to the Neighborhood and Community Services Director, whose decision will be final. Disputes regarding payment of financial assistance may be appealed to the Common Council. 
(i)  Enforcement. 
(1)  General non-compliance penalties. If anyone fails to take any action required by this section, the City or the utility or both may impose violation citations and penalties prescribed by City ordinances, including, but not limited to, those set forth in JGO Section 40-38. In addition, and not in lieu thereof, the City may seek and/or implement other forms of relief for non-compliance by any person. 
(2)  Authority to discontinue service. In addition to the above and not in lieu thereof, if a property owner refuses to provide access as required by this section, the utility may in accordance with its Water Utility Tariffs discontinue water service to such property until access is provided so that a private service line's material of construction can be identified. If a property owner fails to replace a private LSL as required by this section, the utility may, in accordance with its Water Utility Tariffs, discontinue water service to such property until the private LSL is replaced. 
( Ord. No. 2019-781 , § I(13.04.075), 1-13-2020)  
Sec. 40-27. - Fire protection and automatic sprinkler service. 
(a)  If any owner of a building wishes to install a private fire protection and/or automatic sprinkler system, plans must be submitted to the City and state for approval prior to commencement of construction. 
(b)  All fire protection and/or automatic sprinkler service lines shall be installed with a gate valve and gate box, either at the connection main (tapping valve) or in the terrace between the curb and sidewalk. Also, an approved backflow preventer must be installed in the line immediately inside of the building and ahead of any sprinkling nozzles, hose connection or hydrants. 
(c)  The fire line and/or automatic sprinkler line may be used for domestic service. A shut off valve shall be provided on the domestic service. No more than one domestic connection can be made, nor more than one building served, from a single fire line connection to a public water main. In addition, a building cannot be served with a domestic service from a fire line unless the fire line is connected to, and serves, the same building. 
(d)  Consumers having unmetered fire protection and/or automatic sprinkler system can test their fire apparatus upon notice to the utility that such a test is desired, and a time and date mutually satisfactory can be arranged at which time said test may be undertaken. Authorized insurance representatives and inspectors shall likewise be required to give proper notice to the utility. 
(e)  Any fire protection or automatic sprinkler on a water service two inches or smaller shall be metered using either the general service meter or a separate dedicated meter. Existing small systems shall be metered as directed by the utility. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.080)  
Sec. 40-28. - Use of hydrants. 
(a)  In cases where no other supply is available, permission may be granted by the Director to use a hydrant. No hydrant shall be used until it is equipped with a backflow preventer and meter. A charge will be made for setting a meter, or for moving it from on hydrant to another. In no case shall any meter be moved except by a member of the water utility or authorized representative. 
(b)  Before a meter is set, payment must be made for its setting and for the water to be used at the scheduled rates. The applicant must make a deposit for the hydrant meter. When the contractor has finished using the hydrant, he or she must notify the water utility to that effect. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.090)  
Sec. 40-29. - Interference with facilities prohibited. 
(a)  No person, unless duly authorized, shall open or in any manner tamper with any fire hydrant, or draw water from the same, or in any manner obstruct the free access to any fire hydrant, gate, stopcock box, or other connection with the waterworks distribution system. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way obstruct access to any fire hydrant, valve, or corporation box connected with the City water pipes by placing or planting any building materials, rubbish, bushes, trees, or other hindrances thereon or therein. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.100)  
Sec. 40-30. - Waterworks system—Damaging forbidden. 
No person shall in any manner injure, deface or impair the efficiency of the waterworks plant, reservoir, distribution system, or any part thereof, or any property used in connection therewith. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.110)  
Sec. 40-31. - Waterworks system—Unauthorized connection or interference forbidden. 
No person, unless duly authorized, shall tap any portion of the distribution system, or make any attachments or connections therewith, or wrongfully interfere in any manner with the central plant, pumps, reservoir, distribution system, or any other property used in connection with such utility. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.120)  
Sec. 40-32. - Unauthorized water use forbidden. 
No person shall use or take water from the mains or pipes, except as duly authorized. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.130)  
Sec. 40-33. - Unauthorized sale of water forbidden. 
No person shall sell or give away water to be taken from his or her premises or take away water from any public fountain or other public source without the permission of the Director. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.140)  
Sec. 40-34. - No claims for damages. 
The utility does not guarantee a uniform pressure or uninterrupted water supply. No person shall enter a claim for damages against the City as a water utility, or any officer thereof, for damage to any pipe, fixture, or appurtenance by reason of interrupted water supply, or any variation of pressure, or for turning on, either wholly or partially, of the water supply for the extension, alteration or repair of any water main or premises supply, or for the discontinuance of the premises water supply for the violation of any rules or regulation of the Water Department. No claims will be allowed against the City, on account of the interruption of the water supply caused by the breaking of pipes or machinery, or by stopping for repairs, on account of fire or other emergency, and no claims shall be allowed for any damage caused by the breaking of any pipe or machinery. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.150)  
Sec. 40-35. - Inspection. 
(a)  During reasonable hours, any officer or authorized employee of the utility shall have the right of access to the premises supplied with service for the purpose of inspection or for the enforcement of the utility's rules and regulations. At least once every 12 months, the utility will make a systematic inspection of all unmetered water taps for the purpose of checking waste and unnecessary use of water. 
(b)  No plumber shall cover or permit the covering of any water service line until the installation has been inspected and approved by the Inspection Department or its duly authorized representative. When so directed, the plumber shall hydrostatically test the system in the presence of the authorized inspector. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.160)  
Sec. 40-36. - Cross connection control. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who owns, leases or occupies property which is connected to the City's public water supply shall protect the public water system from contamination resulting from backflow of contaminants through the water service connection into the public water system. Every person owning or occupying a premises receiving municipal water supply shall maintain such municipal water supply free from any connection, either of a direct or of an indirect nature, with a water supply from a foreign source or of any manner of connection with any fixture or appliance whereby water from a foreign supply or the waste from any fixture, appliance, or waste or soil pipe may flow or be siphoned or pumped into the piping of the municipal water system. 
(b)  A cross connection is defined as any physical connection or arrangement between the otherwise separate water systems, one of which contains potable water from the City water system, and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there is a possibility that flow may occur from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems. 
(c)  No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established, or maintain or permit to be maintained, any cross connection. No interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the City may enter the City's distribution system. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the Janesville Water Utility to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system where a cross connection with the public water system is deemed possible, in the determination of the Utility Director. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the Janesville Water Utility. 
(e)  Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the Janesville Water Utility or contractor shall have the right of entry at all reasonable hours to examine for cross connections any property served by a connection to the public water system of the City. Refusing entry to such utility representative shall be sufficient cause for the utility to discontinue the property's connection to the public water system under Subsection (f) of this section. Upon the City's request, the owner, the lessee and/or the occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the utility any pertinent information regarding the piping systems on such property. 
(f)  The Utility Director may discontinue water service to any property when, in his or her opinion, it appears that a cross connection or any other emergency threatens or presents an imminent or substantial danger to the public health, safety or welfare, danger to the environment, or interference with the operation of the utility. A written finding to that effect by the Utility Director shall be filed with the City Clerk and delivered to the property affected, whereupon the service may immediately be discontinued. 
(g)  The City shall reinstate the public water service upon receipt of sufficient proof from the property owner, lessee or occupant, of the elimination of the condition creating the threat or presentation of imminent or substantial danger or interference with the operation of the utility. 
(h)  The City adopts by reference the Wisconsin Administrative Plumbing Code, as amended from time to time. 
(i)  This section does not supersede the Wisconsin Administrative Plumbing Code or Article II of Chapter 10, but is supplementary to them. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.170)  
Sec. 40-37. - Private well abandonment. 
Any person, firm or corporation who owns, leases or occupies property which is connected to the City's public water supply shall protect the public water supply from contamination by unused and/or improperly constructed wells. These wells must be properly filled, sealed and abandoned in compliance with the following provisions: 
(1)  All private wells located on any property which is served by the public water system of the City shall be properly filled within one year of written notification by the City unless an extension is granted by the Utility Director. Only those wells for which well operation permits have been granted by the Janesville Water Utility may be exempted from this requirement, subject the conditions of maintenance and operation as specified on the permit. 
(2)  A permit may be granted to a well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed five years if the following requirements are met. Application must be made on forms provided by the Janesville Water Utility. 
a.  The well and pump installation shall meet the requirements of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, Chapter NR 812 (Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812), Well Construction and Pump Installation, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
b.  A well constructor's report shall be on file with the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, or a certification of the acceptability of the well must have been granted by the Department of Natural Resources. 
c.  The well must have a history of producing safe water and must be currently producing bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by two samplings each taken two weeks apart. 
d.  In the determination of the Utility Director, the proposed use of the well must be necessary to serve the property in addition to water provided by the public water system. 
e.  No physical connection may exist between the piping of the public water system and the private well. 
(3)  Wells to be abandoned shall be filled according to the procedures outlined in Chapter NR 812, Wisconsin Administrative Code (Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812), as from time to time amended or renumbered. The pump and piping must be removed and the well checked for obstructions prior to plugging. Any obstruction or liner must be removed. 
(4)  A well abandonment report shall be submitted by the well owner to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources on forms provided by that agency. The report shall be submitted immediately upon completion of the filling of the well. The filling must be observed by a representative of the City or the Department of Natural Resources. Forms for the well abandonment report shall be available at the Janesville Water Utility Office. Completed copies of these forms shall be provided to the Janesville Water Utility by the well owner. 
(5)  Wells located on property not served by the City's public water system at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this revised section (dated June 2001) is derived shall fulfill the requirements of this section within the first year after being connected to the City's public water system. 
(6)  No new high capacity wells (as defined by the WDNR) may be constructed for any purpose within the City on property serviced by the public water system. Other wells will only be allowed in special circumstances and must be approved by the Director. 
(7)  For properties with wells where the property owner is either unable or unwilling to properly abandon or permit the well, penalties as outlined in this Code will be applied except in the case where the property owner agrees to a lien against the property requiring the well's proper abandonment at the time the property is sold. The form of this lien shall be established by the City. If, during the course of this lien, it is discovered that the well becomes contaminated or is at risk of collapse, the lien will be deemed ineffective and the penalties and remedies contained in this Code shall again become effective. 
(8)  If a lien is deemed ineffective as established in Subsection (7) of this section and the property owner remains unwilling or unable to properly abandon their well, the City shall enter that property and cause that well to be abandoned with the cost of such action being a special assessment to that property. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.180)  
Sec. 40-38. - Violations; penalties; remedies. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated Section 40-36 or 40-37 shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture, shall be subject to such sanctions and penalties as provided by law and/or ordered by the court, and/or committed to the Rock County Jail for a term as set forth by the court. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender of any provision of this article to abate the violation immediately, and each day that such violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(c)  The City may, in addition to the previously stated penalties, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by the imposition of a forfeiture of not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture, shall be subject to such sanctions and penalties as provided by law and/or ordered by the court, and/or committed to the Rock County Jail for a term as set forth by the court. 
(e)  If, in any action, any permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense; nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any City agent or employee constitute a defense. 
(f)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the City for any and all expenses, loss or damage occasioned by such violation, including personnel costs and actual attorney's costs. 
(g)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this section and this article result in discontinuance of water service to the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 13.04.200)  
Secs. 40-39—40-66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 40-67. - Sewer classifications, generally. 
The sewerage system of the City shall be divided into two classes of sewers, namely sanitary sewers and storm sewers. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.010)  
Sec. 40-68. - Sanitary sewers. 
Sanitary sewers are those which are designated and used for the disposal of all waste products discharged from plumbing fixtures located in buildings and structures along the line of such sewer. The term "plumbing fixtures," as used in this section, shall not include downspouts or any other fixture discharging rainwater. The system of sanitary sewers shall, for the purpose of this article, be considered as consisting of the following parts: 
(1)  Sewer main, being the principal artery extending along the public street, alley or other public way into which the laterals may feed; 
(2)  Sewer service lateral, being that part of the sewer lying between the street line or curbline and the sewer main; 
(3)  Building sewer (see SPS 381.01(44)), being that part of the sewer leading from the property to be served to the sewer service lateral. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.020)  
Sec. 40-69. - Storm sewers. 
Storm sewers are those which are designed and used for the disposal of rainwater, snow, ice, slush, and other materials coming from the surface of the streets and surrounding area as the result of storms. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.030)  
Sec. 40-70. - Storm sewers; maintenance and construction costs. 
All storm sewers shall be maintained by the City at general expense. Unless otherwise specifically provided by ordinance or resolution of the Council, all construction work on storm sewers may be done directly by the City without submitting the same for bids. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.040)  
Sec. 40-71. - Sanitary sewers; City and state plumbing codes compliance. 
All sanitary sewers shall be constructed in compliance with the provisions and regulations of the City of Janesville and Wisconsin Plumbing Codes. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.050)  
Sec. 40-72. - Sewer service laterals; pipe size and type. 
All sewer service laterals shall be constructed in accordance with the City and state plumbing codes. Sewer service laterals, building sewers, shall not be less than four inches in diameter unless authorized by the Plumbing Inspector. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.060)  
Sec. 40-73. - Sewer service laterals—Connections, generally. 
No four-inch service lateral connection shall be made with any sewer main except at a "Y" or "T" branch. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.070)  
Sec. 40-74. - Sewer service laterals—Connections at manholes; exception. 
Any service lateral connection larger than eight inches shall be made at a manhole on the main sewer, except when granted special permission by the Plumbing Inspector and the Director. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.080)  
Sec. 40-75. - Connection approval and supervision. 
Connections are to be approved by the Plumbing Inspector. The laying of all sanitary sewers, sewer service laterals and building sewers, and the making of connections between them, are subject to the supervision of the Plumbing Inspector. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.090)  
Sec. 40-76. - Records. 
The City Engineer, together with the Plumbing Inspector, shall keep a complete record of the installation of all sewers, whether the same are sanitary sewers or storm sewers, and also of all connections between sewer mains and service laterals, and of provisions made for such connections, and generally of all matters pertaining to the sewerage system of the City. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.100)  
Sec. 40-77. - Deposit of substance liable to obstruct sewers forbidden. 
No person having access to any sewer or drain connected with any portion of the public sewerage system of the City shall deposit or suffer to be deposited in such sewer or drain any garbage, unless treated or processed so as not to cause any obstruction, grease, rags, paper, or other substance liable to obstruct such public sewer, or to create a nuisance. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.110)  
Sec. 40-78. - Downspout connections prohibited. 
No person shall connect the downspouts of any building with any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.120)  
Sec. 40-79. - Clear water prohibited. 
No person shall connect discharge clear water and/or non-contact cooling water to the sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.130)  
Sec. 40-80. - Culvert, drain or sewer; injuries and obstructions prohibited. 
No person shall destroy or damage any culvert, drain or sewer located in any street, public way or elsewhere, or obstruct the drainage or flow of water, or other substance through any storm or sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.140)  
Sec. 40-81. - Industrial wastes disposal. 
No person shall cause or permit any industrial wastes of any kind to be discharged so as to clog any storm or sanitary sewer main or lateral of any kind, or cause or permit such wastes to be discharged in such quantity or content so as to clog the free flow in any such sewer, or to interfere with proper treatment of such industrial wastes or other sewerage in the sewage disposal plant. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.150)  
Sec. 40-82. - Violations; penalties; remedies. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $500.00 and not to exceed $1,000.00 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture, shall be subject to such sanctions and penalties as provided by law and/or ordered by the court, and/or committed to the Rock County Jail for a term as set forth by the court. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender of any provision of this article to abate the violation immediately, and each day that such violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(c)  The City may, in addition to the previously stated penalties, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by the imposition of a forfeiture of not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture, shall be subject to such sanctions and penalties as provided by law and/or ordered by the court, and/or committed to the Rock County Jail for a term as set forth by the court. 
(e)  If, in any action, any permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense; nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any City agent or employee constitute a defense. 
(f)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the City for any and all expenses, loss or damage occasioned by such violation, including personnel costs and actual attorney's costs. 
(g)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this article will result in discontinuance of wastewater service to the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 13.08.160)  
Secs. 40-83—40-107. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEPTIC TANKS AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 40-108. - Use prohibited when. 
The use of privy vaults, cesspools, septic tanks and dry wells used for sewage are each prohibited on all premises within the City where a public water supply and sewer are available. Public water supply and sewer shall be deemed available where a public water and sewer exist either in the street or alley on either side of said premises. Properly designed and maintained septic tanks may be used if a sewer connection deferral is granted by the City Council. If the septic tank fails during the deferral period, connection to the sanitary sewer must be made immediately. 
(Code 1976, § 13.12.010)  
Sec. 40-109. - Removal of existing facilities. 
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or dry well shall hereafter be erected where public water supply and sewer are available, and any such as now exist or are in use on any such premises within the City where a public water supply and sewer are available shall be forthwith entirely removed, and such vault filled in a sanitary manner. 
(Code 1976, § 13.12.020)  
Sec. 40-110. - Construction conformance. 
Whenever a privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or dry well is constructed because of the fact that sewer and water, or either of them, is not available, such construction must conform strictly to the City and state building and plumbing codes, and likewise all states and local health regulations with respect to the same. 
(Code 1976, § 13.12.030)  
Sec. 40-111. - Sewer and water connection required when. 
All dwellings in the City shall be connected with sewer and water where these utilities are available. This connection shall be made within one year of the sewer and water becoming available. Except where otherwise required in this chapter, each structure shall have a separate sewer lateral and water service connection to the public sewer and water mains as required in Article II of Chapter 10. Connections to the water and sewer systems shall be made at the same time. This requirement to connect may be deferred for up to five years with the approval of the City Council. When connection deferrals are granted, the connection deferral applies to both water and sewer. A connection deferral will not be granted for only one utility. If only one utility is available, connection to that main must be made within one year and connection to the other utility main within one year of when it becomes available. 
(Code 1976, § 13.12.040)  
Sec. 40-112. - Violations; penalties; remedies. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture, shall be subject to such sanctions and penalties as provided by law and/or ordered by the court, and/or committed to the Rock County Jail for a term as set forth by the court. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender of any provision of this article to abate the violation immediately, and each day that such violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(c)  The City may, in addition to the previously stated penalties, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by the imposition of a forfeiture of not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture, shall be subject to such sanctions and penalties as provided by law and/or ordered by the court and/or committed to the Rock County Jail for a term as set forth by the court. 
(e)  If, in any action, any permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense; nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any City agent or employee constitute a defense. 
(f)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the City for any and all expenses, loss or damage occasioned by such violation, including personnel costs and actual attorney's costs. 
(g)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this section and this article will result in discontinuance of wastewater and water service to the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 13.12.050)  
Secs. 40-113—40-137. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WASTEWATER FACILITIES AND SEWER USE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 40-138. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of Janesville and enables the City to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation or contaminate the municipal biosolids; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater, sludge and biosolids in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater, sludge and biosolids from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To provide for recovery of all costs associated with the operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(6)  To enable the City to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, biosolids use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
(b)  This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The article authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.010)  
Sec. 40-139. - Wastewater utility authority. 
(a)  General authority. 
(1)  The City, by action of its governing body, provides means of purchasing, construction, acquiring or leasing, extending, addition to, improving, conducting, controlling, operating and managing the publicly owned treatment works; including any treatment plant and equipment within or without its corporate limits for the collection, transportation, storage, treatment and final disposal of sewage, including the lateral main and intercepting sewers and all necessary equipment. 
(2)  The publicly owned treatment works for the City of Janesville shall constitute a sewerage system as defined by Wis. Stats. ch. 66, as time to time amended and/or renumbered. 
(b)  Funding. 
(1)  All costs of exercising the authority under Subsection (a) of this section shall be funded, to the extent applicable, from the City's general fund, by taxation, special assessment or sewerage service charges, by municipal obligations or revenue bonds or from any combination of these sources. 
(2)  If funding under Subsection (b)(1) of this section in whole or in part by the issue and sale of revenue bonds, the payments shall be made as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0621 to the extent not inconsistent with this section. 
a.  The term "public utility," as used in Wis. Stats. § 66.0621, includes the sewerage system, accessories, equipment and other property including land. 
b.  The mortgage or revenue bonds or mortgage certificates do not constitute an indebtedness of the City and may be secured only by the sewerage system and its revenue. 
(3)  All net earnings or profits derived or to be derived from the sewerage system shall be pledged, assigned or otherwise hypothecated into the water pollution control utility fund. 
(c)  Sewer service charges. 
(1)  The City, by action of its governing body, shall establish sewerage service charges in an amount to meet all or part of the requirements for the construction, reconstruction, improvement, extension, operation, maintenance, repair and depreciation of the sewerage system and for payment of all or part of the principal and interest of any indebtedness incurred for those purposes, including the replacement of funds advanced by or paid from the City general fund. 
(2)  For the purpose of making equitable charges for all services rendered by the sanitary sewerage system to the City or to citizens, corporations and other users, the property benefited by the system may be classified, taking into consideration the volume of water, including surface or drain waters, the character of the sewage or waste and the nature of the use made of the sewerage system, including the publicly owned treatment works. The charges may include standby charges to property not connected but for which sewerage system facilities have been made available. 
(3)  Sewerage service charges shall be collected and taxed and shall be a lien upon the property served in the same manner as water rates are taxed and collected under Wis. Stats. §§ 62.69(2)(f) and 66.0809 to the extent applicable. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.020)  
Sec. 40-140. - Administration. 
The City Manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article, except as otherwise provided herein. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the City Manager may be delegated by the City Manager to a duly authorized City employee. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.030)  
Sec. 40-141. - Service area. 
The sewerage system shall extend and provide service within the corporate limits of the City. Service to properties or areas outside the corporate limits shall not be provided unless the property owner enters into an agreement with the City and a boundary agreement has been adopted between the City and the political jurisdiction in which the property is located. This agreement will require property annexation to the corporate limits of the City and allow the City to recoup some or all of the costs incurred for the service extension. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.040)  
Sec. 40-142. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  BOD—Biochemical oxygen demand. 
(2)  BMP—Best management practice. 
(3)  BMR—Baseline monitoring report. 
(4)  CFR—Code of Federal Regulations. 
(5)  CIU—Categorical industrial user. 
(6)  COD—Chemical oxygen demand. 
(7)  DNR—Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(8)  EPA—U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(9)  FOG—Fats, oils and greases. 
(10)  gpd—Gallons per day. 
(11)  IU—Industrial user. 
(12)  mg/l—Milligrams per liter. 
(13)  µg/L—Micrograms per liter. 
(14)  NPDES—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(15)  NSCIU—Non-significant categorical industrial user. 
(16)  POTW—Publicly owned treatment works. 
(17)  RCRA—Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
(18)  SIU—Significant industrial user. 
(19)  SNC—Significant noncompliance. 
(20)  TSS—Total suspended solids. 
(21)  USC—United States Code. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.050)  
Sec. 40-143. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority means the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for an individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in Subsections (1)a through c of this section may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted and on file with the control authority. 
Best management practices or BMPs means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 2.1 A and B 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage areas. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Bulk waste means holding tank wastes, privy or vault toilet wastes, septage, or other liquid wastes from agricultural, residential, commercial, or industrial sources. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of the user's facility. 
Categorical industrial user means an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards or categorical requirements. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471. 
Chemical oxygen demand or COD means a measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water. 
City means the City of Janesville. 
Control authority means the City of Janesville Wastewater Utility. 
Daily maximum means the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day. 
Daily maximum limit means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source means any source of discharge that is not a new source. 
Grab sample means a sample that is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Holding tank waste means scum, liquid, sludge or other waste from a tank designed to provide temporary storage of wastewater and which is not connected to a soil absorption field or other wastewater disposal system. 
Indirect discharge ordischarge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any point source other than residential or commercial sources that discharge only domestic waste. Method of introduction includes, but shall not limited to, by pipe, truck or rail car. 
Instantaneous limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Local limit means specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the City upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Monthly average means the sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month. 
Monthly average limit means the highest allowable average of daily discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month. 
New source. The term "new source" means any building, structure, facility or installation: 
(1)  From which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants; 
(2)  For which the commencement of construction occurred after the publication in the federal register of proposed pretreatment standards that will be applicable if promulgated according to Section 307(c) of the Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq.; 
(3)  That is one of the following: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(4)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of Subsection (1)c.2 or 3 of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(5)  Construction of a new source, as defined under this subsection, has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into Wisconsin waterways in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (including, but not limited to, pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, FOG, trace metals, toxicity, odor, volatile or semi-volatile compounds). 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards means any regulation which applies to users and which contains pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the DNR in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 283.21(2). The term "pretreatment standards" or "standards" includes prohibited discharge standards set forth in or established under Wis. Admin. Code NR 211.10; categorical pretreatment standards set forth in Wis. Admin. Code NR 211.11, NR 221 through 297. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means any standard specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which shall not be discharged to a POTW by users regardless of industrial category. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means a treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), and any sewers that convey wastewater to such a treatment works, which is owned by the City. The definition of the term "publicly owned treatment works" or "POTW" includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or liquid industrial wastes, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term "publicly owned treatment works" or "POTW" also means the municipality which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
Regulated stream means a process generating wastewater and/or pollutants regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard. 
Septage tank waste means the liquid, scum, sludge, or other sewage, in which settled sludge is in immediate contact with the wastewater flowing through the vessel exhibiting conditions for naturally forming bacteria to decompose the organic solids present. This term "septage tank waste" does not include waste characterized, generated or associated with grease traps. 
Sewage means human excrement and gray water (household showers, residential dishwashing operations, residential laundry operations). 
Sewerage means encompassing all constructions for collections, transportation, pumping, treatment and final disposition of wastewater and sludge. 
Significant industrial user (SIU). The term "significant industrial user" means: 
(1)  An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards in Wis. Admin. Code NR 221 to 297, except as provided in Wis. Admin. Code NR 211.15(4)(d); or 
(2)  An industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  The control authority may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met: 
a.  The industrial user, prior to control authority's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
b.  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in Section 40-304(b), together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
c.  The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(4)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (1)b of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug discharge means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards. Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
Storm water means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Total suspended solids or suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by EPA under the provisions of Section 307(a) of the Act; 40 CFR 401.15. 
Unregulated stream means a process generating wastewater and/or pollutants not regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard. 
User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
WPDES permit means a NPDES control mechanism issued to a POTW by the approval authority under Wis. Stats. § 283.31 for the purpose of controlling pollutant discharge. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.060)  
Secs. 40-144—40-169. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 40-170. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 s.u. or more than 10.0 s.u., or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference; but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 149 degrees Fahrenheit, or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(6)  Polar FOG, including, but not limited to, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l and in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Nonpolar FOG, including, but not limited to, fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 300 mg/l and in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(8)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(9)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the control authority designee in accordance with Section 40-212; 
(10)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(11)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the City's NPDES permit; 
(12)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(13)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the control authority designee; 
(14)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(15)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the control authority designee established in an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit; 
(16)  Hazardous waste, as defined in 40 CFR 261 and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 661; 
(17)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test; 
(18)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which might cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(19)  Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five percent or any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.070)  
Sec. 40-171. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 to 471 and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 221 to 297. 
(1)  Limits in categorical pretreatment standards shall apply to the effluent from the process regulated by the standard, unless otherwise specified in the standard. 
(2)  Limits in categorical pretreatment standards shall apply to waste streams which are transported off-site for disposal as well as those discharged on-site. 
(3)  CIUs shall comply with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, in addition to complying with the general prohibitions established in Section 40-170, unless specifically noted otherwise in the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(b)  Compliance dates. 
(1)  All CIUs, except new sources, shall comply with the applicable categorical pretreatment standards within three years from the effective date of the standard, or within a shorter period of time if specified in the applicable standard. 
(2)  A direct discharger which becomes a CIU after promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard may not be considered a new source unless it meets the definition of a new source established in Section 40-143. 
(3)  New sources shall install, have in operating condition and start up all of the pollution control equipment required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards before beginning discharge. Within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed 90 days, new sources shall meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(c)  Conversion to equivalent mass or concentration standards. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of pollutant mass per production unit, the control authority may convert the pretreatment standard to equivalent limitations expressed either as pollutant mass discharged per day or effluent concentration. The determination to convert production based limits is at the discretion of the control authority. 
a.  Equivalent mass per day limits shall be calculated by multiplying the categorical pretreatment standard limit by the user's average rate of production. 
1.  This average rate of production shall be based upon a reasonable measure of the user's actual long-term daily production, such as average daily production during a representative year. 
2.  For new sources, actual production shall be estimated using projected production. 
b.  Equivalent concentration limits shall be calculated by dividing the mass limits derived according to Subsection (c)(1)a of this section, by the average daily flow rate of the user's process wastewater. This average daily flow rate shall be based upon a reasonable measure of the user's actual long-term average flow rate, such as the average daily flow rate during the same representative year used in Subsection (c)(1)a of this section. 
c.  When pretreatment standards specify both daily and long-term limits, the same production or flow figures shall be used in calculating daily and long-term equivalent limits. 
d.  Any user operating under an individual wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production based categorical pretreatment standard shall notify the control authority within two business days after the user has reason to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user which does not notify the control authority of such anticipated change shall meet the mass or concentration limits in their permit that were based on the original estimate of the long term average production rate. 
(2)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, a user may request that the control authority convert the pretreatment standard to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is at the discretion of the control authority. 
a.  The control authority may establish equivalent mass limits only if the user meets all the following conditions: 
1.  Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit; 
2.  Uses control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and has not used dilution as a substitute for treatment; 
3.  Provides sufficient information to establish the facility's actual average daily flow rate for all waste streams, based on data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long-term average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-term average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions; 
4.  Does not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to control the discharge; and 
5.  Has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the user's request for equivalent mass limits. 
b.  Upon approval by the control authority a user subject to equivalent mass limits shall: 
1.  Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits; 
2.  Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device; 
3.  Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify the control authority whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than 20 percent from its baseline production rates determined in Subsection (c)(2)a.3 of this section. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the control authority shall reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and 
4.  Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to Subsection (c)(2)a.1 of this section so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit. 
c.  A control authority which chooses to establish equivalent mass limits: 
1.  Shall calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated processes by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit conversion factor; 
2.  Upon notification of a revised production rate, shall reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and 
3.  May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit terms if the user's actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to Section 40-177. The user must also be in compliance with Section 40-452 regarding the prohibition of bypass. 
d.  A control authority may not express limits in terms of mass for pollutants such as pH, temperature, radiation or other pollutants which cannot appropriately be expressed as mass. 
(3)  The control authority may convert the mass limits of the categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455, and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 233, 235, 279 to equivalent concentration limits. The determination to convert mass limits to equivalent concentration limits is at the discretion of the control authority. 
a.  The control authority shall use the concentrations listed in the applicable subparts of 40 CFR 414, 419, and 455, and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 233, 235, 279 when converting such limits to concentration limits; and 
b.  The control authority shall document that dilution is not being substituted for treatment pursuant to Section 40-177. 
(4)  The user must comply with the equivalent limitations developed in Subsection (c) of this section in lieu of the promulgated categorical pretreatment standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived once incorporated into its individual wastewater discharge permit. 
(d)  Compensation for pollutants in intake water. 
(1)  Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the presence of pollutants in the CIU's intake water if the applicable categorical pretreatment standards specifically provide that they may be applied on a net basis or if the CIU demonstrates to the control authority that: 
a.  The control system it proposes or uses to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards would, if properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the absence of pollutants in the intake waters; 
b.  The constituents of non-conventional pollutants, such as BOD, TSS, and FOG, in a CIU's effluent are substantially similar to the constituents of a non-conventional pollutants in the intake water; 
c.  The intake water is drawn from the same water body as the water body to which the POTW discharges. 
(2)  The control authority shall grant credits only to the extent necessary to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards, up to a maximum value equal to the influent value. The control authority may require additional monitoring to determine eligibility for credits and compliance with the adjusted standards. 
(e)  Combined waste stream formula. 
(1)  Where effluent from a process regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed prior to treatment with wastewaters other than those generated by the regulated process, fixed alternative discharge limits may be established by the control authority. These alternative limits shall apply to the mixed effluent. 
a.  The control authority shall calculate both an alternative daily maximum and alternative monthly average values using the respective daily maximum or monthly average values specified in the appropriate categorical pretreatment standards. 
b.  The CIU shall comply with the alternative daily maximum and alternative monthly average limits approved by the control authority until the control authority modifies the limits or approves a CIU modification request. 
1.  Modification is authorized whenever there is a material or significant change in the values used in the calculation to fix alternative limits for the regulated pollutant. 
2.  The CIU shall immediately report any such material or significant change to the control authority. 
3.  Where appropriate, new alternative categorical limits shall be calculated within 30 days. 
(2)  The alternative limit for a specified pollutant will be derived by use of formulas in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(f)  Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. Where such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation. 
(g)  Fundamentally different factors variances. 
(1)  Any interested person believing that factors relating to an industrial user are fundamentally different from the factors considered during development of a categorical pretreatment standard applicable to that industrial user, and that the existence of those factors justifies a different discharge limit from that specified in the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, may request a fundamentally different factors variance under this section. Such a variance request may be initiated by the EPA. 
(2)  A request for a fundamentally different factors variance may be approved only if: 
a.  Factors relating to the industrial user which would be affected by the variance are fundamentally different from the factors considered in establishing the applicable categorical pretreatment standard; 
b.  There is an applicable categorical pretreatment standard which specifically controls the pollutant for which alternative limits have been proposed; and 
c.  The procedural requirements of this section have been met. 
(3)  A request for a fundamentally different factors variance to establish limits less stringent than required by the categorical pretreatment standard may be approved only if: 
a.  The alternative limit requested is no less stringent than justified by the fundamental difference; 
b.  The alternative limit will not result in a violation of any prohibited discharge standard set forth in or established under Section 40-170; 
c.  The alternative limit will not result in an environmental impact not related to water quality which would be fundamentally more adverse than the impact considered during development of the categorical pretreatment standard; and 
d.  Compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard would result in either a removal cost wholly out of proportion to the removal cost considered during development of the standard or an environmental impact not related to water quality which would be fundamentally more adverse than the impact considered during development of the standard. 
(4)  A request for a fundamentally different factors variance to establish limits more stringent than required by the categorical pretreatment standard may be approved only if: 
a.  The alternative limit requested is no more stringent than justified by the fundamental difference; and 
b.  Compliance with the alternative limit would not result in either a removal cost wholly out of proportion to the removal cost considered during development of the standard or an environmental impact not related to water quality which would be fundamentally more adverse than the impact considered during the development of the standard. 
(5)  Factors considered fundamentally different are: 
a.  The nature or quality of pollutants contained in the industrial user's raw process wastewater; 
b.  The volume of the industrial user's process wastewater and the volume of effluent discharged; 
c.  The environmental impact, other than that related to water quality, of control and treatment of the industrial user's raw process wastewater; 
d.  The energy requirements of the application of control and treatment technology; 
e.  Age, size, and configuration of the industrial user's equipment, facilities, production processes and process changes, availability of land, and engineering aspects of the application of control technology; and 
f.  The cost of compliance with required control technology. 
(6)  Factors which may not be considered fundamentally different are: 
a.  The feasibility of installing the required pretreatment equipment within the time allowed by the categorical pretreatment standard; 
b.  The assertion that the standard cannot be achieved with the appropriate pretreatment equipment installed, if such assertion is not based on factors listed in Subsection (g)(5) of this section; 
c.  The industrial user's ability to pay for the required pretreatment equipment; or 
d.  The impact of a discharge on the quality of the POTW's receiving water. 
(7)  Requests for a variance shall be submitted in writing to the DNR within 180 days after the effective date of the federal categorical pretreatment standard. If the industrial user has requested a categorical determination under Wis. Admin. Code NR 211.33 the request for a fundamentally different factors variance may be delayed to within 30 days after the final decision on the category determination has been made. Variance requests shall include the following: 
a.  The name and address of the person making the request; 
b.  Identification of the interest of the person making the request; 
c.  Identification of the POTW receiving the indirect discharge from the industrial user for which the variance is requested; 
d.  Identification of the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to the industrial user; 
e.  A list of each pollutant for which an alternative discharge limit is sought; 
f.  The alternative discharge limits being proposed for each pollutant identified in Subsection (g)(7)e of this section; 
g.  A description of the industrial user's existing pretreatment equipment; 
h.  A schematic flow chart of the industrial user's water system, including water supply, process wastewater systems, and points of discharge; and 
i.  A statement of facts clearly establishing why the variance request should be approved, including detailed supporting data, documentation and evidence necessary to fully evaluate the merits of the request. 
(8)  The DNR will act only on written requests for variances which contain all of the information required in Subsection (g)(7) of this section. Persons who submit incomplete requests will be notified that the requests are deficient and will be given 30 days to correct the deficiency. If the deficiency is not corrected within 30 days, or within an extended period if allowed by the DNR, the request for the variance shall be denied. 
(9)  The DNR shall publish a notice of its receipt of a request for a fundamentally different factors variance and shall mail copies of the notice to the affected industrial user and any other interested party. The public notice shall be published as a Class I notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985, in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which the industrial user is located. The department shall allow a 30-day period for public review and comment. 
(10)  If the DNR finds that fundamentally different factors do not exist, the DNR shall deny the request. If the DNR finds that fundamentally different factors do exist, the request and findings shall be forwarded to the EPA for the EPA's approval, disapproval, or revision and approval of the variance. A copy of the final determination shall be sent to the person requesting the variance, and to the affected industrial user and POTW. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.080)  
Sec. 40-172. - State pretreatment standards. 
Users must comply with the Wisconsin general pretreatment requirements codified at Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 211 and any applicable categorical effluent limitations codified at Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 220 through 299. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.090)  
Sec. 40-173. - Janesville local limits. 
(a)  The control authority is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c) and Wis. Admin. Code NR 211.10(3). 
(b)  A local limit evaluation is an extensive study conducted to evaluate the impact of nonresidential dischargers in relationship to Janesville POTW plant NPDES requirements. Various potentially limiting environmental criteria were considered relative to the local limits evaluation. These criteria encompassed the NPDES standards, water quality standards, discharge levels causing inhibition, upset, pass through, and sludge disposal standards. Additional criteria considered are worker health and safety issues, air emissions, domestic background levels, operational removal efficiencies, comparison to categorical standards as well as other POTW limits. 
(c)  Local limits are legally enforceable values that when exceeded by a user will result in an administrative enforcement action. 
(d)  The following pollutant guidelines are established generally for the non-toxic or more conventional pollutants. These guidelines are used as benchmarks for nonresidential users because the treatment is more of a loading issue than a toxicity issue. 
(1)  Guideline concentrations may incur or be assessed a surcharge; defined as additional charges to recover the cost associated to treat wastewater concentrations above a defined value, as promulgated in Article VII of this chapter. 
(2)  Should a user continually exceed guideline values and require classification as a SIU, guideline concentrations or alternatives may be incorporated into an individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit and shall be enforceable as local limits. 
Janesville local guidelines. 
Pollutant 	Guideline (mg/l) 
Ammonia nitrogen 	Reserved 
BOD 5 	250 
FOG nonpolar 	300 
FOG polar 	100 
Total selenium 	7.8 
Total suspended solids 	300 
 
(e)  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following the duration: daily maximum limit. 
Janesville local limits 
Pollutant 	Local Limit (mg/l) unless expressed otherwise 
Arsenic 	1.1 
Cadmium 	1.4 
Chromium 	9.5 
Copper 	2.4 
Cyanide 	4.8 
Lead 	7.8 
Mercury 	No detectable discharge allowed 
Nickel 	6.3 
Phosphorus 	18.0 or 20 lbs./day 
Silver 	5.4 
Zinc 	3.1 
pH 	5.0—10.0 s.u. 
 
(1)  The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The control authority may impose mass limitations in addition to the concentration-based limitations above. 
(2)  Exclusive of the phosphorus daily maximum limit, any user discharging above the normal phosphorus concentration of eight mg/l which causes or significantly contributes to a NPDES permit violation will constitute a local limit violation. The control authority may levy monetary penalties upon any user for additional cost incurred by the POTW to process, treat and remove phosphorus above normal concentration. 
(3)  Users may apply for the phosphorus mass based daily maximum limit in lieu of the concentration based phosphorus daily maximum limit. 
a.  Applicants shall comply with all terms of the pollutant minimization assessment described in Section 40-211. 
b.  Users which do not apply for the phosphorus mass based daily maximum limit remain subject to the phosphorus concentration based daily maximum limit. 
(f)  The control authority may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits, to implement local limits. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.100)  
Sec. 40-174. - Mercury Minimization Program. 
(a)  Dental offices. This subsection applies to any dental office that places or removes amalgam. If the work performed at a dental office is orthodontics, periodontics, oral and maxillofacial surgery, endodontics, prosthodontics or other than placing or removing amalgam, then this subsection is not applicable. 
(1)  All dental offices shall implement best management practices for amalgam as established by the Wisconsin Dental Association. 
(2)  All vacuum systems where amalgam is placed or removed shall include an amalgam separator that meets the criteria of the International Standards Organization (ISO 11143). 
a.  Dental offices shall install, operate, and maintain the amalgam separator according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer; 
b.  The amalgam separator shall have a design and capacity appropriate for the size and type of vacuum system. 
(3)  The only dental offices that will be exempt from installing an amalgam separator shall be those that meet a de minimis requirement of placing or removing six amalgam fillings per calendar year. 
(4)  Dental offices shall obtain records from the contractor used to remove amalgam waste, for each shipment showing the volume or mass of amalgam waste shipped; the name and address of the destination; and the name and address of the contractor. 
a.  Dental offices shall maintain these records for a minimum of seven years; 
b.  Dental offices shall make these records available to the control authority for inspection and copying upon request. 
(5)  Annually on or before June 30 of each year, each dental office shall submit a report to the control authority that: 
a.  Identifies the volume or mass of amalgam waste shipped; 
b.  The name and address of the final destination; and 
c.  The name and address of the contractor used to remove and transport amalgam waste within the previous calendar year; 
d.  Indicates all maintenance performed on the amalgam separator within the previous calendar year, including inspections, cleaning, repairs and other maintenance. All maintenance and repair activities with the exception of routine activities authorized by the manufacturer, shall be performed by a technician trained and authorized by the manufacturer to perform those activities; and 
e.  Certifies that: 
1.  During the past year, all regularly scheduled maintenance and other repairs required or recommended by the manufacturer and the manufacturer's representative have been completed; 
2.  The amalgam separator, as of the date of the report, is in good overall operating condition. 
(6)  Dental offices shall permit the control authority to inspect the vacuum system, amalgam separator, and amalgam waste storage areas. 
(7)  Dental offices implementing the management practices, operating and maintaining the amalgam separator as required by Subsection (a)(1) through (6) of this section, with regard to mercury shall not be subject to the regulatory standards and requirements promulgated in Section 40-173. 
(8)  The control authority shall provide forms for reporting the information under the mercury minimization program. 
(b)  Other facilities. This subsection applies to all other facilities having the potential to discharge mercury or mercury-containing material into the POTW. The City strongly advocates the proper handling and, if possible, recycling of all mercury containing products. 
(1)  Facilities include: 
a.  Medical facilities, including all hospitals, clinics and veterinary facilities that have laboratories. 
b.  School facilities, including all public and private schools with science laboratories, including middle schools, high schools, technical schools, colleges and universities, but not elementary schools. 
c.  Industrial facilities, including all industrial plants that historically or consistently discharge mercury into the wastewater treatment plant and industrial plants with the potential for mercury in their wastewater. 
(2)  All facilities regulated under this Subsection (b) shall implement best management practices as established by the DNR Green Tier Charter and the City. 
a.  Facilities regulated under this Subsection (b) shall submit a certification report to the control authority that: 
1.  Identifies the best management practices already implemented; and 
2.  Lists the anticipated dates for implementing the remainder of best management practices. 
b.  The control authority shall provide forms for reporting the information under the Mercury Minimization Program. 
(3)  Facilities implementing the required best management practices, with regard to mercury shall not be subject to the regulatory standards and requirements promulgated in Section 40-173. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.110)  
Sec. 40-175. - Assessment of standards, requirements and limitations. 
Whenever a conflict exists between any of the standards, requirements or limitations established by federal regulation, Wisconsin Statutes and Administrative Code or this article; the most stringent of those regulations and laws shall be met by all users. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.120)  
Sec. 40-176. - Right of revision. 
The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits or in general permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.130)  
Sec. 40-177. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The control authority may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements; or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.140)  
Secs. 40-178—40-207. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 
 
Sec. 40-208. - Pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set forth in this article within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the City, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. 
(b)  Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the control authority, City Building Inspector and WDNR for review, and shall be acceptable to the three aforementioned entities before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Users shall provide a schedule of the activities required to provide such additional wastewater treatment. The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional wastewater treatment processes or equipment, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Hiring an engineer; 
(2)  Completion of preliminary plans; 
(3)  Completion of final plans; 
(4)  Executing contracts for major components; 
(5)  Construction commencement; 
(6)  Equipment installation; 
(7)  Construction completion; 
(8)  Employee training regarding new processes or equipment operation and maintenance; 
(9)  All other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.150)  
Sec. 40-209. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the control authority may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The control authority may require any user discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.160)  
Sec. 40-210. - Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans. 
The control authority shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The control authority may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the control authority of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section 40-297; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.170)  
Sec. 40-211. - Pollutant minimization assessment. 
(a)  General assessment. All users applying for mass based limits shall comply with all terms of this article within 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Assessment forms. Users shall complete and file with the control authority a pollutant minimization assessment declaration in the form prescribed by the control authority. Existing industrial users shall file assessment forms within 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources and users that become significant industrial users shall submit pollutant minimization assessment declaration forms to the control authority. The pollutant minimization assessment to be developed by the user shall cover: 
(1)  Site description. 
a.  Disclosure of name, address and location of the user, and the name of owners and operator; 
b.  Disclosure of North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; and 
c.  Description of products, facility operations and processes. 
(2)  Process and facility data compilation. 
a.  Disclosure of identified materials contributing to pollutant generation; 
b.  Disclosure of source, type, quantity and concentration of identified waste streams contributing to pollutant generation. 
(3)  Description of pollutant minimization options for consideration. 
a.  Disclosure of source reduction options, including, but not limited to, raw material substitution, improved operating practices and process and equipment modifications and/or changes; 
b.  Disclosure of recycling options, including, but not limited to, material exchange or reuse and raw material recovery; 
c.  Disclosure of waste treatment and alternative waste disposal options. 
(4)  Disclosure of feasibility analysis for waste minimization options including technical and economic evaluations of each pollution minimization option. Disclose final outcome of each option and include recommendations for implementation of feasible options. 
(c)  Control authority. The control authority will evaluate the complete pollutant minimization assessment form and data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days after full evaluation and acceptance of the furnished assessment, the control authority shall notify the user of whether mass based limits will be granted. Until the control authority provides such notification of approval, the user shall not proceed in any manner. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.180)  
Sec. 40-212. - Hauled wastewater. 
Holding tank waste, septage tank waste and other bulk waste may be introduced into the POTW upon determination by the control authority that excess hydraulic and loading capacities exist and that characteristics of such waste will not cause interference or pass through. Hauled wastewater shall be subjected to all other requirements of this article; and shall not violate Sections 40-170 through 40-177 or any other requirements established by the control authority. 
(1)  Hauled wastewater shall only be accepted if such wastes are delivered by an approved licensed hauler to the City wastewater treatment plant and discharged at a location and at such times or conditions established by the control authority. No load shall be discharged without prior consent of the control authority. 
(2)  The control authority requires all licensed haulers to obtain an annual individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit prior to any hauled waste being discharged. 
a.  Licensed haulers shall have filed a completed application in writing, on a form provided by the control authority. 
b.  Any applicable application fees established in Section 40-536 shall accompany the filed application. 
c.  The control authority will evaluate applications and shall approve or reject applications within 30 days upon receipt. 
(3)  The control authority may restrict, suspend or prohibit the disposal of hauled wastewater at its discretion, but not limited to: 
a.  Wastewater treatment plant operational or maintenance problems; or 
b.  NPDES violation directly or indirectly related to the acceptance of hauled wastewater. 
(4)  The control authority may require the waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(5)  The control authority may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards and assess applicable surcharges. 
(6)  Waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.190)  
Secs. 40-213—40-232. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS AND GENERAL PERMITS 
 
Sec. 40-233. - Wastewater analysis for permitting purposes. 
When requested by the control authority, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 45 days of the request. The control authority is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.200)  
Sec. 40-234. - Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit requirements. 
(a)  No CIU or SIU shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit from the control authority. 
(b)  The control authority may require other users to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions promulgated in Sections 40-355 through 40-362. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and City law. 
(d)  Permittees may challenge or appeal any conditions imposed within an individual or general wastewater discharge permit by filing a petition for modification in accordance with the requirements of Section 40-261 within 30 days upon receipt of the permit. Failure to petition for permit reconsideration within the 30-day allotted time is deemed a waiver by the permittee of its right to challenge the terms of this permit. 
(Code 1976, 13.16.210)  
Sec. 40-235. - Individual wastewater discharge and general permitting—Existing connections. 
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 60 days after said date, apply to the control authority for an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit in accordance with Section 40-237, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days of the effective date of the ordinance form which this article is derived except in accordance with an existing individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit issued by the control authority. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.220)  
Sec. 40-236. - Individual wastewater discharge and general permitting—New connections. 
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit, in accordance with Section 40-237, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.230)  
Sec. 40-237. - Individual wastewater discharge and general permit application contents. 
(a)  All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit must submit a permit application. Users that are eligible may request a general permit under Section 40-238. The control authority shall require users to submit all or some of the following information as part of a permit application: 
(1)  Identifying information, including: 
a.  The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and plant production processes on the premises. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations including: 
a.  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes; 
b.  Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
c.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
d.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
e.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge. 
(4)  Time and duration of discharges. 
(5)  The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit. 
(6)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in Section 40-171. 
(7)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing sources. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the control authority, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. 
c.  Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. 
d.  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 40-300. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the control authority or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. 
e.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 40-301. 
(8)  Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge based on Section 40-295(b). 
(9)  Any request to be covered by a general permit based on this section. 
(10)  Any other information as deemed reasonably necessary by the control authority to evaluate the permit application. 
(b)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Code 1976, 13.16.240)  
Sec. 40-238. - Wastewater discharge permitting; general permits. 
(a)  The control authority, at their discretion, may use general permits to control SIU discharges to the POTW if the following conditions are met. All facilities to be covered by a general permit must: 
(1)  Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations; 
(2)  Discharge the same types of wastes; 
(3)  Require the same effluent limitations; 
(4)  Require the same or similar monitoring; and 
(5)  In the opinion of the control authority, are more appropriately controlled under a general permit than under individual wastewater discharge permits. 
(b)  To be covered by the general permit, the SIU must file a written request for coverage that identifies its contact information, production processes, the types of wastes generated, the location for monitoring all wastes covered by the general permit, any requests in accordance with Section 40-295(b). For a monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, and any other information the POTW deems appropriate. A monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge is not effective in the general permit until after the control authority has provided written notice to the SIU that such a waiver request has been granted in accordance with Section 40-295(b). 
(c)  The control authority will retain a copy of the general permit, all documentation to support the POTW's determination that a specific SIU meets the criteria in Subsection (a) of this section, applicable state regulations, and a copy of the user's written request for coverage for three years after the expiration of the general permit. 
(d)  The control authority may not control an SIU through a general permit where the facility is subject to production-based categorical pretreatment standards or categorical pretreatment standards expressed as mass of pollutant discharged per day or for users whose limits are based on the combined waste stream formula provided in Section 40-171(e) or net/gross calculations provided in Section 40-171(d). 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.250)  
Sec. 40-239. - Application signatories and certification statements. 
(a)  All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the user pursuant to Section 40-143 and contains the certification statement pursuant to Section 40-304. 
(b)  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the control authority prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(c)  A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by the control authority pursuant to Section 40-143 must annually submit the signed certification statement in Section 40-304(b). 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.260)  
Sec. 40-240. - Individual wastewater discharge and general permit decisions. 
The control authority will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of full evaluation and acceptance of the completed permit application, the control authority will determine whether to issue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit or deny any application for an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.270)  
Secs. 40-241—40-258. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS AND GENERAL PERMIT ISSUANCE 
 
Sec. 40-259. - Individual wastewater discharge and general permit duration. 
An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the control authority. Each individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.280)  
Sec. 40-260. - Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit contents. 
An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the control authority to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Individual wastewater discharge permits and general permits must contain the following: 
a.  A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the control authority in accordance with Section 40-262, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants or best management practices to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and City law; 
e.  The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with Section 40-295(b); 
f.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or City law; 
g.  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the control authority to be necessary; 
h.  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the control authority must be included as a condition in the user's permit. 
(2)  Individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(3)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(5)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
(6)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
(7)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges, surcharges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
(8)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices; 
(9)  A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit; and 
(10)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the control authority to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.290)  
Sec. 40-261. - Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit modification. 
(a)  The control authority may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City's POTW, City personnel, the receiving waters or beneficial sludge use; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(b)  The control authority may modify a general permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(3)  To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit; or 
(4)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.300)  
Sec. 40-262. - Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit transfer. 
(a)  Individual wastewater discharge permits or coverage under general permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days advance notice to the control authority and the control authority approves the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit coverage transfer. The notice to the control authority must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator shall have no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit; 
(4)  Submits a revised authorized or duly authorized representative of the user acknowledgement as per Section 40-143. 
(b)  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the individual wastewater discharge permit or coverage under the general permit void as of the date of facility transfer and shall initiate administrative and civil enforcement actions. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.310)  
Sec. 40-263. - Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit revocation. 
(a)  The control authority may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit or coverage under a general permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the control authority of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the control authority of changed conditions pursuant to Section 40-296; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the control authority timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or the general permit or this article. 
(b)  Individual wastewater discharge permit or coverage under general permit shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership pursuant of Section 40-262. 
(c)  All individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a new individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit to that user. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.320)  
Sec. 40-264. - Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit reissuance. 
A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall apply for individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with Section 40-237, a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.330)  
Secs. 40-265—40-291. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 40-292. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, as published in the federal register, or 180 days after the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4) or Wis. Admin. Code NR 211.33, whichever is later, users subject to the standard which are not new sources and which are currently discharging or scheduled to discharge into the shall submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in Subsection (b) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in Subsection (b) of this section. New sources shall include in this report information regarding the method of pretreatment that will be used to meet applicable categorical standards. The control authority may require the user to submit additional information which the control authority finds necessary to determine the user's ability to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. Users designated as non-significant categorical industrial users are required to comply with the following reporting requirements. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  General. All information required in Section 40-237(a)(1) and (2), (3)a and (6) 
(2)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The user shall provide the information required in Section 40-237(a)(7); 
b.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this Subsection (2); 
c.  Samples shall be taken at the discharge from the regulated process or at the discharge from the pretreatment facilities provided that wastewaters that are not regulated by the applicable categorical standard are not mixed with the regulated waste stream prior to the sampling point. Where sampling according to this provision is not feasible, the control authority may consider allowing alternative means of sampling to be used to determine compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standard at the point of discharge from the regulated process. If streams which are not regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard are mixed with the regulated stream prior to the sampling point, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula promulgated in Section 40-171(e); 
d.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with Section 40-300; 
e.  The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; 
f.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
(3)  Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative as defined in Section 40-143 and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(4)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in Section 40-293. 
(5)  Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with Section 40-304 and signed by an authorized representative as defined in Section 40-143. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.340)  
Sec. 40-293. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
If a user requires additional pretreatment and/or operational and maintenance to achieve compliance with pretreatment standards and regulations, the following conditions shall apply to all compliance schedule progress reports: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the control authority no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the control authority. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.350)  
Sec. 40-294. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standards deadline. 
(a)  Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the control authority a report containing the information described in Section 40-237(a)(6) and (7) and (b)(2). 
(b)  For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in Section 40-171(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. 
(c)  For users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
(d)  All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 40-304. All sampling will be done in conformance with Section 40-301. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.360)  
Sec. 40-295. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  Except as specified in Subsection (c) of this section, all significant industrial users must, at a frequency determined by the control authority, submit no less than twice per year (February and July) reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the control authority or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. 
(b)  The control authority may authorize a user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the user. This authorization is subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater. 
(2)  The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer than five years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes. 
(4)  The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed by the user's authorized representative as defined in Section 40-143, and include the certification statement in Section 40-304(a). 
(5)  Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis. 
(6)  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the control authority must be included as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the control authority for three years after expiration of the waiver. 
(7)  Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's permit by the control authority, the user must certify on each report with the statement in Section 40-304(c), that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the user. 
(8)  In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's operations, the user must immediately comply with the monitoring requirements of Subsection (a) of this section, or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the control authority, and notify the control authority. 
(9)  This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(c)  The control authority may reduce the requirement for periodic compliance reports to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by where the user's total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following: 
(1)  1,910 gallons per day (0.01 percent of the POTW's design dry-weather hydraulic capacity, as measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the user discharges in batches); 
(2)  2.6 pounds BOD per/day (0.01 percent of the POTW's design dry-weather organic treatment capacity); and 
(3)  POTW's value for 0.01 percent of the maximum allowable head works loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local limits were developed. 
Pollutant 	Maximum Allowable Head Works Loading (lb.) 
Arsenic 	0.018 
Cadmium 	0.022 
Chromium 	0.15 
Copper 	0.038 
Cyanide 	0.077 
Lead 	0.12 
Mercury 	No detectable discharge allowed 
Nickel 	0.10 
Phosphorus 	0.29 
Silver 	0.086 
Zinc 	0.049 
 
(4)  Reduced reporting is not available to users that have in the last two years been in significant noncompliance, as promulgated in Section 40-333. In addition, reduced reporting is not available to a user with daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that, in the opinion of the control authority, decreasing the reporting requirement for this user would result in data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(d)  Waste streams subject to pretreatment standards and requirements that have been shipped off-site for disposal, in lieu of discharge into the POTW, shall report the following information: 
(1)  The manufacturing process and volume generated; 
(2)  Waste hauler identification and specific transport information; and 
(3)  The final destination and fate of such waste streams. 
(e)  All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 40-304(a). 
(f)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(g)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the control authority, using the procedures prescribed in Section 40-301, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(h)  Users that send electronic (digital) documents in lieu of paper to the control authority to satisfy the requirements of this section must: 
(1)  Submit in a format that cannot be altered without detection during transmission or at any time after receipt; 
(2)  Any alterations to the electronic document during transmission or after receipt are fully documented; 
(3)  The electronic document was submitted knowingly and not by accident; 
(4)  The electronic document is validated upon the control authority receiving the certification statement paper page containing the original wet ink physically written signature of the authorized representative of the user (photocopy not acceptable) in addition to the electronic document submittal. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.370)  
Sec. 40-296. - Reports of changed conditions. 
User's shall notify the control authority of any significant changes to the operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater prior to implementing the change with sufficient notice to satisfactorily complete the following: 
(1)  The control authority may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section 40-237. 
(2)  The control authority may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit or a general permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  The control authority may deny discharge of the change into the POTW under Section 40-361, if determined the change would present or threaten or appear to present or threaten an imminent or actual danger of interference, pass through or employee health and safety to the POTW. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.380)  
Sec. 40-297. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the control authority of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
Contact Telephone Numbers 	Description 
608.755.3120 	Control Authority Normal Business Hours7:00 a.m.—3:30 p.m. 
608.755.6375 	Control Authority After Hours 
 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the control authority, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in Subsection (a) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  Significant industrial users are required to immediately notify the control authority of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.390)  
Sec. 40-298. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall provide appropriate reports to the control authority as the control authority may require, from time to time, submitted no later than the date specified. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.400)  
Sec. 40-299. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
(a)  Where the control authority has performed the original sampling and analysis in lieu of the user, the control authority shall perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat analysis. 
(b)  If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.410)  
Sec. 40-300. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 219. Laboratory test results for radiological samples submitted by the user to the control authority shall be performed by a laboratory approved by the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. Laboratory test results shall be performed by either a certified or registered laboratory accredited under Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 149. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.420)  
Sec. 40-301. - Sample collection. 
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report; based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period; and performed at the monitoring frequency necessary to assess and/or ensure compliance by the user with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements following the analytical requirements promulgated in Section 40-300. 
(1)  Except as indicated in Subsections (2) and (3) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority. When time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority, the samples must be representative of the discharge and documented in the user's file or industrial wastewater discharge permit. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 219 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the control authority, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(3)  In sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in Sections 40-292 and 40-294, a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the control authority may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by Section 40-295, the user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.430)  
Sec. 40-302. - Date of report receipt. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.440)  
Sec. 40-303. - Recordkeeping and retention. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying by the EPA, WDNR and the City, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices established under Section 40-173(f). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least seven years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the City, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the control authority. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.450)  
Sec. 40-304. - Certification statements. 
(a)  Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring waiver. The following certification statement is required to be signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance with Section 40-239; users submitting baseline monitoring reports under City ordinance Section 40-292(b)(5); users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under Section 40-294; users submitting periodic compliance reports required by Section 40-295(a) through (e); and users submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the basis of Section 40-295(b)(4). The following certification statement must be signed by an authorized representative of the user as defined in Section 40-143(c): 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(b)  Annual certification for non-significant categorical industrial users. A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by the control authority pursuant to Sections 40-143 and 40-239(c) must annually submit the following certification statement signed by an authorized representative of the user as defined in Section 40-143. This certification must accompany an alternative report required by the control authority. 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR _____, (insert applicable national pretreatment standard part) I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from _____, _____ to _____, _____ (month, day, year): 
a.  The facility described as _____. (insert facility name) met the definition of a non-significant categorical industrial user as described in Section 40-143; 
b.  The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements during this reporting period; and 
c.  The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. 
This compliance certification is based on the following information: (insert information supporting the facility's classification as a non-significant industrial user). 
(c)  Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have an approved monitoring waiver based on Section 40-295(b) must include the following statement along with the signature of the authorized representative of the user as defined in Section 40-143(e) certifying the facility did not increase waste stream pollutant due to activities of the user: 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR _____ (insert applicable national pretreatment standard part), I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of _____ (list pollutant) in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under Section 40-295(a). 
(d)  Certification of toxic organics management plan. Categorical users promulgated to 40 CFR 433, Effluent Guidelines for Metal Finishing, that have been approved by the control authority to implement a toxic organic management plan and total toxic organic certification statement in lieu of monitoring for total toxic organics shall certify that: 
Based on my inquiry of the permit or the persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for total toxic organics (TTO), I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, no dumping or concentrated toxic organics into the wastewaters has occurred since filing of the last periodic compliance report. I further certify that this facility is implementing the toxic organics management plan submitted to the control authority. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.460)  
Sec. 40-305. - Electronic (digital) reporting submission requirements. 
Users that submit electronic (digital) documents in lieu of paper to the control authority to satisfy reporting requirements must: 
(1)  Submit in a format that cannot be altered without detection during transmission or at any time after receipt; 
(2)  Any alterations to the electronic document during transmission or after receipt are fully documented; 
(3)  The electronic document was submitted knowingly and not by accident; 
(4)  The electronic document is only validated upon the control authority receiving the certification statement paper page containing the original wet ink physically written signature of the authorized representative of the user (photocopy not acceptable) in addition to the electronic document submittal. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.470)  
Secs. 40-306—40-328. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 
 
Sec. 40-329. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  All users shall have an inspection and sampling manhole or structure installed with an opening of no less than 24 inches in diameter and an internal diameter no less than 48 inches which is designed to contain flow measurement and sampling equipment located with access in the sewer lateral between the user's facility and prior to connection with the City collection system. The manhole shall be in an unobstructed location and shall provide ample room in or near the manhole to allow accurate flow measurement, sampling and preparation of samples for analysis whether constructed on public or private property. 
(b)  Any user subject to an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall provide and operate, at the user's own expense, a monitoring facility to allow 24-hour access for inspection, sampling and flow measurement of each unique waste stream outfall discharged into the POTW. 
(c)  Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the user's premises, except when such a location would, in the opinion of the control authority, cause an extreme hardship on the user. When the control authority determines such a hardship exists, the control authority may concur with the facility being constructed in the public right-of-way or easement, in an unobstructed location. The monitoring facility location shall provide ample room in or near the monitoring facility to allow accurate flow measurement, sampling and preparation of samples for analysis whether constructed on public or private property. 
(d)  The user shall submit plans for the location and design of the monitoring facility, and related sampling and flow measurement equipment for review and approval as promulgated in Section 40-208 prior to construction. All monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner so as to enable the control authority to perform concurrent monitoring activities independently from the user provided and maintained sampling and flow monitoring equipment. 
(e)  The metering of flow volume discharged into the POTW shall be determined from incoming water consumption records maintained by the City Water Utility. 
(1)  In the event that a user produces evidence satisfactory to the control authority that more than 20 percent of the total annual volume of water consumption is not discharged into the POTW collection system, the user shall be required to install and maintain flow measurement equipment. 
(2)  In the event that a user discharges flow volume greater than what shall be determined from incoming water consumption records due, in part, but not limited to, the introduction of raw materials, chemical addition or processes, cleaning and sanitation contribution, the user shall be required to install and maintain flow measurement equipment. 
(3)  Devices for metering the volume of waste discharged may be required by the control authority. Metering devices for determining the volume waste discharged into the POTW shall be purchased, installed, owned and maintained at the user's expense. Following the approval and installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent of the control authority. All applicable service charges and surcharges shall then be determined by the volume recorded on such metering device. 
(4)  Calibration of flow measurement equipment and devices shall be performed by an independent third party on no less than an annual frequency. Calibration certification reports provided by the independent third party shall be submitted with the applicable periodic compliance report promulgated in Section 40-295. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.480)  
Sec. 40-330. - Right of entry; inspection and sampling. 
The control authority shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the control authority ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the control authority shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The control authority shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the control authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(4)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the control authority access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.490)  
Sec. 40-331. - Search warrants. 
If the control authority has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the control authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Circuit Court of Rock County, State of Wisconsin. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.500)  
Sec. 40-332. - Confidential information/trade secrets. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, general permits and monitoring programs, and from the control authority inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the control authority, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. 
(b)  When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. 
(c)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302 and Wis. Stats. § 19.21 shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.510)  
Sec. 40-333. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The control authority shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice in the City, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. An industrial user has been in significant noncompliance if any of the criteria in Subsections (1) through (8) of this section, apply. A non-significant industrial user has been in significant noncompliance if criteria in Subsection (3), (4) or (8) of this section apply. 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six month period exceed by any magnitude a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH; or exceeded a pH limit by 0.4 standard units); 
(3)  The control authority has reason to believe that a user has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference, pass through or endangerment of health of POTW personnel or the general public because of a violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or the environment, or has resulted in the control authority's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  The user failed to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  The user has failed to provide, within 45 days after the deadline, a required report containing all required monitoring results and other information, such as baseline monitoring report, report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline, periodic self-monitoring report, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  The user failed to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.520)  
Secs. 40-334—40-354. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 40-355. - Notification of violation. 
When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the control authority. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the control authority from initiating additional administrative or judicial enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.530)  
Sec. 40-356. - Consent orders. 
The control authority may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 40-358 and 40-359 and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.540)  
Sec. 40-357. - Show cause hearing. 
The control authority may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the control authority and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail at least 14 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user as defined in Section 40-143 and required by Section 40-239(a). A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.550)  
Sec. 40-358. - Compliance orders. 
When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed, properly operated and maintained. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.560)  
Sec. 40-359. - Cease and desist orders. 
(a)  When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the control authority may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(b)  Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.570)  
Sec. 40-360. - Court forfeitures and penalties, equitable relief. 
(a)  When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement set forth in this article, the control authority may initiate enforcement of penalties through legal action, together with equitable relief, in the manner allowed by Wisconsin law. Such forfeitures and other monetary penalties shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(b)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall be subject to such additional costs, fees, assessments, interest and legal and equitable relief allowed by law. Interest at the rate of one percent per month shall be assessed as allowed by law upon the unpaid balance. A lien against the user's property may be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(c)  The control authority may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders and case preparation to the recovery sought through legal enforcement action. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.580)  
Sec. 40-361. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  The control authority may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The control authority may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the City POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the control authority may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the City POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The control authority may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the control authority that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in Section 40-362 are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the control authority prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under Section 40-357 or 40-362. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.590)  
Sec. 40-362. - Termination of discharge. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions in Section 40-263, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; 
(5)  Violation of the conditions or any provision of this article or any administrative or judicial order entered with respect hereto; 
(6)  Makes, attempts to make, aids or abets any connection to the City POTW collection system in any manner contrary to provisions of this article or other federal, state or City law; or 
(7)  Discharges, causes to be discharged, or in any manner aids in the discharge of any toxic or hazardous pollutant or any other substance prohibited in Section 40-170. 
(b)  Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 40-357 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the control authority shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.600)  
Secs. 40-363—40-382. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 40-383. - Injunctive relief. 
When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority in addition to any and all other enforcement and legal actions, remedies, penalties and relief may petition the Circuit Court of Rock County through the City's Attorney's Office for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction or other equitable order, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the individual wastewater discharge permit, the general permit order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The control authority may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.610)  
Sec. 40-384. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to the City for a maximum forfeiture in an amount of not less than $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The control authority may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties and forfeitures shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other enforcement, legal or equitable action against a user for similar or other violation, and default. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.620)  
Sec. 40-385. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The control authority may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City's enforcement response plan. However, the control authority may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the control authority is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.630)  
Secs. 40-386—40-413. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION 
 
Sec. 40-414. - Penalties for late reports. 
A penalty of $100.00 shall be assessed to any user for each day that a report required by this article, a permit or order issued hereunder is late, beginning five days after the date the report is due. Actions taken by the control authority to collect late reporting penalties shall not limit the control authority's ability to initiate other enforcement actions that may include penalties for late reporting violations. 
(Code 1976, § 16.16.640)  
Sec. 40-415. - Performance bonds. 
The control authority may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or a previous general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the City, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the control authority to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(Code 1976, § 16.16.650)  
Sec. 40-416. - Liability insurance. 
The control authority may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or a previous general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the City POTW caused by its discharge. 
(Code 1976, § 16.16.660)  
Sec. 40-417. - Payment of outstanding fees and penalties. 
The control authority may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or a previous general permit or order issued hereunder. 
(Code 1976, § 16.16.670)  
Sec. 40-418. - Water supply severance. 
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user's expense, only after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Code 1976, § 16.16.680)  
Secs. 40-419—40-449. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 40-450. - Accidental discharge upset. 
The term "accidental discharge upset" is defined as an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with either categorical or local pretreatment standards and requirements because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An accidental discharge upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(1)  An accidental discharge upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with either categorical or local pretreatment standards if the user demonstrates through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence that the following requirements: 
a.  An accidental discharge upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The user has followed the procedures identified in reporting potential problems as promulgated in Section 40-297 and has submitted the following information to the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the accidental discharge upset or, if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(2)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with either categorical or local pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(3)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an accidental discharge upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(Code 1976, § 16.16.690)  
Sec. 40-451. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in Section 40-170(a) or the specific prohibitions in Section 40-170(b)(3) through (8) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the City POTW was regularly in compliance with its WPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 16.16.700)  
Sec. 40-452. - Bypassing. 
(a)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions identified hereafter. 
(b)  Bypass notifications. 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the control authority, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  The user shall follow the procedures identified in reporting potential problems as promulgated in Section 40-297 and shall submit the following information to the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards or, if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
a.  A description of the bypass discharge and contributing factors causing the bypass; 
b.  The duration of bypass, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the bypassing is expected to continue; 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. 
The control authority may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(c)  Bypass is prohibited, and the control authority may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage which includes substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(3)  The user submitted notices as required under Subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  The control authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the control authority determines that it will meet the three conditions listed under Subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 16.16.710)  
Secs. 40-453—40-472. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES 
 
Sec. 40-473. - Wastewater treatment rates. 
(a)  Specific charges. Specific sewer service charges shall be reserved and promulgated in Article VII of this chapter. 
(b)  Pretreatment charges and fees. The City may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the City's pretreatment program, which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(5)  Fees to recover administrative and legal costs associated with the enforcement activity taken by the control authority to address user noncompliance; and 
(6)  Other fees as the control authority may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the City. 
(Code 1976, § 13.16.720)  
Secs. 40-474—40-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FATS, OILS, GREASE AND SAND INTERCEPTORS 
 
Sec. 40-500. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for commercial and industrial property owners and possessors, and every such user (except residential units) of the publicly owned treatments works (POTW) for the City of Janesville ("City") to capture and dispose of fats, oils, and grease ("FOG") and enables the City to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.; and the General Pretreatment Regulations, 40 CFR 403, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(b)  The term "person" means every user, entity, and form of organization. 
(c)  The term "POTW" means the City POTW. 
(d)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of FOG and other pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with its operation. 
(2)  To protect both the POTW personnel who may be affected by FOG, wastewater, and bio solids in the course of their employment, and the general public. 
(3)  To provide recovery of all costs associated with the operation, maintenance, and remediation of system failures due to noncompliance. 
(4)  To enable the City to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, bio solids use, and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject. 
(Code 1976, § 13.17.010)  
Sec. 40-501. - Administration. 
The City Manager and his or her representatives shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article, except as otherwise provided herein. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the City Manager may be delegated by the City Manager to a duly authorized City employee. 
(Code 1976, § 13.17.020)  
Sec. 40-502. - Applicability and prohibitions. 
(a)  Fats, oils, grease, and sand interceptors are necessary and shall be installed, maintained, and used by every commercial and industrial property owner and possessor, and each POTW user in the City, unless specifically exempt by the control authority, for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amount of FOG or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interceptor units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the POTW control authority, City Plumbing Inspector or the State of Wisconsin, and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired by the user at their expense. 
(b)  All commercial and industrial properties, POTW users, and plumbing installations, other than residential dwelling units, where FOG or similar waste products of cooking or food are introduced into the POTW shall provide interceptors in accordance with this article and other applicable laws and regulations. All drains and drain piping carrying FOG shall be directed through one or more interceptors in accordance with the state and City plumbing code. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the state and City plumbing codes, every new commercial and industrial property and POTW user plumbing system which discharges to the POTW shall be provided with one or more grease and/or sand interceptors. 
(1)  Altered or remodeled plumbing systems. Notwithstanding the state and City plumbing codes, every existing commercial and industrial property and POTW user plumbing system that discharges to the POTW which is altered or remodeled as to that part of the plumbing system which discharges from kitchens or food processing area shall be provided with one or more approved interceptors. 
(2)  Existing installations. The POTW control authority or City Plumbing Inspector may require the installation of a grease or sand interceptor for existing plumbing installations where the waterway of a drain system or sewer system is reduced or filled due to sand or congealed grease, or where sand or congealed grease impairs the proper functioning or the sewer system. 
(3)  Exterior grease interceptors shall receive the entire waste discharge from kitchens or food processing areas. Every exterior interceptor shall be designed, constructed, and installed in accordance with the standards contained in the state and City plumbing codes, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(4)  No POTW user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect discharge of any FOG of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW system in such amount as to cause interference and/or harm of any kind with or to the City wastewater collection or treatment system, or as to cause one or more pollutants to pass through the treatment works into the environment. 
(5)  All users with a grease and/or sand interceptor must adhere to all the requirements, procedures, and detailed recordkeeping to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article. All users shall maintain such records for not less than seven years and every user shall render the records available for inspection by a representative of the POTW during normal business hours. An accurate, complete, and daily updated maintenance log shall be kept by every user that indicates, at a minimum: 
a.  Date the interceptor was serviced. 
b.  Name of person or company servicing the interceptor. 
c.  Method of cleaning. 
d.  Disposal method of FOG or sand. 
(6)  Cleaning schedules. 
a.  Grease and sand interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the interceptor; to ensure the discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits as identified in Section 40-173(d)(3); and so that no visible grease is observed in the discharge. 
b.  Grease interceptors shall be completely evacuated at least annually, or more frequently when: 
1.  25 percent or more of wetted height of the grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, fats, oils, or greases; or 
2.  The discharge exceeds BOD, TSS, FOG, PH, or other pollutant levels established by the POTW; or if there is a history of noncompliance. 
(7)  Any person who owns or operates a grease interceptor may submit to the POTW a request in writing for an exception to the 30, day cleaning frequency of their grease interceptor. The POTW may grant an extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when: 
a.  The grease interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated that the specific interceptor shall produce an effluent, based on defensible analytical results, in consistent compliance with established local discharge limits such as BOD, TSS, FOG, and other parameters as determined by the POTW; or 
b.  Less than 25 percent of the wetted height of the grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, fats, oils, or greases. 
(8)  Prohibited practices. No person shall introduce, permit, or cause the introduction of any surfactant, solvent, or emulsifier into a grease interceptor. Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are materials which allow the grease to pass from the grease interceptor into the collection system and include, but are not limited to, enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene terrene, and other solvents. 
(Code 1976, § 13.17.030)  
Sec. 40-503. - Compliance monitoring; right of entry. 
(a)  A representative of the POTW shall have the right to enter the premises of any user or potential user during normal business hours (7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday) to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Every user shall allow representatives of the POTW ready access to all parts of the premises at all times for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records, examination, copying, remediation, and the performance of any additional duties. Every user shall have the appropriate tools and staff available to open the grease interceptor for inspection at all times. 
(b)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry is allowed into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the representative of the POTW shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities under this article and otherwise. 
(c)  The POTW shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such device as are necessary or desirable to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations under this article. The costs hereunder shall be at the user's expense. 
(d)  The POTW may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary or desirable to the POTW. The user facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the user's facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or oral request of a representative of the POTW and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(f)  Unreasonable delay, any obstruction, any hindrance, and any denial in allowing the POTW access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13.17.040)  
Sec. 40-504. - Violations and enforcement action. 
(a)  Violation of any and all provisions of this article include, but are not limited to, failure to clean or pump grease control equipment, failure to maintain grease control equipment including installation of properly functioning effluent-T and baffles, failure to install grease control equipment, failure to control FOG discharge, failure to certify the grease interceptor, being responsible for a sewer line obstruction, being responsible for a sanitary sewer overflow and using additives so that FOG is diluted or pushed downstream from connection, and each and every breach of any other provision set forth in this article. 
(b)  Whenever the City determines that a grease interceptor is in need of installation, pumping, repairs, maintenance, or replacement, a noncompliance notification or notice of violation (NOV) shall be issued stating the nature of the violation and timeframe for corrective measures. 
(c)  If the user fails to initiate action or fully comply with a requirement or notice, a second notice shall be issued and additional fees assessed. Fees may include costs associated with service calls for sewer line blockages, line cleaning, camera trucks, line and pump repairs, including all labor, material, and equipment. Further noncompliance may result in the discontinuance of the user's facility water service and/or wastewater service. 
(d)  Immediate discontinuance of water service and/or wastewater service may be implemented by the City if the user or facility, in the sole determination of a representative of the POTW and/or City Plumbing Inspector, present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the public, or to the environment; or causes or potentially causes: a stoppage or excessive maintenance to the sanitary sewer system, significant interference with the wastewater treatment plant, or an actual or potential violation of any City condition of its permit. Service shall be reinstated when such conditions have been eliminated as determined by the City. 
(e)  If an inspection or field investigation determines that any fats, oils, and grease interference or blockage in the sewer system, a sewage pumping station, or the wastewater treatment plant is caused by a particular user, then that user shall reimburse the City the costs, fees, and expenses of all labor, equipment, supplies, and disposal incurred by the City to clean the interference or blockage. Failure to reimburse the City for all such costs, fees, and expenses may result in the termination of water service and/or wastewater service to that user. 
(Code 1976, § 13.17.050)  
Secs. 40-505—40-531. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SEWER SERVICE CHARGES 
 
Sec. 40-532. - Purpose; scope; policy. 
(a)  The City has provided facilities for collection and treatment of sewage to promote the health, safety and convenience of its people, and to safeguard the water resources common to all. In such facilities, provisions of design, construction and operation have been made to accommodate certain types and quantities of commercial and industrial wastes in excess of, and in addition to, normal sewage. 
(b)  The City Council has determined that it is the obligation of the producers of domestic, commercial and industrial wastes to defray the cost of normal and extraordinary services rendered by the City in the collection and treatment of such wastes in an equitable manner and, insofar as it is practicable, in proportion to the benefits derived from such services. 
(c)  Service area. The wastewater utility shall provide service within the corporate limits of the City. Service to properties or areas outside the City limits cannot be provided unless the property owners enter into an agreement with the City. This agreement will, among other things, require the property owner, or the property owner's heirs or successors, to annex into the City when the City's corporate limits reach any side of the property. If the property fails to annex to the City, for any reason, service will be terminated until such time that annexation does occur. 
(d)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To provide for the recovery of all the costs of constructing, maintaining and operating the City wastewater system; and 
(2)  To provide for the establishment and maintenance of an equipment replacement fund. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.010)  
Sec. 40-533. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City Council means the governing body of officials elected by the City of Janesville to oversee the management of the City utilities. 
Clear water means all water which has not been polluted or contaminated by use, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not benefit by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities of the utility. Clear water includes non-contact cooling water, water used for irrigation, and any other non-polluted water. Clear water may come from the public water supply or from any other source. 
Director means the City Manager, the Director of Public Works or Services, the Utility Director and/or other duly authorized deputy, agent or representative as designated by the City Manager. 
Garbage means the residue from the preparation and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food produce. 
Grease interceptor means a receptacle, either interior or exterior, designed to intercept and retain or remove grease or fatty substances. Also called "grease trap." 
Ground garbage means the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Lateral means all pipes and devices connecting a sewer main to a customer and/or serviced property. In certain instances, at the discretion of the Director, the utility will pay street restoration costs when a residential customer must perform lateral maintenance under a publicly-owned street surface. 
Normal concentration means: 
(1)  A five-day, 20-degree-centigrade BOD of not more than 250 mg/l; 
(2)  A suspended solids content of not more than 300 mg/l; 
(3)  A phosphorus concentration of not more than eight mg/l. 
Normal sewage means sanitary sewage or other wastes in which BOD, suspended solids, or phosphorus concentrations do not exceed normal concentrations. 
Privy or vault toilet wastes means wastes from a cavity in the ground or vault constructed for toilet uses which receives human excrement either to be partially absorbed by the surrounding soil or for storage and periodic removal. 
Public sewer means a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City. The term "public sewer" also includes sewers within or outside the City boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the City sewerage system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with City funds. 
Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the sewerage system during the service life of the sewerage system for which such system was designed and constructed. 
Sanitary sewage means the waste from water closets, urinals, lavatories, sinks, bathtubs, showers, household laundries, cellar floor drains, garage floor drains, and other sewage from primarily domestic sources. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, or institutions, and into which stormwater and clear water are not admitted. 
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
Sewer means any pipe, conduit, ditch or other device used to collect and transport sewage, stormwater, groundwater or other waters from the generating source. 
(b)  See Section 40-143 for additional definitions. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.020)  
Sec. 40-534. - Sewer service charges, generally. 
(a)  There is levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building, premises or unit having a connection with the public sewer system, a sewer charge based upon the quantity of wastewater discharged, as measured by the Janesville Water Utility. Unless metered and showing otherwise, it shall be assumed that the quantity of wastewater discharged into the public sewer system is the same as the quantity of water used by the particular lot, parcel of land, building, premises or unit. If any person discharging wastewater into the public sewer system procures any part or all of his or her water from sources other than the City water utility, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall, at his or her expense, provide a suitable location and proper connections for the installation of a water meter provided by the utility, for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources. Such sewer service charge for each quarter shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(b)  Clear water/deduct meter. The customer may, in an effort to reduce wastewater charges, measure the water supplied by the City water utility which does not enter the sanitary sewer collection system, through the use of an additional clear water meter. The person shall, at his or her own expense, provide a suitable location and proper connections to allow the installation of a water meter and transmitter purchased from, and installed by, the City water utility. Wastewater charges will be reduced by using the volume of flow not entering the sanitary sewer with the current wastewater rates. The cost of testing, maintenance, and replacement of the clear water meter shall be included in the following fixed fees. Meter and transmitter upgrade fee for five-eighths inch and three-quarter inch meters, $156.00. This is a one-time fee to upgrade the meter, if needed, and transmitter to a radio reading system. This fee can be paid in one payment or spread over five years at $10.00/quarter. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.030; Ord. No. 2018-740, §§ I, II(attach), 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 40-535. - Industrial and commercial surcharge. 
(a)  Imposition. All persons, firms, corporations, institutions, or organizations discharging wastes into the public sewers shall, if their sewage has a concentration greater than "normal" concentrations, be considered an industrial discharger and subject to the requirements of Section 40-208. The amount of surcharge shall reflect the cost incurred by the City in removing the excess biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and suspended solids. 
(b)  Computation. The excess pounds of BOD and suspended solids will be computed by multiplying the flow volume in million gallons per day (MGD) by the constant 8.345, and then multiplying the product by the difference between the person's concentrations of BOD and suspended solids and the aforementioned normal concentrations in parts per million by weight. This product will then be multiplied by the number of days in the billing period to determine the surcharge. 
(c)  Rates. The rates of surcharge for each of the constituents mentioned in the Subsection (b) of this section will be at the prevailing rate at the time. The prevailing rate at the time shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.040; Ord. No. 2018-740, § III(attach), 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 40-536. - Hauled waste service charge. 
Application fees and disposal charges for bulk wastes shall be as follows: 
(1)  Application fee. To defray annual program administration costs, a non-refundable fee shall be paid by the applying licensed hauler at the time of the application. Once the application is approved by the Director, the licensed hauler will be authorized to discharge residential septage and/or holding tank waste at the treatment plant for a period of one year. All other liquid wastes require a separate specific approval of the Director prior to their discharge. A new application and non-refundable fee must be submitted each year. The non-refundable fee shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(2)  Septage. For each 1,000 gallons or a portion thereof of typical strength septage (less than 7,000 mg/l BOD and 15,000 mg/l SS) there shall be a charge in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. If analytical testing determines the strength of the septage to be higher than the typical values as indicated above, an additional charge shall be levied, based upon the unit charges as indicated in Section 40-535, and upon the increased pounds of BOD and/or SS over and above the typical strengths as stated in this subsection. 
(3)  Commercial/industrial hauled waste. Commercial/industrial bulk waste haulers will be billed a surcharge per pound of phosphorous on all waste received. The per pound surcharge shall be in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(4)  Holding tank wastes. For each 1,000 gallons or portion thereof of typical strength holding tank waste (less than 600 mg/l BOD and 1,800 mg/l SS) there shall be a charge in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. If analytical testing determines the strength of the septage to be higher than the typical values as indicated above, an additional charge shall be levied, based upon the unit charges as indicated in Section 40-535, and upon the increased pounds of BOD and/or SS over and above the typical strengths as stated in this subsection. 
(5)  Privy, vault toilet wastes, and other bulk wastes. Privy, vault toilet wastes and other bulk wastes will be charged on a case-by-case basis, based on the character of the wastes as determined by actual testing, upon the unit charges as indicated in Section 40-535, and including actual costs for analytical charges and for administrative expenses. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.050; Ord. No. 2018-740, § IV(attach), 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 40-537. - Sewer service charges, surcharges and pretreatment program charges—Billing period. 
(a)  Sewer service charges, surcharges, and pretreatment program charges provided for in this article and Article V of this chapter shall be included as separate items on the regular bill for water service, and shall be payable upon issue in accordance with the existing rules and regulations of the water utility. 
(b)  Revenue raised by the operation, maintenance and replacement (OM&R) rates are to be used only to defray utility expenses for OM&R. The replacement fund is to be funded at the level of $800,000.00 per year. Monies allocated for replacement are to be used only for replacement. 
(c)  DNR regulations, specifically Wis. Admin. Code NR 128.13(2)(b), as from time to time amended, requires an audit and review of the user charge system rates no less often than every two years. The regulation specifically provides that the City should revise the charges for users or user classes to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Maintain the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs among the users and user classes as required herein; 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the treatment works; and 
(3)  Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for next year and adjust the rate accordingly. 
(d)  In accordance with these rules, a biannual review of charges for users or user classes shall be made by the utility to ensure the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and user classes, and that adequate funds are accumulating in the replacement fund to defray the cost of future replacements. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.060; Ord. No. 2018-740, § V, 11-26-2018 )  
Sec. 40-538. - Sewer service charges, surcharges and pretreatment program charges—Payment procedure. 
(a)  Sewer service charges, surcharges and pretreatment charges shall be payable at the office of the municipal building, or at any other officially designated location at the same time that the water bills become due, or at such other time as may be designated by the wastewater utility. Payments for water service shall not be accepted without full payment of the sewer service charges and surcharges. 
(b)  These and any and all other costs and fees set forth herein, pertaining to, or arising from, this article, Article V of this chapter and/or its application shall, in addition to any and all other remedies available at law for the assessing, levying, and collecting of the same, be levied against the user's property as a lien and/or special assessment. All remedies for collecting the cost of same being cumulative and not exclusive. 
(c)  Residential property owners may have the bill placed in the name of the tenant if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The owner of the rental dwelling unit notifies the utility in writing of the name and address of the owner. 
(2)  The owner of the rental dwelling unit notifies the utility in writing of the name and address of the tenant who is responsible for payment of the utility charges. 
(3)  If requested by the utility, the owner of the rental dwelling unit provides the utility with a copy of the rental or lease agreement in which the tenant assumes responsibility for the payment of the utility charges. 
(d)  In order to comply with the requirements of Subsection (c) of this section, the property owner must complete a written application in compliance with the operating policies of the Janesville Utility. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.070)  
Sec. 40-539. - Industrial pretreatment program; funding and fees. 
The sample collection and analysis costs of the industrial pretreatment program of the City shall be borne by those users that require monitoring, as determined by the Director. Sample analysis and collection costs shall be based upon the actual costs of this activity to the utility and shall be proportionately divided amongst the users to reflect each user's actual use. The costs of any additional services that are requested by a particular user or required by the Director for a particular user shall be charged to that user. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.080)  
Sec. 40-540. - Sewer service charges, surcharges and pretreatment program charges—Delinquent bills; late charge. 
Bills for sewer service charges, surcharges and pretreatment program charges levied and assessed in accordance with this article and/or Article V of this chapter shall become due and payable within 30 days from and after the date of the bill. In the event that any such bills are not paid when due, a late charge of one percent every 30 days on the unpaid balance will be added thereto. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.090)  
Sec. 40-541. - Sewer service charges, surcharges and pretreatment charges—When constitutes a lien. 
Each sewer service charge, surcharge and pretreatment program charge levied by or pursuant to this article and/or Article V of this chapter shall constitute a lien upon the premises serviced by the sewer system, as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 66.0821, as from time to time amended. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.100)  
Sec. 40-542. - Sewer service charges, surcharges and pretreatment program charges—Effect of ownership or occupancy change on delinquency. 
Change of ownership or occupancy of premises delinquent under the provisions of this article and/or Article V of this chapter shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating charges due and penalties. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.110)  
Sec. 40-543. - Severability. 
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or subsection of this article is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and subsections shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.120)  
Sec. 40-544. - Violations; penalties; other relief. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not to exceed $1,000.00 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture shall be subject to such sanctions and penalties as provided by law and/or ordered by the court, and/or committed to the Rock County Jail for a term as set forth by the court. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the offender of any provision of this article to abate the violation immediately, and each day that such violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(c)  The City may, in addition to the previously stated penalties, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation, or any officer of any corporation, who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by the imposition of a forfeiture of not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture, shall be subject to such sanctions and penalties as provided by law and/or ordered by the court, and/or committed to the Rock County Jail for a term as set forth by the court. 
(e)  If, in any action, any permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any City agent or employee constitute a defense. 
(f)  Any person, or any officer of any corporation, who violates or causes to be violated any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the City for any expenses, loss or damage occasioned by such violation, including personnel costs and attorney's enforcement of the order and/or any other appropriate legal and/or equitable relief. 
(g)  If, in any action, any permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense; nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any City agent or employee constitute a defense. 
(h)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this section and article will result in discontinuance of wastewater service to the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 13.18.130)  
Secs. 40-545—40-564. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FLUORINATION 
 
Sec. 40-565. - Generally. 
Having received the consent and approval of the State Board of Health, the Water Department of the City, under the direction of the Health Department of the City, is authorized and directed to provide the means and equipment necessary to proceed and continue with the introduction of approximately one part of fluorine to every million parts of water distributed in the water supply system of the City. The employees and facilities of the Water Department of the City are to be used as far as possible in this public health program, under the supervision of the Department of Health of the City, and the entire program shall be considered as a health program of the City. 
(Code 1976, § 8.44.010)  
Chapter 42 - ZONING  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TITLE 
 
Sec. 42-19. - Generally. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the "Janesville Zoning Ordinance." 
(Code 1976, § 18.04.010)  
Secs. 42-20—42-41. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 42-42. - Generally. 
The authority of the City Council to regulate development with a zoning ordinance is done pursuant to a grant of power in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23 and 87.30. 
(Code 1976, § 18.08.010)  
Secs. 42-43—42-72. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PURPOSE 
 
Sec. 42-73. - Generally. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted for the following generally: 
(1)  To promote public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the community; 
(2)  To lessen congestion in the streets; 
(3)  To zone all properties with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City; 
(4)  To encourage reasonable flexibility of development design through appropriate innovation; 
(5)  To isolate or control the location of unavoidable nuisance-producing uses; 
(6)  To foster a more rational pattern of relationship between residential, business, commercial and industrial uses for the mutual benefit of all; 
(7)  To provide adequate light, air, and open spaces; 
(8)  To prevent the overcrowding of land; 
(9)  To avoid undue concentration of population; 
(10)  To facilitate the adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; 
(11)  To protect existing uses from harmful encroachment by incompatible uses; 
(12)  To provide for the elimination and encouragement of the elimination of those uses of land, buildings, and structures which are contrary to the intent and purposes of this article of which are adversely affecting the character, development, and taxable value of property in each district; 
(13)  To provide for preservation and restoration of historically significant buildings and neighborhoods; 
(14)  To define the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies, as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 18.12.010)  
Sec. 42-74. - Standards and requirements in this chapter. 
The standards and requirements contained in this chapter and the district mapping reflected on the Janesville Zoning Map, are intended to further the implementation of the objectives of the Janesville Comprehensive Pan, as well as to protect all desirable existing structures and uses. 
(Code 1976, § 18.12.020)  
Secs. 42-75—42-91. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - APPLICABILITY 
 
Sec. 42-92. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in favor of the City as minimum requirements adopted for the purposes stated. 
(1)  Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter or regulations of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(2)  This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easement, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1976, § 18.16.010)  
Sec. 42-93. - Scope of regulations. 
All structures erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located. 
(1)  Any building, structure, or use of land, building, or structure that was nonconforming prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which clearly complies with the intent, purposes, and all regulations of this article shall be considered lawful and conforming. Any building, structure, or use of land, buildings, or structure which is in conflict with the requirements of this article, shall be nonconforming to the extent of the conflict and shall be subject to the provisions of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses. 
(2)  However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and provided construction is begun within 90 days of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, the building or structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been issued, and further, may upon completion be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses. 
(Code 1976, § 18.16.020)  
Sec. 42-94. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the several provisions of this chapter are severable, in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not specifically included in the judgment. 
(2)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property, building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in the judgment. 
(Code 1976, § 18.16.030)  
Sec. 42-95. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall use, develop, or maintain any parcel of land, building, or structure, or any part of any of the foregoing, within the City, except as specifically allowed by a valid conditional use permit or by the applicable chapter or section of this chapter. No person shall use, develop, or maintain any parcel of land, building, or structure, or any part of any of the foregoing, within the City, except as specifically allowed pursuant to the applicable zoning regulations and other such regulations which apply to such land, building, or structure, including, but not limited to, limitations on the number of buildings on any lot or parcel of land, vision clearance, other obstructions, use lists, height limitations, setback requirements, off-street parking, off-street loading, and accessory buildings, structures, and uses. 
(b)  Except as specifically allowed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, no person shall use, develop, maintain, sell, transfer, or convey any parcel of land or part thereof which has been represented to be, or has been used as, or has been agreed to be used as, or was set aside as a fulfillment of any regulation or requirement of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the City, including, but not limited to, green area, off-street parking, and off-street loading, when such use, development, maintenance, sale, transfer, or conveyance does or would result in noncompliance with any such regulation or requirement. 
(c)  No building, occupancy, or conditional use permit shall be issued to any person when the proposed use or development would violate any of the provisions of this article. This prohibition includes any violation resulting from a change of use of any land, building or structure previously used to fulfill a condition or requirement of this article or any other ordinance or part thereof of the City. There are many parts of this article which specify certain activities that may be accomplished in the future in order to comply fully with all requirements and regulations imposed by this article for particular uses. Examples of such future activities are construction of required off-street parking spaces and planting and maintenance of green areas. If any use or development is commenced and some activity or activities are specified as requirements for such use or development, these positive steps must be completed within any applicable time limit, or within a reasonable time if no time limit is imposed, or within 60 days of the mailing of written notice by the City that such requirements must be fulfilled. Such written notice may specify a longer period of time for compliance. No person shall fail to take such required action or actions specified herein. 
(Code 1976, § 18.16.040)  
Secs. 42-96—42-118. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 42-119. - Generally. 
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in this chapter shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. In further amplification and for clarity of interpretation of the context, the following definitions of word use shall apply: 
(1)  Terms used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and the plural the singular. 
(2)  The term "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(3)  The term "may" is permissive. 
(4)  The term "lot" includes the terms "piece," "parcel," and "plots"; the term "building" includes all other structures of every kind regardless of similarity to buildings and the phrase "used for" includes the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
(5)  All measured distances shall be to the nearest foot. If a fraction is one-half foot or more, the full number next above shall be taken. 
(6)  Words contained in this chapter and not defined herein after shall assume definitions as prescribed in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary (1976 Edition). 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.010)  
Sec. 42-120. - A Zones. 
A Zones means those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.020)  
Sec. 42-121. - Accessory building. 
Accessory building means a building which is incidental and subordinate to the principal building, serves the principal building exclusively and located on the same lot with such principal building. An accessory building shall not exceed 120 square feet in area. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.030)  
Sec. 42-122. - Accessory use. 
Accessory use means a use which is incidental to the principal use and serves the principal use exclusively. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.031)  
Sec. 42-123. - Adult entertainment or oriented establishment. 
Adult entertainment or oriented establishment means the establishment or business described, regulated and licensed in Chapter 4, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.033)  
Sec. 42-124. - Adult family home. 
Adult family home means a private residence or other facility, defined under Wis. Stats. § 50.01(1), within which care, maintenance, treatment and/or services above the level of room and board, but not including nursing care, are provided, and the number of adults in residence receiving services is generally limited to three or four. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.034)  
Sec. 42-125. - Alteration. 
Alteration means any change to one or more of the exterior architectural features of an improvement, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction or moving of any such improvement. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.040)  
Sec. 42-126. - Awning. 
Awning means a fixed or retractable roof like cover which projects from the wall of a building and is used as a sunshade or rain shelter. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.050)  
Sec. 42-127. - Base flood. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) as part of a flood insurance study (FIS) and depicted on a flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.060)  
Sec. 42-128. - Base flood elevation. 
Base flood elevation means an elevation equal to that which reflects the height of the base flood as defined. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.010)  
Sec. 42-129. - Bay. 
Bay means an area within the building intended for or usable as a location to service, repair or wash a car. Each area large enough to accommodate one car shall be considered as one bay. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.070)  
Sec. 42-130. - Bed and breakfast establishments. 
Bed and breakfast establishment means an owner-occupied single-family residence containing lodging rooms for rent and providing limited meal service to only the permanent residents of the site and occupants of the lodging rooms. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.084)  
Sec. 42-131. - Beer garden. 
For a definition of the term "beer garden," see Outdoor cafe. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.085)  
Sec. 42-132. - Boathouse. 
Boathouse as defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.121(1), means a permanent structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and includes all structures which are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls or any combination of structural parts. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.088)  
Sec. 42-133. - Brewpub. 
Brewpub means a restaurant that holds a Class B liquor license and is licensed by the State of Wisconsin to manufacture not more than 10,000 barrels of fermented malt beverages annually or as otherwise amended from time to time by the state. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.089)  
Sec. 42-134. - Building. 
Building means any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, chattels, or movable property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to the land but shall not include fences. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.090)  
Sec. 42-135. - Building Division Director. 
Building Division Director means the person designated by the City Manager to enforce and administer this Code or his or her duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.100)  
Sec. 42-136. - Bulkhead line. 
Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of a navigable body of water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11, and which allows limited filling on the landward side except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.110)  
Sec. 42-137. - Carwash. 
Carwash means a building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing automobiles by using production line methods or partial hand washing. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.120)  
Sec. 42-138. - Certificate of appropriateness. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a statement containing the signature of the secretary of the Historic Commission verifying that the Historic Commission has found the requested action to be appropriate to the general character of the Historic Overlay District and that the requested action may be taken subject to applicable building and zoning codes. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.130)  
Sec. 42-139. - Channel. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct the normal flow of water. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.140)  
Sec. 42-140. - Club or lodge, private (nonprofit). 
Private (nonprofit) club or lodge means a nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members which owns, hires, or leases a building, or portion thereof; the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. The affairs and management of such private club or lodge are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.150)  
Sec. 42-141. - Community living arrangement. 
Community living arrangement means any of the following facilities licensed or operated or permitted under the authority of the State Department of Health and Social Services: child welfare agencies under Wis. Stats. § 48.60, group homes for children under Wis. Stats. § 48.02(7) and community-based residential facilities under Wis. Stats. § 50.01, but does not include adult family homes, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 50.01, day care centers, nursing homes, general hospitals, special hospitals, prisons and jails. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.160)  
Sec. 42-142. - Compatible. 
Compatible means: 
(1)  Having harmony in design and/or appearance between two or more attributes of a structure; 
(2)  Having harmony in design and/or appearance between two or more structures; 
(3)  Having harmony in design and/or appearance between two or more attributes of a neighborhood; 
(4)  Having harmony in use or function between two or more attributes of a neighborhood or area.  
Sec. 42-143. - Conditional use. 
Conditional use means a use which, because of its unique or varying characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a particular district. After due consideration, as provided for in this article, of the impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at a particular location, such conditional use may or may not be granted. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.170)  
Sec. 42-144. - Convalescent home or nursing home. 
Convalescent home or nursing home means a home for the aged, infirmed, chronically ill, or incurable persons in which person, not restricted to members of the immediate family of the home operators, are received, kept or provided with food, shelter, and care for compensation. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.180)  
Sec. 42-145. - Corner lot. 
For a definition of the term "corner lot," see Lot, corner. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.190)  
Sec. 42-146. - Court. 
Court means an area planned to accommodate mobile homes and their accompanying facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.200; Ord. No. 80-208, § l(part), 1981)  
Sec. 42-147. - Day care center. 
Day care center means a facility licensed by the state that provides care, education or supervision for four or more children under the age of seven for less than 24 hours a day. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.210)  
Sec. 42-148. - Demolition. 
Demolition means any act of razing, destruction or ruination of all or any part of an improvement. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.220)  
Sec. 42-149. - Development. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, construction of or additions to or, substantial improvements to buildings, other structures, or accessory uses, the placement of mobile homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, deposition of materials. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.230)  
Sec. 42-150. - Drainage greenbelt. 
Drainage greenbelt means a normally dry valley which is subject to intermittent storm runoff. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.240)  
Sec. 42-151. - Drainage system. 
Drainage system means one or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.245)  
Sec. 42-152. - Drainageway. 
Drainageway means a public owned and maintained valley for the purpose of conducting surface drainage; the bottom of a greenbelt. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.250)  
Sec. 42-153. - Drive-in establishment. 
Drive-in establishment means a place of business being operated for the sale and purchase at retail of food and other goods, services or entertainment, which is laid out and equipped so as to allow its patrons to be served or accommodated while remaining in their motor vehicles, or which allows the consumption of food or beverage in motor vehicles on the premises. Such business may also allow consumption of food or beverage on the premises and outside any completely enclosed structures if provided for in the conditional use permit. The term "drive-in establishment" includes, but is not limited to, car washes, drive-in restaurants, drive-in banks and drive-in theaters. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.260)  
Sec. 42-154. - Dwelling. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof used primarily for human habitation including single-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, or lodginghouses. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.270)  
Sec. 42-155. - Dwelling unit. 
Dwelling unit means a unit consisting of one or more rooms containing cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities and which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for one family only. Cooking facilities shall consist of a minimum of a sink equipped that is connected to public potable water and sanitary sewer facilities, a stove or oven that has been designed and approved for interior use and a source of refrigeration that has been designed and approved for interior use and both of which are intended for the preparation and preservation of food for human consumption. Sanitary facilities shall consist of a minimum of a toilet, sink and shower or bathtub that are all connected to public potable water and sanitary sewer facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.280)  
Sec. 42-156. - Emergency service. 
Emergency service means a service rendered to a customer that is unusual due to some type of urgent situation involving a motor vehicle and which requires services performed outside the building, but in no case takes more than 24 hours to complete. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.290)  
Sec. 42-157. - Encroachment. 
Encroachment means any fill, structure, building, accessory use, or development in the floodway. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.300)  
Sec. 42-158. - Encroachment/floodway lines. 
Encroachment/floodway lines means limits of obstruction to flood flows. These lines are on both sides of and generally parallel to the stream. The lines are established by assuming that the area landward (outside) of the encroachment lines will be ultimately developed in such a way that it will not be available to convey flood flows. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.310)  
Sec. 42-159. - Equal degree of hydraulic encroachment. 
Equal degree of hydraulic encroachment means the effect of any encroachment into the floodway must be computed by assuming an equal degree of hydraulic encroachment on the other side of a river or stream for a significant hydraulic reach. This computation ensures that property owners up, down or across the river or stream will have the same rights of hydraulic encroachment. Encroachments are analyzed on the basis of the effect upon hydraulic conveyance, not upon the distance the encroachment extends into the floodway. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.320)  
Sec. 42-160. - Exercise studio. 
Exercise studio means a facility for providing weight loss, physical fitness instruction, aerobics and related programs with or without the use of exercise equipment on the premises. An exercise studio shall not include activities such as basketball, tennis courts, racquetball courts or swimming pools. All activities shall be conducted indoors. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.325)  
Sec. 42-161. - Family. 
Family means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption living as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, including foster children, domestic servants, and not more than four roomers. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.340)  
Sec. 42-162. - Family day care home. 
Family day care home means a dwelling licensed as a day care center by the Department of Health and Social Services where care is provided for not more than eight children. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.345)  
Sec. 42-163. - Fenestration. 
Fenestration means the design and placement of windows in a building. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.350)  
Sec. 42-164. - Flood or flooding. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normal dryland areas caused by one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The overflow or rise of inland waters; 
(2)  The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; 
(3)  The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.360)  
Sec. 42-165. - Flood fringe. 
Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway, which is covered by floodwater during the regional flood; it is generally associated with standing water rather than rapidly flowing water. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.370)  
Sec. 42-166. - Flood hazard boundary map. 
Flood hazard boundary map means a map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A-Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance study and a flood insurance rate map. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.380)  
Sec. 42-167. - Flood insurance rate map. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means a map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.385)  
Sec. 42-168. - Flood insurance study map. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) a technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A-Zones. Flood insurance rate maps that accompany the flood insurance study form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.390)  
Sec. 42-169. - Floodplain. 
Floodplain means the land which has been or may be hereafter covered by floodwater during the regional flood. The floodplain includes the floodway and the flood fringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.400)  
Sec. 42-170. - Flood profile. 
Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations along a stream or river. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.410)  
Sec. 42-171. - Floodproofing. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings in flood hazard areas. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.420)  
Sec. 42-172. - Flood protection elevation. 
Flood protection elevation means an elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. Also see Freeboard. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.430)  
Sec. 42-173. - Floodway. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry and discharge the floodwater or flood flows associated with the regional flood. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.440)  
Sec. 42-174. - Freeboard. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in terms of a certain amount of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for the many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated. These unknown factors include, but are not limited to, ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology of the watershed, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggradation of the river or stream bed. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.450)  
Sec. 42-175. - Frontage. 
Frontage means that portion of a lot abutting a public street or, in a planned unit development, abutting a private street. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.460)  
Sec. 42-176. - Garage. 
Garage means a building or portion thereof that is greater than 120 square feet in area and in which a motor vehicle containing gasoline, distillate, or other volatile flammable liquid in its tank may or may not be stored, prepared, or kept. A garage may also allow storage of other vehicles (including electric vehicles), tools, gardening equipment, or other vehicle or equipment that includes gasoline or other volatile flammable liquid in its tank. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.465)  
Sec. 42-177. - Garage, attached. 
Attached garage shall mean a garage which meets or exceeds one or more of the following: 
(1)  Attached directly to the principal building. 
(2)  Attached to the principal building by means of an enclosed or open breezeway, porch, terrace, or vestibule, constructed so as to form an integral part of the principal building. 
(3)  Constructed in the basement of the principal building. 
(4)  Situated less than five feet from any point of the principal building and/or attached deck. 
(5)  Situated so that any portion of any garage wall lies on or in front of an imaginary line extending across the lot (said line being five feet in back of and parallel to the closest rear wall of the principal building or attached deck), and at least one garage wall is less than ten feet from any other wall of the principal structure. 
 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.466)  
Sec. 42-178. - Garage, detached. 
Detached garage means a garage entirely separated from the principal building and which meets or exceeds one or more of the following: 
(1)  Situated so that any portion of any garage wall lies on or to the rear of an imaginary line extending across the lot (said line being five feet in back of and parallel to the closest rear wall of the principal building or attached deck) and all other garage walls are ten feet (or five feet if a firewall is provided in accordance with the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code) or more from any other wall of the principal building. 
(2)  Situated so that any portion of any garage wall lies on or in front of an imaginary line extending across the lot (said line being five feet in back of and parallel to the closest rear wall of the principal building or attached deck) and all other garage walls are ten feet (or five feet if a firewall is provided in accordance with the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code) or more from any other wall of the principal building. 
 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.467)  
Sec. 42-179. - Gasoline dispensing station. 
Gasoline dispensing station means a station dispensing gasoline and related automotive products. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.470)  
Sec. 42-180. - Gasoline service station. 
Gasoline service station means a station dispensing gasoline and related automotive products and, in addition, providing auto servicing and repairs in a service bay. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.480)  
Sec. 42-181. - Green area. 
Green area means that part of a parcel or lot that is permanently devoted to grass, trees, shrubs and similar natural aesthetic plantings. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.490)  
Sec. 42-182. - Health club 
Health club means a facility for providing fitness and recreational activities on-site, which may include, but is not limited to, basketball, tennis and racquetball courts, swimming pools, aerobics, weightlifting, bodybuilding and other similarly related activities. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.495)  
Sec. 42-183. - Height. 
Height refers to the height of a building and is measured from the ground level at the entrance to the building to the highest point of the roof. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.500)  
Sec. 42-184. - Historic overlay district. 
Historic Overlay District means an area designated by the City Council which contains one or more improvements or historic structures (also referred to as Historic District). 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.510)  
Sec. 42-185. - Historic structure. 
Historic structure means any improvement which has historic significance as described in the intent and purpose of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.520)  
Sec. 42-186. - Hotel. 
Hotel means a building containing a group of rooms for sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space and designed for use by transient tourists or temporary residents. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.530)  
Sec. 42-187. - Hydraulic reach. 
Hydraulic reach means that portion of the river or stream extending from one significant change in the hydraulic character of the river or stream to the next significant change. These changes are usually associated with breaks in the slope of the water surface profile, and may be caused by bridges, dams, expansion and contraction of the water flow, and changes in stream bed slope or vegetation. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.540)  
Sec. 42-188. - Improvement. 
Improvement means any building, erection, structure or appurtenance within an historic district and shall include, but is not limited to, the following: wall, fence, steps, paving, gate, sign, light, general arrangement of place or area, the kind of texture or quality of building material, landscaping or landscape architecture, or work of art which may be erected upon or proposed to be erected upon any specific real estate. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.550)  
Sec. 42-189. - Kennel, animal. 
Animal kennel means any premises, or portion thereof, where dogs, cats and other household pets are maintained, boarded, bred, or cared for, in return for remuneration, or kept for the purpose of sale. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.560)  
Sec. 42-190. - Living area. 
Living area means the gross floor area of living space within the principal building, excluding porches, decks, breezeways, garages, and basements, regardless of whether or not these areas are finished. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.565)  
Sec. 42-191. - Lodging, rooming, or boarding room. 
Lodging or boarding room means a room within a dwelling unit that is rented as a sleeping and living quarters, but without separate kitchen facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.570)  
Sec. 42-192. - Lodginghouse, roominghouse, or boardinghouse. 
Lodginghouse, roominghouse or boardinghouse means a dwelling unit in which the owner or principal resident provides rooming, boarding or lodging rooms to more than four occupants but fewer than 11 occupants, exclusive of the principal resident or residents of the dwelling unit as such are defined by Section 42-161 Family. Said occupants of a rooming, boarding or lodging house may or may not have access to common kitchen facilities or be provided with common meals with the primary occupant of the dwelling unit in which the rooming, boarding or lodging room is located. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.571)  
Sec. 42-193. - Lot. 
Lot means a parcel of land recorded for the purpose of transferring ownership. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.580)  
Sec. 42-194. - Lot area. 
Lot area means the area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.590)  
Sec. 42-195. - Lot corner. 
Corner lot means a lot that has at least two adjacent sides that abut for their full lengths upon a street provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 150 degrees. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.600)  
Sec. 42-196. - Lot depth. 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.610)  
Sec. 42-197. - Lot, through. 
Through, lot, means a lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or less parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.620)  
Sec. 42-198. - Manufactured home. 
Manufactured home means any of the following: 
(1)  A structure that is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation and that is certified by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development as complying with the standards established under 42 USC 5401 to 5425. 
(2)  A mobile home, unless a mobile home is specifically excluded under the applicable statute. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.622)  
Sec. 42-199. - Microbrewery. 
Microbrewery means a place of business licensed by the State of Wisconsin to operate as a brewery and operated for the production of not more than 60,000 barrels of fermented malt beverages annually and the sale of said beverages for on-site consumption or in sealed containers for consumption off-site. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.624)  
Sec. 42-200. - Migrant labor contractor. 
Migrant labor contractor means any person, who, for a fee or other consideration, on behalf of another person, recruits, solicits, hires, or furnishes migrant workers, excluding members of the contractor's immediate family, for employment in the State of Wisconsin. The term "migrant labor contractor" shall not include an employer or any full-time regular employees of an employer who engages in any such activity for the purpose of supplying workers solely for the employer's own operation. 
(Ord. No. 2019-769, § II(18.20.626), 10-14-2019)  
Sec. 42-201. - Migrant labor housing. 
Migrant labor housing means the site and all structures maintained as living quarters by, for or under the control and supervision of any person for: 
(1)  Any migrant worker; or 
(2)  Any other person who is not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to his or her employer and who occasionally or habitually leaves an established place of residence to travel to another locality to accept seasonal employment in the planting, cultivating, raising, harvesting, handling, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, or storing of any agricultural or horticultural commodity in its unmanufactured state. 
(Ord. No. 2019-769, § II(18.20.627), 10-14-2019)  
Sec. 42-202. - Migrant worker. 
Migrant worker means any person who temporarily leaves a principal place of residence outside of this state and comes to the State of Wisconsin for not more than ten months in a year to accept seasonal employment in the planting, cultivating, raising, harvesting, handling, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, or storing of any agricultural or horticultural commodity in its unmanufactured state. 
(Ord. No. 2019-769, § II(18.20.628), 10-14-2019)  
Sec. 42-203. - Mini-warehouse. 
Mini-warehouse means a building containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented for the storage of customers' goods. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.625; Ord. No. 2019-769, § I(18.20.629), 10-14-2019)  
Sec. 42-204. - Mobile home. 
Mobile home means a transportable, factory built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and which: 
(1)  Was built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976; and/or 
(2)  Regardless of when built, is not in conformance with said Act. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.630)  
Sec. 42-205. - Mobile home court. 
Mobile home court means an area planned to accommodate a group of mobile and/or manufactured homes and their accompanying facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.640)  
Sec. 42-206. - Mobile home lot. 
Mobile home lot means a lot within a mobile home court designated for the exclusive use of a single mobile or manufactured home. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.650)  
Sec. 42-207. - Mobile home stand. 
Mobile home stand means that part of a mobile home lot which has been reserved and designed to support and anchor a mobile home with appurtenant structures or additions to the mobile home. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.660)  
Sec. 42-208. - Motel. 
Motel means a building or buildings consisting of a group of rooms for sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space and designed for use by transient tourists. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.670)  
Sec. 42-209. - Motor inn. 
For a definition of the term "motor inn," see Motel. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.680)  
Sec. 42-210. - Navigable waters. 
Navigable waters means all lakes, streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters which are navigable under the laws of the state. Under Wis. Stats. § 144.26(2)(d), notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under Wis. Stats. § 62.231, and NR 117, Wis. Admin. Code, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if; 
(1)  Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river; 
(2)  Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching; and 
(3)  Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.685)  
Sec. 42-211. - Nonconforming structure. 
Nonconforming structure means an existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements or other standards of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.689)  
Sec. 42-212. - Nonconforming use. 
Nonconforming use means any use of land, buildings, or structures which does not comply with all the regulations of this article or of any amendment hereto governing use for the zoning district in which such use is located. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.690)  
Sec. 42-213. - Nursery school. 
For a definition of the term "nursery school," see Day care center. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.700)  
Sec. 42-214. - Nursing home. 
For a definition of the term "nursing home," see Convalescent home ornursing home. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.710)  
Sec. 42-215. - Official floodplain zoning map. 
Official floodplain zoning map means that map, adopted and made part of the Floodplain Overlay District, as described in Section 42-478(b), which has been approved by the Department of Natural Resources and FEMA. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.719)  
Sec. 42-216. - Official letter of map amendment. 
Official letter of map amendment means official notification from the Federal Insurance Administration Office of FEMA that a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance study map has been amended. This official letter does not amend the floodplain zoning map for regulation purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.720)  
Sec. 42-217. - Open space. 
Open space means that part of a parcel or lot which is open to the sky and which is unoccupied by buildings, or structures. However, swimming pools, tennis courts, or similar recreational facilities and walks, off-street parking spaces or other similar uses are permitted in required open space. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.730)  
Sec. 42-218. - Open storage lot. 
Open storage lot means an unroofed area upon which are kept any goods, materials, merchandise, product, vehicles and other items. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.733)  
Sec. 42-219. - Ordinary high water mark. 
Ordinary high water mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance or aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.740)  
Sec. 42-220. - Outdoor cafe. 
Outdoor cafe means a place of business or an accessory business activity being operated for the sale and purchase at retail of food, refreshments or beverages which is laid out to allow its patrons to be served on the premises and outside any completely enclosed structure. The term "outdoor cafe" shall not include drive-in establishment. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.742)  
Sec. 42-221. - Person. 
Person means any individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.750)  
Sec. 42-222. - Planned unit development (PUD). 
Planned unit development (PUD) means a parcel of land having an area as required in the district regulations under common management and single ownership control or under condominium ownership pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 703 and which is the site for one or more buildings and where yard requirements as required by district regulations may be modified as regulated by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.760)  
Sec. 42-223. - Public view. 
Public view means any view from a street, site, way or building and shall include the visual perspective from any adjoining or abutting property to an Historic Overlay District or to an improvement within an Historic Overlay District. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.770)  
Sec. 42-224. - Reach, hydraulic. 
For a definition of the term "reach, hydraulic," see Hydraulic reach. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.780)  
Sec. 42-225. - Regional flood. 
Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.790)  
Sec. 42-226. - Residential shelter care facility. 
Residential shelter care facility means a dwelling unit in which short-term occupancy (not exceeding 60 days) may be provided as a service to multiple related or unrelated individuals in need of emergency shelter, sustenance and other support services. Such facilities shall be run as not-for-profit operations. They are intended to principally serve clients, including, but not limited to, the homeless, persons seeking immediate refuge from violence or abuse, persons rendered shelterless by natural disasters or calamity or other persons that by some atypical circumstance have been displaced from their normal or permanent residence. Residential shelter care facilities are not intended to provide transitional housing or accommodate licensed communal living arrangements, including, but not limited to, group homes, foster homes or community based residential facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.793)  
Sec. 42-227. - Roadside stand. 
Roadside stand means a temporary structure which is not permanently affixed to the ground, is readily removable in its entirety, and is used solely for the display or sale of farm products, or Christmas trees. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.800)  
Sec. 42-228. - Screening. 
Screening means a hedge, wall or fence that provides a visual separator and physical barrier from abutting property. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.810)  
Sec. 42-229. - Seasonal merchandise. 
Seasonal merchandise means merchandise which is sold only part of the year during one of the four seasons; winter, spring, summer, or fall. The term "seasonal merchandise" shall include firewood, Christmas trees, fruits and vegetables, soda, outdoor plants, topsoil, garden fertilizer, ornamental stone, charcoal, mulch, lawnmowers, rototillers, bicycles, wading pools, lawn furniture and other similar items. Seasonal merchandise shall not include products such as package food or other packaged products, furniture, clothing or other similar merchandise or products permitted to be prepared and/or offered for sale under non-motorized vendor cart or motorized vendor truck regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.815)  
Sec. 42-230. - Service building. 
Service building, for travel trailer camps, means a building housing toilet and bathing facilities for men and women which may also include laundry and other facilities. The term "service building," for mobile home courts, means a building providing adequate space for storage of court grounds maintenance equipment. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.820)  
Sec. 42-231. - Sheltered workshops. 
Sheltered workshop means a building where supervised instruction and training in a work environment is provided to disabled or disadvantaged individuals. In addition, vocational and personal development services are provided. The work may include assembly, packaging and other related production or servicing activities. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.825)  
Sec. 42-232. - Shorelands. 
Shorelands means lands within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of navigable waters: 
(1)  1,000 feet from a lake, pond or flowage; or 
(2)  300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.828)  
Sec. 42-233. - Single-family dwelling. 
Single-family dwelling means a detached building designed for and occupied exclusively by one family. The term "single-family dwelling" includes a manufactured home. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.829)  
Sec. 42-234. - Site. 
Site means any parcel of real estate whether improved or unimproved. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.830)  
Sec. 42-235. - Special tent sale. 
Special tent sale means a marketing activity where product not meeting the definition of "seasonal merchandise" may be displayed and/or offered for sale. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.835)  
Sec. 42-236. - Storage capacity of a floodplain. 
Storage capacity of a floodplain means the volume of space above an area of floodplain land that can be occupied by floodwater of a given stage at a given time, regardless of whether the water is moving. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.840)  
Sec. 42-237. - Structural alteration. 
Structural alteration means any change other than incidental repairs, which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.850)  
Sec. 42-238. - Structure. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location or which is attached to something having a permanent location on or in the ground, a stream bed or lake bed. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.860)  
Sec. 42-239. - Substantial improvement. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the Wisconsin State Historical Society or listed on the National Register of Historic Places. 
Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications, or additions; such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, and the replacement of doors, windows, and other nonstructural components. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.870)  
Sec. 42-240. - Temporary structure. 
Temporary structure means a structure which is built of such materials and in such a way that it would commonly be expected to have a relatively short useful life, or is built for a purpose that would commonly be expected to be relatively short term. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.880)  
Sec. 42-241. - Through lot. 
For a definition of the term "through lot," see Lot, through. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.890)  
Sec. 42-242. - Travel trailer. 
Travel trailer means a vehicular portable structure designated as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation use. Such travel trailer does not exceed eight feet in width. The definition of the term "travel trailer" includes motor homes. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.900)  
Sec. 42-243. - Travel trailer camp. 
Travel trailer camp means any plot of ground which two or more travel trailers occupy for temporary dwelling regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.910)  
Sec. 42-244. - Use. 
Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is occupied or maintained. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.920)  
Sec. 42-245. - Use, conditional. 
For a definition of the term "use, conditional," see Conditional use. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.930)  
Sec. 42-246. - Utilities. 
Utilities means any public or private water supply, or waste collection and/or disposal system, including, but not limited to, septic systems, private and public wells, and their attendant facilities, and public sewage collection systems. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.940)  
Sec. 42-247. - Wetlands. 
Wetlands means those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.950)  
Sec. 42-248. - Wetland alteration. 
Wetland alteration means any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area. 
(Code 1976, § 18.20.960; Ord. No. 80-208, § l(part), 1981)  
Secs. 42-249—42-268. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 42-269. - Occupancy certificates. 
No certificate of occupancy under Chapter 10 shall be issued unless the intended use of the property complies with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 18.24.010)  
Sec. 42-270. - Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(a)  Authority. Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e) is adopted by reference. 
(b)  Appeals. 
(1)  Scope of appeals. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or department of the City affected by any decision of the administrative official. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after such order or decision as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Zoning Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Administrative Official shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Building Division Director certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him or her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Building Division Director, and on due cause shown. 
(3)  Notice of hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time, but in no case longer than 90 days, for the hearing of the appeal. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication as a Class 1 notice under the Wisconsin Statutes in the official city newspaper. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall also be sent by regular mail to the applicant, the Building Division Director, the City Planner, and the owners of record, as listed in the Office of the City Assessor, who are owners of property adjoining the property affected by any appeal. The notice shall be sent at least ten days prior to the date of such public hearing. 
(4)  Findings and decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make findings and shall render a decision on the appeal within a reasonable time, but in no case longer than 90 days. The Board, upon the concurring vote of four members, may reverse wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Building Division Director and may issue or direct the issue of a permit. 
(c)  Variances. 
(1)  Authority to grant variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals, after a public hearing, may vary the regulations of this article, but such variance must be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article and may be granted only when the Board determines that the literal enforcement of the provisions of the title will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. 
(2)  Application for variance and notice of hearing. An application for a variance shall be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals. The application shall contain such information as the Zoning Board of Appeals may from time to time by rule provide. After the filing of such application, a public hearing shall be held by the Zoning Board of Appeals on such application. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication as a Class 1 notice under the Wisconsin Statutes in the official City paper. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall also be sent by regular mail to the applicant, the Building Division Director, the City Planner and the owners of record as listed in the Office of the City Assessor who are owners of property adjoining the property affected. Said notice shall be sent at least ten days prior to the date of such public hearing. 
(3)  Standards for variance. 
a.  The Zoning Board of Appeals may upon appeal in specific cases authorize such variance from the terms of the title as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the title will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the title shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, substantial justice done. 
b.  The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such variance upon other property in the neighborhood, and to better carry out the general intent of this article. 
(4)  Authorized variances. Variances shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals only in accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection (c)(3) of this section and may be granted only in the following instances: 
a.  To permit any yard or setback less than the yard or setback required by the applicable regulations; 
b.  To permit a use of a lot or lots that is otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient area or width of the lot or lots, but only when the respective area and width of the lot or lots is at least as great as required in the zoning district of the same category most immediately less restrictive than the subject district. For this purpose, residence, office/residence, business and industrial are separate categories of districts; 
c.  To permit off-street parking and loading standards that are less than required by this article; 
d.  To allow an increase of from one to 40 percent in the maximum distance that required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use served; 
e.  To allow the reduction or elimination of area or dimensional requirements and the reduction or elimination of standards. 
(Code 1976, § 18.24.020)  
Sec. 42-271. - Amendments. 
(a)  Authority. The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this article may from time to time be amended, supplemented, or repealed; provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing is held by the City Council in the manner set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7). 
(b)  Initiation of amendment. Amendments may be proposed by the City Council, the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, or any interested person or organization. 
(c)  Application and hearing on amendment. All applications for an amendment shall be filed with the City Planner, together with the review fee as required in Section 42-277. Such application shall be forwarded to the City Council for its referral to the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission may hold a public hearing at its discretion and shall report its findings and make recommendation to the City Council. The City Council, only after receiving such recommendation from the Plan Commission, shall hold a public hearing on the application. However, if the Plan Commission does not so report and recommend within 60 days of the submission of the application, the City Council may proceed to hold the public hearing and consider the application. 
(d)  Notification of a proposed amendment to the zoning district map. 
(1)  Notification of a Plan Commission or City Council hearing shall be by written notice and sent to the specified property owners not less than ten days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing. 
(2)  The Planning Division shall be responsible for the notification of all property owners: 
a.  Within the boundaries of those lands being considered for any zoning district change; 
b.  Within 400 feet of the boundaries of those lands being considered for a zoning change. 
(3)  Such notification shall be made by regular mail and shall be addressed by name to the property owners as recorded in the property tax assessment rolls. 
a.  The letter of notification of a Plan Commission or City Council public hearing shall include the following: 
1.  The date, time and place of the public hearing on the subject rezoning; 
2.  The present and the proposed zoning; 
3.  A description or address of the property for which the zoning is proposed; 
4.  The name and address of the party or parties requesting the proposed zoning, and at their option, a statement as to the intended or planned use of the property; 
5.  An invitation to attend the public hearing. 
b.  A map of the proposed area to be rezoned shall be included with each notification. 
(Code 1976, § 18.24.030)  
Sec. 42-272. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Purpose. The development and execution of this article is based upon the division of the City into districts within which the use of land and buildings and the height and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are substantially compatible. However, there are certain uses that, because of their unique or varying characteristics, cannot be allowed as a permitted use in a particular district without consideration in each case of the impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use of the particular location. 
(b)  Application for conditional use. An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the City Planner on a form prescribed by the City Planner, accompanied with the required fee. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and information as are required by the site plan review in Section 42-273(d) and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and evidence showing that the proposed conditional use shall conform to the standards set forth in Subsection (s) of this section. 
(c)  Site plan review. An application for a conditional use permit shall be referred to the Site Plan Review Committee. The Site Plan Review Committee shall within 15 days of such referral make a recommendation to the Plan Commission. 
(d)  Hearing on application. Upon receipt of the application and other material referred to in Subsection (b) of this section, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application for a conditional use at such time and place as shall be established by such commission. 
(e)  Notice of hearing. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given as a Class 2 notice under the Wisconsin Statutes in the official City paper. Notice of time, place and purpose of such public hearing shall also be sent to the applicant and to the property owners as recorded in the property tax assessment rolls within 400 feet of the subject site, said notice to be sent by regular mail at least ten days prior to the date of such public hearing. 
(f)  Plan Commission Review. The Plan Commission, after a public hearing, shall, within a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days, grant or deny any application for a conditional use. Failure to act shall constitute denial of the request. Prior to the granting of a conditional use, the Commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented that the standards herein prescribed are being complied with. 
(g)  Standards. No application for a conditional use shall be granted unless the Plan Commission finds: 
(1)  That a recommendation has been made by the Site Plan Review Committee; 
(2)  That the uses, values, and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for purposes already permitted shall not be substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use; 
(3)  That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district; 
(4)  That adequate utilities, access roads and drainage have been or are being provided; 
(5)  That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the streets; 
(6)  That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the use; 
(7)  That the conditional use shall conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the Plan Commission; 
(8)  That any large-scale development complies with the standards of Article XI of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions. The following conditions shall apply to all conditional uses: 
(1)  Prior to the granting of any conditional use, the Plan Commission may require such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as it deems necessary to promote the public interest, and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in Subsection (g) of this section. 
(2)  No alteration of a conditional use shall be permitted unless approved by the Plan Commission, except that the Building Division Director may issue permits for minor alterations or additions which are approved, by the City Planner, and are compatible with the concept approved by the Plan Commission and the standards in Subsection (g) of this section. This subsection shall not apply to additions or alterations to two-family dwellings within an R1 or R2 District if the addition complies with all zoning ordinance standards of the district. 
(i)  Revocation and extension. In any case where a conditional use has not been established within one year after the date of issuance of the permit, then without further action by the Plan Commission and without notice to the applicant, the conditional use permit shall become null and void unless substantial building construction has commenced. However, the permit holder may apply to the Plan Commission for an extension of this time requirement. The Plan Commission may, in its discretion, grant, deny, condition or modify such time extension request, but such extension shall not exceed one year. If a conditional use permit becomes void under the provisions of this section, the City Planner shall remove such permit from the official zoning district map. 
(j)  Applicability. For any use in existence at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which becomes a conditional use because of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, such use shall be deemed to be a permitted conditional use and shall be granted a conditional use permit by the Plan Commission or, for mobile home courts or travel trailer camps, the City Council. Application for a conditional use permit and a hearing before the Plan Commission for City Council shall not be required for conditional use permits under this subsection and such permit shall be deemed to have been granted upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(k)  Discontinuance of conditional use. In any case where an established conditional use is discontinued for a period of one year, then without further action by the Plan Commission and without notice to the permit holder, the conditional use permit shall become null and void. If a conditional use permit becomes void under the provisions of this section, the City Planner shall remove such permit from the official zoning district map. 
(Code 1976, § 18.24.040)  
Sec. 42-273. - Site plan review. 
(a)  Purpose of applicability. 
(1)  The purpose of site plan review is to promote the orderly development of the City, the stability of land values and the general welfare by reviewing plans and making recommendations on new uses or changes of use. 
(2)  Site plan review shall be required for all new or conditional uses or changes of use applications. However, site plan review shall not be required for new one-family or two-family dwelling units. 
(b)  Site Plan Review Coordinator. A Site Plan Review Coordinator shall carry out the duties hereinafter specified. All prior actions taken by, and all references and duties previously assigned to, the Site Plan Review Committee shall be the responsibility of the Site Plan Review Coordinator. 
(c)  Referrals for Building Division Director, City Planner, or other Administrative Officials. All applications for building permits and conditional use permits for which site plan review is required shall be referred by the official receiving the same to the Site Plan Review Coordinator for review and recommendation to the applicant, and either to the Building Division Director or to the Plan Commission as this chapter specifies. 
(d)  Required information and materials. Sufficient plans, material lists and specifications for all site and exterior building improvements shall be submitted for each application referred to the Site Plan Review Coordinator to evidence compliance with the standards of this chapter. Failure to submit sufficient evidence of compliance may be grounds for denial of plan approval by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. Said plans, material list and specifications shall include, but are not limited to, the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to at least a scale of one inch equals 50 feet and indicating clearly and with dimensions, the following information: 
a.  All property lines and parcel dimensions; 
b.  Existing and proposed buildings and structures: location, size, height and proposed uses; 
c.  Walls, fences, plantings, open space, green area: location, height and materials; 
d.  Off-street parking: location, number of spaces and dimensions of parking areas, and circulation patterns; 
e.  Points of ingress and egress showing widths of planned and existing curb openings at property and curbline; 
f.  Off-street loading: location and dimensions and delineating through the use of turning path templates that the proposed loading area is of sufficient size to accommodate the intended vehicles delivering goods to the site; 
g.  Location of trash containers: dimensions and type of screening; 
h.  Signs: location, type, size, materials and lighting; 
i.  Lighting: location, type and hooding devices and a photometric analysis indicating that the proposed illumination levels are consistent with the zoning standards; 
j.  Street dedications and improvements, if any; 
k.  Grading and drainage; 
l.  Any such other data as may be required to permit the Building Division Director or Plan Commission to make their required findings. 
m.  For parcels with area included in the Shoreland-Wetland Overlay District as regulated in Article XV of this chapter, the following additional information shall be included: 
1.  Location of the ordinary high water mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
2.  Boundaries of all wetlands as determined from Wisconsin Wetlands Inventory Maps; 
3.  Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover; 
4.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined from floodplain zoning maps; and 
5.  Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration. 
(2)  Architectural drawings or sketches indicating building floor plans and the exterior elevations of the buildings or structures under consideration and the proposed exterior building materials and colors. 
(e)  Action by Site Plan Review Coordinator. The Site Plan Review Coordinator shall act on such applications within 15 days of the time such applications are submitted to the responsible official unless a longer time is agreed to by the applicant. The Coordinator shall determine from the reports and data submitted, whether the use and structures will meet the requirements of this chapter and shall, upon making a positive finding, recommend approval to the Building Division Director or Plan Commission. If the Coordinator finds that requirements of this chapter would not be secured, he or she shall recommend disapproval or approval subject to specified conditions to the Building Division Director or Plan Commission. Upon request of the applicant, the Site Plan Review Coordinator shall provide in writing the reasons for disapproval. The Site Plan Review Coordinator shall have authority to make discretionary decisions as specifically provided in this chapter. 
(f)  Appeals. If the Site Plan Review Coordinator denies or conditionally approves a site plan and the applicant disagrees with such decision, the applicant may appeal such denial or condition to the Plan Commission. Such an appeal shall be signed and filed in writing with the Planning Division within 30 days following the Site Plan Review Coordinator's determination or be forever barred. The Plan Commission may affirm, overrule or modify a decision of the Site Plan Review Coordinator. 
(Code 1976, § 18.24.050; Ord. No. 80-208, § l(part), 1981)  
Sec. 42-274. - Planned unit developments. 
(a)  Purpose. Planned unit developments are permitted in order to encourage and provide a means of effectuating desirable development and to promote improved environmental design by allowing for greater freedom, imagination, and flexibility in the development of land while ensuring substantial compliance to the basic intent of the zoning ordinance and comprehensive plan. It is further intended to encourage more economical and efficient development of land with relationship to public services and to facilitate preservation of open land. 
(1)  Residential planned unit development. A residential planned unit development is created to offer: 
a.  Recreational opportunities close to home; 
b.  A sense of spaciousness through the preservation of natural green spaces to counteract the effects of urban monotony and congestion in the streets; 
c.  Cooperative relationships between neighbors and participation by all age groups in the use and care of local open space tracts; 
d.  Compatible architecture between adjoining dwellings or institutional buildings; 
e.  Placement of structures in proper relationship to the natural characteristics of the site. 
(2)  Business or office/residence planned unit developments. A business or office/residence planned unit development is created to offer: 
a.  Adequate off-street parking; 
b.  Controlled access points on heavily traveled streets; 
c.  Separation of pedestrian and automobile traffic; 
d.  Stabilizing of property values; 
e.  Centers of size and location compatible with the market potential; 
f.  Buffering of adjoining residential areas with landscaped green spaces and encouragement of harmonious architecture between adjoining commercial and office structures and between dwellings and commercial and office structures. 
(3)  Industrial planned unit development. An industrial planned unit development is created: 
a.  To promote the establishment of industrial parks; 
b.  To permit groups of industrial buildings with integrated design and a coordinated physical plan; 
c.  To buffer adjoining residential areas with landscaped green areas. 
(4)  Traditional neighborhood planned unit development. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.1027(2) and a document entitled as "A Model Ordinance for Traditional Neighborhood Development," dated December, 2000, and published by the University of Wisconsin Extension, a traditional neighborhood planned unit development is created: 
a.  To form and encourage compact, mixed-use neighborhoods; 
b.  To include residential, commercial or civic buildings (including parks and open space) in close proximity to each other; 
c.  To promote pedestrian scale development; 
d.  To provide and encourage multiple modes of circulation, including vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic; 
e.  To address environmentally sensitive areas and adapt development to be harmonious with such land. 
(b)  Procedure and application. 
(1)  Preapplication conference. Each applicant shall first confer with the City Planner and interested department heads in connection with the preparation of the planned unit development application. It shall be the City Planner's responsibility to contact affected department heads for the joint meeting. The applicant shall produce general outlines of the proposal. The City Planner shall assist the applicant prior to preparing the preliminary planned unit development and rezoning application, if necessary. 
(2)  Preliminary development plan. 
a.  Site plan review. Upon application for approval of the preliminary development plan, the City Planner shall first refer the application to the Site Plan Review Coordinator accompanied by one scaled print of site plans, the preliminary subdivision plat or a certified survey map, and other documents as required in Section 42-273 and in Subsection (b)(2)b of this section. The Site Plan Review Coordinator, shall within 15 days of receipt of such application, make recommendations to the applicant and to the Plan Commission. 
b.  Plan Commission review. Upon receiving the recommendation of the Site Plan Review Coordinator, the applicant shall submit five scaled copies and one reproducible reduction of the preliminary development plan and surveys and other documents required by this chapter to the City Plan Commission for its consideration. 
1.  Maps required. Any preliminary development plan and text agreement shall be prepared and endorsed by a qualified urban planner, registered professional engineer, or registered architect and shall include required information presented in a general schematic fashion on a topographic map with a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet. 
2.  The map shall include the following: 
(i)  Proposed land uses, dwelling densities, population densities, parcel size, building intensities, green area and off-street parking; 
(ii)  Proposed circulation patterns indicating both public and private streets, walkways, and curb and gutter; 
(iii)  A general landscaping and grading plan; 
(iv)  Delineation of the units to be constructed in progression if any; 
(v)  Relation to future land uses in surrounding areas and to the land use plan; 
(vi)  Evidence that the proposal is in conformance with the general plan of the City; 
(vii)  Evidence that existing and proposed utilities are adequate; 
(viii)  Evidence that the street patterns are sufficient to support the projected traffic generation for the site and surrounding streets; 
(ix)  Proposed zoning districts and legal description for each zoning classification; 
(x)  Examples of the architectural styles to be used throughout the development. 
c.  Plan Commission approval. The Plan Commission shall, after holding a public hearing in accord with provisions of Section 42-271, map amendments (if necessary), and Section 42-272, conditional uses, either approve, conditionally approve, or reject the preliminary plan application. If rejected, the applicant may request, and the secretary of the Plan Commission shall provide in writing, the reasons for rejection. If the application is approved, the Plan Commission shall make findings that: 
1.  The surrounding area can be compatibly planned and zoned; 
2.  The PUD is in conformance with the general plan of the City; and 
3.  The existing and proposed utilities are adequate. 
Approval or conditional approval of the preliminary development plan and map amendment (if necessary) by the Plan Commission shall entitle the applicant to prepare the final development plan in accord with the conditions of approval of the preliminary development plan. Where the Plan Commission has approved a preliminary development plan, such approval shall become null and void if the final development plan has not been submitted within 12 months of the date of the Plan Commission's action. At its discretion, and for good cause, the Plan Commission may extend the approval period no more than six months. If a map amendment is necessary, the City Council must approve the amendment before a final development plan is submitted. 
(3)  Final development plan. Upon approval of the preliminary development plan by the Plan Commission, and if necessary, the map amendment by the City Council, the applicant may apply to the Plan Commission for approval of the final development plan by submitting an application for a conditional use permit for a planned unit development accompanied by the required fee and by filing with the City Planner the following items: 
a.  Survey required. Six scaled prints and one reproducible reduction of the final plat or certified survey map of the boundary of the planned unit development shall be submitted. 
b.  Text agreement. A text agreement shall accompany the final development plans. The agreement shall describe the responsibilities and services of the owner/developer as it relates to maintenance and construction of the planned unit development. Such agreement shall be recorded with the final development plans. 
c.  Final development plans. Six scaled prints and one reproducible reduction of the final development and one reproducible reduction of the final development plan and titled on each sheet as such and drawn to a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet showing: 
1.  Existing features map. A map that depicts existing features of the property, including specimen trees, streams, rock formations, structures, streets, easements, sewers, utilities, walkways, and curb and gutter; 
2.  Site plan. A map that depicts the location and proposed sites of all structures, roads, parking lots and driveways, loading or service areas, walkways, curb and gutter, and a table giving a breakdown of areas of the site, green area, open space, number of dwelling units, density and a schedule of progression of phased construction; 
3.  Landscaping plan. A map showing the proposed landscaping of the entire site, showing spacing, size and specific types of landscaping material and treatment of recreation areas, see also Section 42-274(d), environmental design; 
4.  Grading plan. A map indicating existing and proposed contours drawn to a two-foot contour interval, see also Section 42-274(d), environmental design; 
5.  Utilities plan. A map showing location and size of utility service lines for water, storm, and sanitary sewers, electrical, telephone, and cable television service; 
6.  Zoning plan. For planned unit development incorporating modified development standards, multiple-family and/or neighborhood commercial zoning classification, a map showing the multiple-family and/or neighborhood commercial zoning boundaries, and proposed minimum development regulations shall be submitted; 
7.  Architectural plan. Illustrations showing the specific architectural styles, including building elevations to be incorporated in the development. The type of materials proposed for each building shall also be provided. 
d.  Approval of final development plan. Approval of final development plan and the text agreement shall be by the granting of a conditional use permit by the Plan Commission. If any dedication of land to the public is shown on the certified survey, which is part of the final development plan, such survey must first be approved by the City Council before the Plan Commission may grant the conditional use permit. Before the Plan Commission may grant the conditional use permit for any final plat, such plat must first be approved by the City Council. 
e.  Recording of final development plan. The applicant shall record with the Register of Deeds of Rock County, Wisconsin, the certified survey or subdivision plat, deeding to the City those lands and easements shown on the survey or plat, if any; a statement that the land is to be developed as a planned unit development as approved by the Plan Commission of the City; the text agreement required in Section 42-274(b)(3)b; and the final development plan, including all the items required in Section 42-274(b)(3)c. 
f.  Revocation and extension of permit. If no substantial construction has begun within 12 months from the approval of the PUD then without further action the conditional use permit shall become null and void. The permit holder may apply to the Plan Commission for an extension of this time requirement. In its discretion and for good cause, the Plan Commission may extend, for a reasonable time, not to exceed one year, the period for the beginning of construction. If a conditional use permit becomes void under the provisions of this section, the City Planner shall remove such permit from the official zoning district map and the Building Division Director shall file a notice of revocation with the recorded final development plan. The City Council may rezone the property back to its original zoning classification. The zoning regulations applicable before the development was approved shall then be in effect. 
g.  Amendments to the final development plan. Minor changes in the location, siting, height of buildings and structures may be authorized by the Site Plan Review Coordinator if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final development plan was approved. Major changes such as changes of use, increased density, reduction of green area, open space, off-street parking or pavement widths may be authorized by the Plan Commission without an additional public hearing after a report of the planning staff and recommendation by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. Any changes in the final plan which are approved must be recorded as amendments in accordance with the procedures for recording the final development plan. 
(c)  Design standards. 
(1)  Parcel size. Planned unit developments shall be established on parcels of land which are suitable for and of sufficient size to allow for a mixture of housing types, adequate open spaces, appropriate recreational facilities, separate vehicular facilities, and pedestrian circulation systems. The contiguous land area of each PUD shall be at least two acres in size except that the Plan Commission may, at its discretion, reduce this requirement to one acre. For a traditional neighborhood planned unit development, the minimum area shall be at least 40 acres in size, except that the Plan Commission may at its determination, reduce this requirement to 20 acres if the site is defined by a significant physical feature including, but not limited to a greenbelt, large park space, woodland area, drainage creek, river or state or federal highway. 
(2)  Green area. 
a.  Green area for residential planned unit developments. The green area requirement for residential planned unit developments shall be the same as that required in the underlying zoning district. Such area shall be used for recreational, park or environmental amenity for collective enjoyment by occupants of the development, but shall not include buildings, public or private streets, off-street parking lots, or drives. However, up to 50 percent of the required green area may be composed of privately owned properties which shall be restricted either on the plat, final development plan, text agreement, or some other appropriate recordable agreement so as to ensure that the green area will be permanent. The requirements of this subsection may be reduced or waived by the Plan Commission for redevelopment programs. 
1.  Dimension. Green area must exist in quantities of not less than 6,000 square feet in area nor less than 50 feet in its smallest dimension. 
2.  Location. Green area shall be reasonably accessible to all the residents of the planned unit development and shall be distributed equitably throughout the project in relation to the dwelling units of the people they are intended to serve. Large open spaces may be enhanced by walkway systems linking them to one another. 
b.  Green area for business, office/residence or industrial planned unit developments. 
1.  Area. Not less than 20 percent of the lot area shall be permanently placed in green area. Green area includes landscaping such as grass, shrubs, bushes, rock gardens, trees, flowers (including the pedestrian mall of a shopping center). Such green area shall be permanently set aside, planted and maintained and not encroached upon. 
2.  Buffer screen planting. A buffer screen planting shall be provided as required in Section 42-442(a)(9) or 42-443(a)(6), as appropriate. 
(3)  Density and uses. 
a.  Permitted uses. Any use or conditional use permitted in the underlying zoning district in which the planned unit development is proposed to be located may be permitted within a planned unit development by means of an approved conditional use permit. 
b.  Density. Lots within a PUD may be permitted a reduction in size or area to permit the clustering of dwelling units for an even exchange for common open spaces; however, the gross project density shall be no greater than permitted in the underlying zoning district regulations. For the purpose of computing the maximum density for a PUD, the minimum lot size requirements in the underlying zoning district, for the size and type of unit desired, shall be divided into the gross project area. 
(4)  Building spacing and yard requirements. There shall be no minimum setback or lot coverage or lot width. Each structure shall be at least 16 feet from any adjoining structure. No building shall be located closer than 25 feet from the boundary of the PUD. 
(5)  Design standards for traditional neighborhood planned unit developments. The design standards for traditional neighborhood planned developments shall follow the principles of a document identified as "A Model Ordinance for Traditional Neighborhood Development," dated December 2000, and published by the University of Wisconsin Extension pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.1027(2). Said document shall not be the exclusive guide for consultation regarding this type of development. City staff and the Plan Commission may consult other sources of information, including the City's Zoning and Infrastructure Standards for evaluating this type of development. 
(d)  Environmental design. The location of trees must be considered when planning the green area, open space, location of buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas, playgrounds, parking areas and finished grades. 
(1)  A general landscaping plan shall be required at the time of submission of the preliminary development plan to be followed by a detailed landscaping plan at the time of submission of the final development plan showing the spacing sizes and specific types of landscaping material and treatment of recreational areas. 
(2)  A general grading plan shall be required at the time of submission of the preliminary development plan to be followed by a detailed grading plan at the time of submission of the final development plan showing the earth-moving procedures and other changes to the landscape in order to preserve and prevent despoliation of the character of the area to be retained as green area. 
(e)  Traffic circulation. Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to permit smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. The pedestrian circulation system shall be designed so as to be as completely separate as possible from the vehicular street system in order to provide separation of pedestrian and vehicular movement. 
(f)  Private streets. Standards of design and construction for roadways within the planned unit development may be modified as is deemed appropriate by the Plan Commission after receiving a recommendation by the City Engineer. 
(g)  Parking. The provisions of Section 42-360 pertaining to off-street parking shall apply to planned unit developments. 
(Code 1976, § 18.24.060)  
Sec. 42-275. - Home occupations. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to guarantee that all residential areas are free from excessive noise, excessive traffic, nuisance, fire hazard and other possible effects of commercial, office, and other nonresidential uses. This section also recognizes the need to allow residents of the community an opportunity to use their homes in a limited manner as a place to operate a business which is unobstructive to the neighborhood. In order to ensure that the operations of home occupations do not adversely impact residential areas, criteria and development standards for home occupations have been developed. Home occupations are permitted in any dwelling unit under the following conditions: 
(1)  The use is incidental to the principal residential use, the area used to conduct the home occupation does not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of such residence, and is conducted within the principal building. Gross floor area includes the basement, and any physically attached garage; 
(2)  All business inventory and equipment is kept in the principal building; 
(3)  The exterior of the home or yard does not display or indicate any evidence of the home occupation; 
(4)  The use produces no noise, odor, vibration or electrical interference; 
(5)  The occupants transact no business on the premises which would generate additional traffic or parking problems for the neighborhood; 
(6)  Only members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit shall be employed on the premises. 
(7)  Provided that all conditions of this section are satisfied, permitted home occupations include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
a.  Artists and sculptors; 
b.  Authors and composers; 
c.  Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Tupperware); 
d.  Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring; 
e.  Home crafts for sale off-site; 
f.  Individual tutoring; 
g.  Office facility of a salesman, sales representative, or manufacturer's representative, provided that no transactions are made in person on the premises; 
h.  Preserving and home cooking for sales off-site; 
i.  Telephone answering and solicitation. 
(8)  The following uses shall be prohibited as home occupations: 
a.  Ambulance service; 
b.  Beauty salons and barbershops; 
c.  Carpentry, cabinet makers; 
d.  Lawn and landscaping services; 
e.  Limousine or taxi services; 
f.  Medical or dental offices; 
g.  Photographic studios; 
h.  Retail sales; 
i.  Tow truck services; 
j.  Tree services; 
k.  Vehicle and motor repair; 
l.  Vehicle parts sales, upholstery, or detailing. 
(b)  Any use not listed in Subsection (7) or (8) of this section shall require an interpretation from the Planning Director upon consultation with the Building Division Director. The Planning Director shall evaluate requests for home occupations and determine if they are similar in nature to listed permitted home occupations and are consistent with the purpose of the home occupation provisions. The determination shall be in writing. Anyone aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Director may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(c)  An application for a home occupation permit shall be filed with the Building Division on a form prescribed by the Building Division Director. No home occupation may be established without first obtaining a home occupation permit and verifying compliance with the conditions specified in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 18.24.070)  
Sec. 42-276. - Mobile home courts and travel trailer camps. 
(a)  Procedures and application. 
(1)  Approvals required. No person shall construct, expand, or operate a mobile home court or travel trailer camp within the City unless such person holds a valid license issued annually by the City Clerk. Any person owning or controlling a mobile home court in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may apply for and receive an annual license for an existing court or camp by complying with Subsection (a)(5) of this section, annual license application. (For the purpose of this section only, where the term "mobile home" is listed, the term "manufactured home" may be substituted.) The City Clerk shall issue an initial license only after the following actions have taken place: 
a.  The land has an approved conditional use permit allowing mobile homes and travel trailers pursuant to the procedures of Section 42-272; 
b.  The applicant completes the application form and submits it to the City Clerk together with the required license fee; 
c.  The City Council approves the license. 
(2)  Preliminary plan. 
a.  Plan Commission review. The applicant shall apply for preliminary plan approval to the City Planner. Such applicant shall submit six scaled copies and one reproducible reduction of the preliminary plan to the Plan Commission for its consideration. Such preliminary plan shall be drawn on a topographic map with a scale of at least one inch equals 200 feet showing four-foot contours, the area, location and proposed layout of lots, roadways, buffer strips, parking areas, and recreational areas. 
b.  Plan Commission approval. Approval by the Plan Commission shall be in concept only. The Plan Commission shall make findings that: 
1.  The surrounding area can be compatibly planned and zoned; 
2.  The mobile home court or travel trailer camp is in conformance with the general plan of the City; 
3.  The existing and proposed utilities are adequate; 
4.  Approval by the Plan Commission shall enable the applicant to prepare a final plan. The applicant shall have the option of obtaining from the City Council approval in concept of the preliminary plan after approval is given by the Plan Commission. If no favorable approval is given by the Plan Commission, the applicant may revise the preliminary plan accordingly and resubmit to the Plan Commission. Where the Plan Commission or the City Council has approved a preliminary plan, such approval shall become null and void if the final plan has not been submitted within 12 months of the date of the Plan Commission's or the City Council's action. 
(3)  Final plan. 
a.  Plan Commission review. Upon approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant may apply to the Plan Commission for approval of the final plan by submitting an application for a conditional use permit for a mobile home court or travel trailer camp accompanied by the required fee and by filing with the City Planner the following items: 
1.  Survey required. Six scaled prints and one reproducible reduction of a certified survey map or final subdivision plat of the property showing existing features; 
2.  Final plans. Six scaled copies and one reproducible reduction of the final plan titled as such on each sheet, drawn to a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet and showing: 
(i)  Site plan. A complete plan of the court or camp, showing the number, location and dimensions of all mobile home or travel trailer lots, proposed location and width of roadways, walkways, easements, setback lines, recreational areas, vehicular parking areas and service buildings if provided; 
(ii)  Existing features. The location of specimen trees, structures, streets, easements, sewers, utilities, walkways and curb and gutter; 
(iii)  Landscaping plans. The proposed landscaping of the entire site, showing spacing, size and specific types of landscaping material and treatment of recreation areas; 
(iv)  Utilities plan. The location and size of utility service lines for water, storm and sanitary sewers, electrical, telephone, fuel and, if provided, cable television service; 
(v)  Building and lot plan. Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the court or camp, including a detailed sketch of a typical mobile home or travel trailer lot. 
b.  Plan Commission findings. Upon submission of the final plan to the Plan Commission, the Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to requirements in Section 42-272 and, after hearing any interested party, and any staff report, recommendation or information, the Plan Commission shall make a recommendation and report to the City Council concerning such plan. Before the Plan Commission can recommend approval of the plan, the following findings must be made: 
1.  That the uses, values, and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for purposes already permitted shall not be substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance or operation of the intended court or camp; 
2.  That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have been or are being provided; 
3.  That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or egress designed so as to minimize traffic congestion in the public street. 
c.  City Council approval. After receiving the final plan and recommendation and report from the Plan Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the conditional use permit and initial license applications. Following the public hearing, the City Council may grant such permit and license. 
(4)  Procedure after permit granted. Upon approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council, the applicant shall record with the Register of Deeds for Rock County, Wisconsin, the certified survey map or plat, deeding to the City those lands and easements shown on the survey or plat, a statement that the land is to be developed pursuant to a conditional use permit approved by the City Council of the City, and the approved final plan. 
a.  Issuance of initial license. Upon the submission of proof of such recording to the City Clerk, the Clerk shall issue the initial license allowing the applicant to develop the land according to the conditional use permit and recorded plan. 
b.  Revocation and extension of permit. If no substantial construction has begun within 12 months from the approval of the final plan, then without further action by the City Council and without notice to the applicant, the conditional use permit shall become null and void. The permit holder may apply to the City Council for an extension of this time requirement. In its discretion and for good cause, the City Council may extend, for a reasonable time not to exceed one year, the period for the beginning of construction. If a conditional use permit becomes void under the provisions of this section, the City Planner shall remove such permit from the official zoning district map and the Building Division Director shall file a notice of revocation with the recorded final plan. The zoning regulations applicable before the plan was approved shall then be in effect. 
(5)  Annual license application. The applicant shall apply annually for license renewal, the annual license shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. The application for each annual license shall be accompanied by a fee. 
(6)  Transfer of license. A transfer of license application shall be applied for and may be approved by the City Council in the same manner as an application for a renewal license. The application for such license shall be accompanied by a fee. 
(b)  Administration. 
(1)  Enforcement. It shall be the responsibility of the Building Division Director to enforce the provisions of this chapter by authorizing and directing inspections to be made of all mobile home courts and travel trailer camps. 
(2)  Violations. Whenever the Building Division Director determines violations of pertinent regulations exist, he or she shall notify the licensee or permittee of such alleged violations. Such notice shall: 
a.  Be in writing; 
b.  Include a statement of the violations enumerated; 
c.  Allow a reasonable time for the correction of such violations but not to exceed 90 days. 
(3)  Revocation of license. The license for such court or camp is subject to revocation by the City Council as provided in the Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. 
(4)  Emergency order. Whenever the Building Division Director finds that an emergency exists which required immediate action to protect the public health, safety or welfare, he or she may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he or she may deem necessary to meet the emergency, including the recommendation of the suspension of the license. Such order shall be in writing, shall be notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, and shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately or be subject to Subsection (b)(3) of this section, revocation of license. 
(5)  Reports required of license holder. It shall be the duty of the license holder to file with the City Clerk a monthly report containing the following information on a form sheet: 
a.  Name of mobile home court, name and address of owner, agent or operator. 
b.  A tabulation of mobile home court occupancy listing lot designation, and monthly tax. 
c.  Within five days of the arrival of each new mobile home occupant, the owner shall submit the form specified by the assessor's office. 
d.  Failure to report the information as required above shall be a violation subject to a forfeiture in an amount not to exceed $25.00. 
(c)  General provisions. 
(1)  Applicability. Every mobile home court and every travel trailer camp built or added to after December l, 1972, shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. No mobile home court shall be allowed in any zoning district except by conditional use permit. Every mobile home court developed and governed by this chapter shall first have an approved conditional use permit prior to being licensed. 
(2)  Classification. Classification shall be of two types: 
a.  Mobile home courts; 
b.  Travel trailer camps. 
(3)  Parking of mobile homes and travel trailers. It is unlawful to permit a mobile home or travel trailer to be located in a court or camp unless it is placed in a designated stand in a licensed court or camp. Only one mobile home or travel trailer shall be placed on a mobile home lot except that an unoccupied travel trailer may be parked behind the setback line of the mobile home owner's yard to the rear of the principal building unless otherwise approved in the final plans. 
(4)  Nonresidential uses. No part of any court or camp shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses as are required for the direct servicing and wellbeing of court or camp residents and for the management and maintenance of the court or camp as contained in the plan approved by the City Council. 
(5)  Signing. No signs shall be permitted except the following: 
a.  One nonflashing identification ground-mounted sign or a wall sign stating only the name of the mobile home court, provided the sign does not project into the public right-of-way; 
b.  One ground or on-premises wall sign per street frontage for travel trailer camps; 
c.  Any necessary regulatory signs such as street name signs, and entrance and exit signs, etc. Signs and their installation shall comply with all other applicable code and regulations. 
(6)  Occupancy restrictions. No mobile home shall be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is properly placed on a mobile home lot and connected to water, sewerage, electrical and other utilities and complies with all provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Standards. 
(1)  Court and camp size. 
	Minimum
Acreage 	Maximum Density of Court 
Mobile home courts 	15 acres 	7.0 units per gross land acre 
Travel trailer camps 	l0 acres 	9.0 units per gross land acre 
 
(2)  Minimum number of lots. There shall be a minimum of 50 mobile home lots completed and ready for occupancy before first occupancy is permitted. 
(3)  Length of residential occupancy. No lot shall be rented for residential use of a mobile home in any such mobile home court except for periods of 30 days or more. 
(4)  Compliance with Code Standards. No mobile home shall be admitted in any mobile home court unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of American Standards for Installation in Mobile Homes of Electrical, Heating and Plumbing Systems or MHMA (Mobile Home Manufacturers Association) Mobile Home Standards for Plumbing, Heating and Electrical Systems. 
(5)  Minimum lot standards. 
a.  Minimum setback requirements. 
Mobile Home Courts and Travel Trailer Camps 
	Mobile Home 
(in feet) 	Accessory 
Structure 
(in feet) 	Travel Trailer 
(in feet) 
Front setback from any private street 	10 	10 	5 
Side setback 	8 	5 	5 
Rear setback 	8 	5 	5 
Corner side setback 	8 	8 	5 
Setback adjoining green areas 	8 	8 	
Setback from any public street 	25 	25 	
 
b.  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width except irregular shaped lots may be approved with lesser frontage where necessary. 
1.  Mobile home: 50 feet. 
2.  Travel trailer: 30 feet. 
c.  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
d.  Lot frontage. Each mobile home and travel trailer lot shall adjoin a roadway within an approved court or camp. 
(6)  Parking. 
a.  At least two off-street, hard-surfaced parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home lot. The size of each space must be at least nine feet by 20 feet. 
b.  At least one off-street parking space shall be provided on or for each travel trailer lot. The size of each space must be at least nine feet by 20 feet. 
c.  Street parking on both sides of private streets shall be permitted only if the roadway is at least 36 feet wide. Street parking shall be permitted on one designated side only if the roadway is at least 30 feet wide. 
(7)  Screening. There shall be provided a screening buffer strip at least five feet in width along any boundary of the mobile home court or travel trailer camp which adjoins a residence district. Such screening shall be a living hedge, shrubs or trees which at the time of planting shall be of sufficient density to effectively screen the court or camp from view of the adjoining residence district. Such screening shall be at the time of planting a minimum of three feet in height and shall, within a period of four years, attain a height of at least five feet. When such screening is within the required front or corner side setback, the maximum height shall be 30 inches. 
(8)  Green area. Not less than ten percent of the total gross court or camp area shall be devoted to recreational facilities and green area. Recreation facilities such as playgrounds, swimming pools or tot lots shall be conveniently located for the residents the court or camp is designed to serve. 
(9)  Tenant storage. One storage building accessory to a mobile home shall be permitted on a mobile home lot, provided that the storage building does not exceed 80 square feet and does not exceed eight feet in height. Such storage building shall be fully enclosed and located on the mobile home lot. A storage building may be 81 to 120 square feet, provided the mobile home court owner or management approves and delivers written permission along with a building permit application to the Public Works, Building and Development Services Division. Said accessory building may be no taller than the roof peak height of the mobile home being served or 12 feet, whichever is less. The structure's interior sidewall may not exceed eight feet in height. 
(10)  Fuel service. All fuel service shall be placed underground and installed in conformity with all local and state regulations. 
(11)  Additions and alterations. 
a.  Permit required. A permit issued by the Building Division Director shall be required before any construction on a mobile home lot or any structural addition or alteration to the exterior of a mobile home. No permit is required for addition of steps, awnings, skirting, or tenant storage structures as defined above. 
b.  Size of expansion. No addition to a mobile home shall be greater than the area in square feet of the existing mobile home. No addition or alteration to the mobile home shall exceed in height the height of the existing mobile home, and all such alterations or additions shall be factory built. 
c.  Conform to setbacks. Any addition to a mobile home shall be deemed a part of the mobile home and shall have the same setbacks as the existing mobile home. 
d.  Skirting required. Vented skirting of nonflammable material for mobile homes is required. Areas enclosed by such skirting shall be maintained so as not to provide a harborage for rodents or create a fire hazard. 
(12)  Utilities. Utilities shall be installed underground and shall meet City ordinances and State of Wisconsin Statutes and codes. 
a.  Electrical requirements. Each mobile home and travel trailer lot shall be connected to the court or camp electrical wiring system by underground cable and by approved receptacle, disconnecting means, and over current protective equipment. The minimum service for each mobile home lot shall be 12-240 volts AC, 100 amperes. Adequate lights shall be provided in mobile home courts and travel trailer camps to illuminate public or private streets, driveways, parking areas and walkways, for the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. Street lights shall be provided at each public or private street intersection, at all dead ends, and at mid-block points not exceeding 300-foot intervals and shall meet the City's minimum lighting level standards for public streets or be as approved by the City Engineer. 
b.  Sewer service. All mobile home courts shall be served by public sewer. Each mobile home lot shall be equipped with at least a three-inch sewer connection so located as to provide a suitable connection from the home with a continuous grade, not subject to surface drainage. Travel trailer courts shall provide facilities for the disposal of sanitary wastes as set forth in the State of Wisconsin Administrative Standards. 
c.  Water. City water shall be provided by a separate lateral at each mobile home lot. Travel trailers shall be served by the City water system. Provisions shall be made to supply water within 50 feet of each travel trailer lot. 
d.  Fire protection. Fire hydrants shall be located within 500 feet of any mobile home or service building. 
(13)  Mobile home stand, patio, and tiedowns. 
a.  A mobile home stand shall be a continuous four-inch concrete single slab or an approved alternate to support the mobile home. 
b.  The mobile home stand shall be provided with six anchors and tiedowns such as cast-in-place concrete dead man eyelets embedded in concrete foundations or arrowhead anchors or other devices securing the mobile home. Anchors and tiedowns shall be placed at least at each corner of the mobile home stand and at the middle of each side, and each side shall be able to sustain a minimum tensile strength of 2,800 pounds. 
(14)  Roadways. 
a.  All roadways created by a mobile home court shall be hard surfaced according to standards established by the City Engineer. 
b.  The minimum pavement width of roadways shall be 30 feet except that a 24-foot pavement width may be permitted, provided space is permanently set aside and shown on the final plan to accommodate the storage of tenants' recreation equipment and vehicles. 
c.  The alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography, to safe movement of types of traffic anticipated, and to satisfactory control of surface water and groundwater. 
d.  The names of roadways within the court shall not duplicate the names of streets within the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(15)  Lot markers. The limits of each mobile home and travel trailer lot shall be clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stakes, markers or other suitable means. 
(16)  Fences and hedges. Fences and hedges may be permitted in a mobile home court or travel trailer camp provided they do not exceed a height of 30 inches in the front or corner side setback areas and six feet in height in all other areas. 
(17)  Garbage and rubbish storage areas. Garbage and rubbish shall be stored in flytight, watertight, approved containers stored within a completely enclosed building or may be stored outside, provided such storage area is effectively screened from view. 
(18)  Service building required. Service buildings for mobile home lots or travel trailer lots shall be made of permanent construction in accordance with City and state codes. 
(Code 1976, § 18.24.080) 
State Law reference— Authorizing of city to license and regulate manufactured and mobile home communities, Wis. Stats. § 66.0435.  
Sec. 42-277. - Seasonal migrant labor housing. 
(a)  Conditional use permit required. A conditional use permit is required prior to the establishment of any migrant labor housing development. 
(1)  The conditional use shall be reviewed annually by the Plan Commission for the first two years of operation to ensure that approval conditions are being met and additional conditions are not needed. 
(2)  The conditional use is only valid while there is a business or industry within the City of Janesville requiring migrant workers. When the seasonal use is discontinued for a period of three consecutive years, all housing structures and common use facilities shall be removed from the property. 
(3)  Violations to approval conditions may result in revocation of the conditional use permit upon a hearing held by the Janesville Plan Commission and such other relief as provided in this Chapter, in law, and/or in equity. 
(b)  Seasonal migrant labor housing standards: 
(1)  Migrant labor facilities and housing must meet all provisions of Chapter DWD 301, Department of Workforce Development, published under Wis. Stats. § 35.93, as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(2)  The maximum number of inhabitants allowed in the facility and in each room shall be specified and each habitable unit shall be defined. The occupant load shall be posted inside each building. 
(3)  Only the first floor can be used as dormitory type of migrant labor housing and dormitory type housing cannot be used for non-migrant workers. 
(4)  Basement and second floor rooms or apartments cannot be used for habitation unless specified in the conditional use permit. 
(5)  The facility, and each room within it, cannot exceed the number of tenants specified in the conditional use permit. There shall be an inspection of the facilities by City of Janesville inspection staff if there are complaints about the number of individuals in the facility or its rooms. 
(c)  Site specifics: 
(1)  Seasonal migrant labor housing may only be established on the same or adjacent site and accessory to the industrial use being served. 
(2)  Site plan review shall be conducted in accordance with Section 42-273. 
(3)  The off-street parking standards described in Section 42-359, as from time to time amended or renumbered, shall be adhered to at all times. The required parking ratio for migrant labor housing is one parking stall per five migrant workers. 
(4)  All permanent loading facilities and trash/recyclable storage areas shall be completely screened from view by an opaque vertical wall or fence that is a minimum of five feet in height or greater as necessary to adequately screen the trash enclosures. Said wall or fence shall be constructed of the same or complementary materials as the building that it serves. Loading and trash storage area shall be designed in consultation with professional service providers in order to accommodate all desired functions within the screened area. Loading and trash storage areas shall be proximal to the building they serve in order to provide convenience in access for employees using such facilities. 
(5)  Each housing structure and common use facility within the migrant labor housing development shall be connected to municipal water and sewer service. 
(Ord. No. 2019-769, § IV(18.24.085), 10-14-2019)  
Sec. 42-278. - Fee Schedule. 
(a)  The zoning fees are an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code. 
(b)  Re-inspection fee. A re-inspection fee in an amount as established by the City Council from time to time, and as set out in the fee schedule that appears in this Code shall be charged by the City against and paid by the property owner for every violation that is not correct by the re-inspection date. An additional re-inspection fee shall be charged by the City for each subsequent re-inspection per violation until full compliance is achieved. 
(c)  Fee schedule review. The fees as listed above shall be reviewed on at least a five-year cycle beginning on January 1, 2007. 
(Code 1976, § 18.24.090; Ord. No. 2017-708, § II, 11-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 2018-741, § III, 11-26-2018 )  
Secs. 42-279—42-302. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SOLAR ACCESS PERMITS 
 
Sec. 42-303. - Statement of findings and purpose. 
(a)  The City Council of the City of Janesville finds that: 
(1)  Diminishing supplies of nonrenewable energy resources threaten physical economic well-being of the residents of this community who presently rely on such resources to maintain their homes, industries, businesses and institutions; 
(2)  Solar energy systems hold great promise for the future energy needs of this community because they use a renewable energy resource; and because they do not pollute the community's water and air; and 
(3)  The successful use of solar energy systems for such purposes as supplying space heating, water heating or the production of electricity is dependent upon sufficient access to direct sunlight. 
(b)  This chapter is adopted under authority contained in Wis. Stats. § 66.0403, for the purpose of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community by: 
(1)  Promoting the use of solar energy systems; 
(2)  Protecting access to sunlight for solar energy systems; and 
(3)  Ensuring that potentially conflicting interests of individual property owners are accommodated to the greatest extent possible, compatible with the overall goal of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 18.26.010; Ord. No. 84-395, § (part), amend § 2, 1984)  
Sec. 42-304. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means an owner applying for a permit under this chapter. 
Application means an application for a permit under this chapter. 
Collector surface means any part of a solar collector that absorbs solar energy for use in the collector's energy transformation process. The term "collector surface" does not include frames, support and mounting hardware. 
Collector use period means 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Standard time daily. 
Impermissible interference means a blockage of solar energy from a collector surface or a proposed collector surface for which a permit has been granted under this chapter during a collector use period, if such blockage is by any structure or vegetation on property, an owner of which was notified under Section 42-305(f). Impermissible interference does not include: 
(1)  Blockage by a narrow protrusion, including, but not limited to, a pole or wire, which does not substantially interfere with absorption of solar energy by a solar collector. 
(2)  Blockage by any structure constructed, under construction or for which a building permit has been applied for before the date the last notice is mailed or delivered under Section 42-305(f). 
Owner means at least one owner, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0217(1)(d), of a property or the personal representative of at least one owner. 
Permit means a solar access permit issued under this chapter. 
Solar collector means a device, structure or part of a device or structure, a substantial purpose of which is to transform solar energy into thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy. The term "solar collector" may include passive systems, such as windows, sun porches or greenhouses, which do not use any external mechanical power to distribute collected heat. 
Solar energy means direct radiant energy received from the sun. 
(Code 1976, § 18.26.020)  
Sec. 42-305. - Permit application and notice. 
(a)  Permit jurisdiction. Any owner who has installed or intends to install a solar collector may apply for a permit. The Site Plan Review Committee is delegated the responsibility to grant solar access permits. A permit may affect any land which, at the time the permit is granted, is located within the territorial limits of the City of Janesville. 
(b)  Application. An application for a permit under this chapter may be obtained from the Building Division and shall be completed by the applicant. 
(c)  Informal preapplication meeting. Prior to the filing of an application, the applicant shall meet with the Building Inspector to discuss the application and the permit process. 
(d)  Application fee. The completed permit application shall be submitted to the Building Division with an application fee of $50.00. 
(e)  Review of application. The Building Inspector shall review the application to determine if it is adequately completed. The Building Inspector shall notify the applicant of this determination: 
(1)  If the Building Inspector determines that the application is adequately completed, the applicant shall immediately file a copy of the application form with the Register of Deeds for Rock County. The applicant shall then submit a copy of the application form with the recording data to the Building Inspector. 
(2)  If the Building Inspector determines that the application is adequately completed, he or she shall provide notice forms and receipt forms to the applicant for service and signing under Subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  Service of notice. If an applicant is notified that his or her application has been adequately completed, the applicant shall deliver by Certified Mail or by hand the notice, supplied by the Building Division, to the owner of any property which the applicant proposes to be restricted by the permit. The applicant shall submit to the Building Division a copy of a signed receipt for every notice delivered under this subsection. 
(g)  Content of notice. The information on the notice form shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, and the address of the land upon which the solar collector is or will be located; 
(2)  That an application has been filed by the applicant; 
(3)  That the permit, if granted, may affect the rights of the notified owner to develop his or her property and to plant vegetation; 
(4)  That any person who receives a notice may request a hearing under Section 42-306 within 30 days after receipt of the notice; 
(5)  The procedure for filing a hearing request and telephone number, address and office hours of the contact person in the Building Division. 
(Code 1976, § 18.26.030)  
Sec. 42-306. - Hearing. 
Within 30 days after receipt of the notice under Section 42-305(f), any person who has received a notice, or anyone acting on that person's behalf, may file a request for a hearing on the granting of a permit, or the Site Plan Review Committee may determine that a hearing is necessary even if no such request is filed. If a request is filed or if the Site Plan Review Committee determines that a hearing is necessary, the Site Plan Review Committee shall conduct a hearing on the application within 90 days after the last notice under Section 42-305(f) is delivered. At least 30 days prior to the hearing date, the Site Plan Review Committee shall notify the applicant, any person who has requested a hearing under this section, all owners notified under Section 42-305(f), and any other person filing a request of the time and place of the hearing. 
(Code 1976, § 18.26.040; Ord. No. 84-305, § (part), 1984)  
Sec. 42-307. - Grant of permit. 
(a)  Determination. The Site Plan Review Committee shall grant a permit if that body determines that: 
(1)  The granting of a permit will not unreasonably interfere with the orderly land use and development plans of the City; 
(2)  No person has demonstrated that he or she has present plans to build a structure that would create an impermissible interference by showing that he or she has applied for a building permit prior to receipt of a notice under Section 42-305(f), has expended at least $500.00 on planning or designing such a structure or by submitting any other credible evidence that he or she has made substantial progress toward planning or constructing a structure that would create an impermissible interference; and 
(3)  The benefits to the applicant and the public will exceed any burdens. 
(b)  Conditions. 
(1)  The Site Plan Review Committee may grant a permit subject to any condition or exemption the Site Plan Review Committee deems necessary to minimize the possibility that the future development of nearby property will create an impermissible interference or to minimize any other burden on any person affected by granting the permit. 
(2)  As a condition of receiving a permit, a permit holder shall be responsible for the cost of trimming vegetation planted before the date the last notice is mailed or delivered, to prevent an impermissible interference on property affected by the permit. The permit holder shall give consideration to the desires of the property owner in trimming such vegetation and shall not unnecessarily remove vegetation which does not or will not, in a reasonable period of time, create an impermissible interference. 
(Code 1976, § 18.26.050)  
Sec. 42-308. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision under this article may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court for review. 
(Code 1976, § 18.26.060; Ord. No. 84-395, § (part), 1984)  
Sec. 42-309. - Record of permit. 
If the Site Plan Review Committee grants a permit: 
(1)  The Site Plan Review Committee shall specify the property restricted by the permit and shall prepare a notice of the granting of the permit. The notice shall include the legal description pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 706.05(2)(c), for the property upon which the solar collector is or will be located and for any property restricted by the permit, and shall indicate that the property may not be developed and vegetation may not be planted or allowed to grow on the property so as to create an impermissible interference with the solar collector which is the subject of the permit unless the permit affecting the property is terminated or unless a waiver agreement affecting the property is recorded under Section 42-311. 
(2)  The applicant shall record with the Register of Deeds of Rock County the notice under Subsection (1) of this section for each property restricted by the permit and for the property upon which the solar collector is or will be located. A copy of the notice with the recording information for each property affected shall be filed with the Building Division. 
(3)  The Building Division shall keep a record of the location of any solar collector which is the subject of a permit and of the location of all properties which are subject to restrictions resulting from the granting of a permit. 
(Code 1976, § 18.26.070)  
Sec. 42-310. - Rights of permit holder. 
(a)  Any person who uses property which he or she owns or permits any other person to use the property in a way which creates an impermissible interference under a permit which has been granted or which is the subject of an application shall be liable to the permit holder or applicant for damages, except as provided under Subsection (b) of this section for any loss due to the impermissible interference, court costs and reasonable attorney fees unless: 
(1)  The building permit was applied for prior to receipt of a notice under Wis. Stats. § 66.0403(3)(b) or the agency determines not to grant a permit after a hearing under Wis. Stats. § 66.0403(4). 
(2)  A permit affecting the property is terminated under Wis. Stats. § 66.0403(9). 
(3)  An agreement affecting the property is filed under Wis. Stats. § 66.0403(10). 
(b)  A permit holder is entitled to an injunction to require the trimming of any vegetation which creates or would create an impermissible interference as defined under Wis. Stats. § 66.0403(1)(f). If the court finds on behalf of the permit holder, the permit holder shall be entitled to a permanent injunction, damages, court costs, and reasonable attorney fees. 
(Code 1976, § 18.26.080)  
Sec. 42-311. - Waiver of rights. 
A permit holder by written agreement may waive all or part of any right protected by a permit. The permit holder shall record a copy of the agreement with the Register of Deeds of Rock County. A copy of the recorded agreement shall also be filed with the Building Division. 
(Code 1976, § 18.26.090)  
Sec. 42-312. - Termination of permit. 
(a)  Any rights protected by a permit under this chapter shall terminate if the Building Division determines that the solar collector which is the subject of the permit is: 
(1)  Permanently removed or is not used for two consecutive years, excluding time spent on repairs or improvements; or 
(2)  Not installed and functioning within two years after the date of issuance of the permit. 
(b)  The Building Division shall give the permit holder written notice and an opportunity for a hearing on the proposed termination under Subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  If the Building Division terminates a permit, the Building Division shall record a notice of termination with the Register of Deeds. The Building Division may charge the permit holder for the cost of recording. 
(d)  The Building Division shall modify the record of solar collectors prepared under Section 42-309(3) to reflect the termination of a permit. 
(Code 1976, § 18.26.100)  
Sec. 42-313. - Preservation of rights. 
The transfer of title to any property shall not change the rights and duties provided by a permit granted under this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 18.26.110)  
Sec. 42-314. - Construction. 
(a)  This chapter may not be construed to require that an owner obtain a permit prior to installing a solar collector. 
(b)  This chapter may not be construed to mean that acquisition of a renewable energy resource easement under Wis. Stats. § 700.35, is in any way contingent upon the granting of a permit under this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 18.26.120)  
Secs. 42-315—42-331. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 42-332. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article except Section 42-445(b)(2)f shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty not less than $25.00 and not more than $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution, for each offense. Each day during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In default of the payment of such penalty, such person shall be imprisoned for not to exceed 30 days. 
(b)  Any person who violates Section 42-445(b)(2)f shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty of not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day during which such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, the total penalties of which shall not exceed the amount of the assessed valuation of the property. The penalty described above has been intentionally set very high for violation of Section 42-445(b)(2)f because improper activities in a historic district may be completed quickly but the effects will be long lasting. In default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, the violator shall be imprisoned for not less than ten nor more than 90 days unless the forfeiture and costs are sooner paid. 
(c)  In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be demolished, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the City or any adjoining or neighboring property owner who would be specially damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or enjoin or abate or remove such unlawful demolition, erection, construction, reconstruction or use. 
(Code 1976, § 18.28.010)  
Secs. 42-333—42-352. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 42-353. - Number of residential buildings on a lot. 
Except in the case of planned unit developments, not more than one principal detached residential building shall be located on a lot, nor shall a principal detached residential building be located on the same lot with any other principal building. 
(Code 1976, § 18.32.010)  
Sec. 42-354. - Objects obstructing traffic or vision of traffic unlawful. 
(a)  A vision triangle is all that land at a street intersection between the vision line and the street intersection. The vision line is determined by drawing a straight line from the curb or edge of pavement of one street to the curb or edge of pavement of the intersecting street, and such line shall run through two points, each such point being on the edge of the street right-of-way/property line and 25 feet back from the corner formed by the intersection of the two street right-of-way/property lines, as shown on the vision triangle ordinance diagram in Subsection (c) of this section. No bushes or shrubbery nor any opaque or semi-opaque object is permitted in the vision triangle if such bush, shrub or object is over 30 inches above curb grade, except trees trimmed to the trunk and at least to seven feet above sidewalk grade. Official traffic signs and signals and utility poles are exempt from this restriction. 
(b)  At all intersections controlled by yield signs, stop signs, or traffic signals, only that portion of the vision triangle lying within the public street right-of-way shall apply. 
(c)  All buildings existing within the vision triangle at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
 
(Code 1976, § 18.32.020)  
Sec. 42-355. - Permitted obstructions in required setback areas. 
(a)  Except as otherwise regulated herein for a specific permitted or conditional use, the following accessory buildings, structures and uses are permitted and may be allowed obstructions in required setback areas where indicated by an X: 
Mobile Home Courts and Travel Trailer Camps 
	Front 
Setback 
and Corner Side Setback 	Interior Side Setback 	Rear Setback 
1. Awnings or canopies attached 	X 	X 	X 
2. Arbors or trellises 	X 	X 	X 
3. Attached air conditioning equipment 	X 	X 	X 
4. Detached air conditioning equipment 		X 	X 
5. Balconies. No balcony may be extended beyond the setback line more than eight feet or 50 percent of the distance between the property line and the setback line, whichever is the smaller 	X 	X 	X 
6. Bay windows. Projecting not more than three feet into a setback 	X 		X 
7. Chimneys, attached projecting not more than 24 inches into a setback 	X 	X 	X 
8. Eaves and gutters on principal buildings or attached accessory buildings projecting not more than four feet into a front setback and rear setback and not more than 24 inches into a side setback 	X 	X 	X 
9. Eaves and gutters on detached accessory buildings located in a rear setback projecting not more than 18 inches from the building wall adjoining a lot line 			X 
10. Fallout shelters, attached or detached, when conforming also with other codes and ordinances of the City 			X 
11. Fences, subject to compliance with Section 42-356 Fences. 	X 	X 	X 
12. Hedges are permitted within all setbacks, except that hedges may be no greater than 30 inches in height when located within the front or corner side setbacks and 6 feet where located within rear and interior side setbacks. 	X 	X 	X 
13. Fire escapes, open or enclosed may project three feet into a side setback or five feet into a rear setback 		X 	X 
14. Flagpoles and garden ornaments 	X 	X 	X 
15. Garages or carports, detached 		X 	X 
16. Growing of farm and garden crops in the open, when conforming also with other codes and ordinances of the City. Plantings which have a screening effect may not be taller than 30 inches in height when located within the front and corner side setbacks. 	X 	X 	X 
17. Compost bin or compost pile, when also conforming with other codes and ordinances of the City 			x 
18. Home occupations 	Not permitted in any setback 
19. Laundry drying lines or rods 		X 	X 
20. Ornamental light standards 	X 	X 	X 
21. Playground equipment 			X 
22. Playhouses, summerhouses and boathouses 			X 
23. Sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features of the principal building, projecting not more than 18 inches into a setback 	X 	X 	X 
24. Sheds and storage buildings for garden equipment and household items 			X 
25. Steps, open 	X 	X 	X 
26. Swimming pools, private, when conforming also with other codes or ordinances of the City 		X 	X 
27. Patios and outdoor fireplaces 		X 	X 
28. Tennis courts, private 			X 
29. Trees, shrubs and flowers 	X 	X 	X 
30. Other accessory buildings, structures, or uses customarily incidental to the primary use upon approval by the Building Division Director 			X 
 
(Code 1976, § 18.32.030; Ord. No. 2018-739, § I, 1-14-2019 ; Ord. No. 2019-749, § I(18.32.030), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2019-748, § I(18.32.030), 6-24-2019)  
Sec. 42-356. - Fences 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall cause or allow the installation, construction, erection, placement, or replacement of a fence in the City of Janesville without first obtaining a fence permit. Exception: When all other provisions of this chapter are met, a fence permit is not required for: 
(1)  The installation, repair, or replacement of any fence less than 16 feet in length. 
(2)  Underground electrical fences, such as an invisible pet fence. 
(3)  Decorative fences not exceeding two feet in height shall be permitted in all districts. Such fences shall not be placed in any manner which presents a hazard to pedestrians on any public or private sidewalk. 
(4)  Temporary fences where permitted by this chapter. 
(5)  Chicken runs as defined in Section 8-70. 
(b)  Application. A written application shall be filed with the Building Division and shall include a drawing, a site plan or property survey displaying the property lines, and adjoining streets, the location of all buildings and structures on the property, and the proposed location of the fence. 
(c)  Fee. An application fee, established and amended from time to time by City Council resolution, shall be paid to the City when the application is filed. 
(d)  Certificate of appropriateness required. For fences proposed to be installed on a property located in an Historic Overlay District, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required. 
(e)  Fence types. 
(1)  Privacy Fence. A privacy fence is one which is opaque or provides zero to less than 50 percent visibility through the fence. The degree of visibility is measured by the open space through which light is able to pass through the fence. Visibility is measured through one or multiple planes of fencing. 
a.  Privacy fences located within the front and corner side yard setbacks may be no greater than 30 inches in height. 
b.  Privacy fences are permitted within the interior side and rear yard setback areas. 
c.  Privacy fences are subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Semi-transparent fence. A semi-transparent fence is one which provides 50 percent or greater visibility through the fence. The degree of visibility is measured by the open space through which light is able to pass through the fence. Visibility is measured through one or multiple planes of fencing. Semi-transparent fences are permitted within all setback areas, subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Fence height. The height of fences shall be measured vertically from the finished grade on the interior side of the fence. If a fence is placed on a berm, the berm shall be included in the height of the fence and the height shall be measured vertically from the base of the berm. Support posts shall not extend more than three inches above the top line of the fence, except for decorative caps, knobs, or finials as designed by a manufacturer. 
(1)  Fences in the front setback area. Fences installed in the front setback area shall comply with the following height requirements, subject to all other requirements of Section 42-356: 
a.  In residential zoning districts and where residential uses exist or are permitted to exist in other zoning districts, semi-transparent fence height shall not exceed four feet. 
b.  In business and office zoning districts, semi-transparent fence height shall not exceed four feet. 
c.  In industrial zoning districts, semi-transparent fence height shall not exceed 12 feet. 
d.  Privacy fencing cannot exceed 30 inches in height in the front setback area for all zoning districts. 
(2)  Fences in the corner side setback area. 
a.  In residential zoning districts and where residential uses exist or are permitted to exist in other zoning districts, semi-transparent fence height shall not exceed six feet. 
b.  In business and office zoning districts, semi-transparent fence height shall not exceed six feet. 
c.  In industrial zoning districts, semi-transparent fence height shall not exceed 12 feet. 
d.  Privacy fencing cannot exceed 30 inches in height in the corner side setback area for all zoning districts. 
(3)  Fences in the interior side and rear setback areas. Semi-transparent and privacy fences installed in interior side and rear setback areas shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter and the following requirements: 
a.  In residential zoning districts and where residential uses exist or are permitted to exist in other zoning districts, fence height shall not exceed six feet. 
b.  In business and office zoning districts, fence height shall not exceed eight feet. 
c.  In industrial zoning districts, fence height shall not exceed 12 feet. 
(4)  Overlapping setback areas. In areas where the front setback and interior side setback areas overlap, the standards of fence height for front setback areas shall apply. 
(g)  Fence installation. No person shall cause or allow the installation, construction, erection, placement, or replacement of a fence, or any portion thereof, except in strict compliance with this section, site specific conditions, and the following requirements: 
(1)  Fences including all structural members and footings may be installed up to but not on property lines. No portion of the fence shall encroach beyond the property line. 
(2)  It is the responsibility of the property owner to locate the property lines and warrant that the fence is properly located entirely on the property site to which the fence permit has been issued. 
(3)  Fences shall be installed with the finished side facing the adjacent property or public right-of-way. 
(4)  All fence posts must be located on the inside of the fence facing the property on which the fence is located unless the fence is designed and constructed to look the same on both sides of the fence. 
(5)  Fences near street intersections. Fences may not obstruct traffic or vision of traffic and shall provide at least 50 percent visibility through any fence or multiple planes of fencing encroaching within the vision triangle as described in Section 42-354. 
(6)  Fences near driveways. Fences near driveways may not obstruct traffic or vision of traffic in the street or alley or along a public sidewalk. Privacy fences greater than 30 inches in height may not be placed along driveways within a vision triangle formed by the point of intersection between any right-of-way or alley or driveway and the two points located 15 feet from the point of intersection along the right-of-way line or the edge of the driveway. 
(7)  Fences located in the R2—Limited General Residence District. Privacy fences located in the R2 Zoning District may be positioned in the corner side setback area up to halfway between the corner side of the principal building and the corner side lot line provided that it does not extend into the fence vision triangle described in Subsection (g)(5) of this section. 
(8)  Fences on lots having multiple street frontages. Privacy fences up to six feet in height may be installed in the rear and corner side yard setback areas on properties which present more than one street frontage and the rear yard includes frontage along a state or federal highway, county trunk highway, or town road, subject to all of the following requirements: 
a.  Areas defined: State highways and county roads include the following: 
1.  State and Federal Highways 11, 14, 26, and 51. 
2.  County Trunk Highways A, D, F, G, O, and Y. 
3.  Town roads located within or adjacent to the municipal limits. 
4.  Jurisdictional changes of the above-listed roadways as deemed appropriate by the Chief Building Division Director. Said fences must meet all other requirements of this chapter in order to be deemed appropriate. 
b.  Access is controlled and prohibited to the subject property from the state or federal highway, county trunk highway, or town road where the fence would be installed. 
c.  Access is controlled and prohibited to the adjacent properties from the state or federal highway, county trunk highway, or town road for a distance of no less than 500 feet from the subject property in either direction along the state or federal highway, county trunk highway, or town road, or as determined by the Chief Building Division Director. 
d.  Fences may not obstruct traffic or vision of traffic and are subject to all vision triangle provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  Fence materials. 
(1)  Fences located in residential districts shall be manufactured for residential use. Opaque metal of any kind is prohibited. Typical residential fence materials approved for use are aluminum, wrought iron or steel, chainlink, wood, and vinyl. 
(2)  Temporary fencing such as plastic or wood-slat snow fencing shall be prohibited in all zoning districts, except as a temporary use for a special event, hazard, or construction warning. Said fence shall be removed within 24 hours after the conclusion of the special event or when the condition or season for which the said fence was erected no longer exists. Temporary fencing may not be used to enclose yard space on a property. 
(3)  Any residential wire-type fencing material shall be 13 gauge or less thickness. 
(4)  Prohibited fencing materials. 
a.  No fence shall be constructed of used or discarded materials in disrepair, including, but not limited to, pallets, tree trunks, trash, tires, junk, or similar items. Materials not specifically manufactured for fencing, such as railroad ties, wooden doors, or utility poles shall not be used for, or in the construction, of a fence. 
b.  Fences consisting of chicken wire, deer fence, hog wire, high-tensile wire strands, which are normally used in the agricultural, farming, and livestock business, specifically for livestock, animal, or bird control, are prohibited. Exception: In residential districts, chicken wire of no more than 24 inches in height may be used only to encompass rear yard, food-producing gardens. 
c.  No person shall erect, keep or maintain any barbed wire or electric fence, except electric invisible dog fence, upon any premises within the City limits, except that barbed wire is allowed only on properties located in Industrial Zoned Districts or in other districts at the discretion of the Building Division Director and so long as all such barbed wire is at least six feet above the ground. In no case, shall barbed wire or electric fence be installed on any property being used for residential purpose regardless of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(i)  Prohibited fences. No person shall install, construct, erect, place, replace or cause to be installed, constructed, erected, placed, or replaced the following types of fences: 
(1)  An aboveground electric fence or razor wire fence. 
(2)  Any wire or chainlink fence with the cut or salvage end of the fence exposed at the top. 
(3)  A structure that consists only of vertically-placed materials with no structurally-tied cross members for support. 
(4)  A fence that creates a potential hazard to users of the street, sidewalk, or to nearby property. 
(5)  A fence that has not been fully completed in accordance with the permit issued under this section. 
(j)  Nonboundary related fence standards. 
(1)  Residential fences or enclosures for swimming pools shall be as permitted in Section 10-27, temporary fences may not be used to enclose pool areas. 
(2)  Fencing installed in Commercial and Industrial Districts and for public athletic facilities (ex: tennis courts, baseball or softball fields) may be erected in conformance with accepted ASTM industry standards. A fence permit shall be required for such installations. 
(k)  Encroachments. No portion of any fence may extend into any adjoining public right-of-way or public land including greenbelts, unless the owner has secured a valid written and recorded easement for such encroachment from the City. 
(l)  Completion of installation. A fence authorized by a fence permit shall be fully installed in accordance with this section and permit requirements within one year of the date of permit issuance. No further work may be conducted thereafter until a new permit is applied for and issued. 
(m)  Maintenance of fences. Fences shall be maintained in a manner so as to prevent rust, corrosion, and deterioration, so as not to become a public or private nuisance, and so as not to be dilapidated or a danger to adjoining property owners or the public. Fences shall not create an appearance of patchwork, which is indicative of a state of disrepair. Every fence installed shall be maintained in such a way that it will remain plumb and in good repair. A property owner or occupant of the property on which the fence is located shall be responsible for the maintenance of a fence as required by this subsection. 
(n)  Existing fences. Any fence, lawfully existing upon the effective adoption date of the ordinance from which this section is derived (June 25, 2019), shall not be altered, enlarged, extended, or replaced, except in strict compliance with all of the requirements of this section and chapter. Except where otherwise prohibited in this section, normal maintenance thereof shall not be a violation hereof. 
(o)  Appeals. A decision to deny a fence permit or issuance thereof subject to conditions may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 42-272. 
(Ord. No. 2019-748, § III(18.32.035), 6-24-2019)  
Sec. 42-357. - Interpretation of use lists. 
The Building Division Director may allow land uses (permitted or conditional) which, though not contained by name in a zoning district list of permitted or conditional uses, are deemed to be similar in nature and clearly compatible with the listed uses. The Building Division Director shall call upon the City Planner and City Attorney to assist in the determination of similarity and/or compatibility. At the time of periodic updating and revision, the Building Division Director shall recommend the addition of all such approved uses to the appropriate use list. 
(Code 1976, § 18.32.040)  
Sec. 42-358. - Nonconforming buildings, structures and uses. 
(a)  Statement of purposes. This chapter establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of the uses which are permitted in that district. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of those districts that those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses be discontinued or reduced to conformity as soon as the fair interests of the parties will permit, or be permitted to continue with certain restrictions. The purpose of this section is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall be permitted to continue. 
(b)  Authority to continue. Any nonconforming building, structure or use which existed lawfully at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and which remains nonconforming and any building, structure, use or land which shall become nonconforming upon the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and any building, structure, use or land which becomes nonconforming upon annexation to the City may be continued subject to the regulations which follow. 
(c)  Change of nonconforming use. The nonconforming use of a building, structure or land may be changed to a use that is permitted in the type of district in which the nonconforming building, structure or use is located. After holding a public hearing in accordance with Section 42-272(e), the Plan Commission may authorize a change from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use of the same district classification in which the existing nonconforming use would normally be a permitted use, or change an existing nonconforming use to a use more appropriate in the type of district in which it is located, if the Plan Commission finds that such changed use will not be contrary to the purposes listed in Section 42-273. 
(d)  Repairs, alterations and expansion. 
(1)  Repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or structure, provided that no structural alterations are made which increase the bulk of the nonconforming building or structure, unless such a structural alteration and the use thereof, conforms to all the regulations of the district in which the building or structure is located. 
(2)  The nonconforming use of part of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, may be extended throughout the building or structure in which the use is presently located, but no changes or structural alterations which increase the bulk of the nonconforming building or structure shall be made unless such changes or structural alterations and the use thereof, conform to all the regulations of the district in which the building or structure is located. 
(3)  The nonconforming use of part of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such building or structure, nor changed to any other nonconforming use. 
(4)  The nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, shall not be expanded or extended beyond the area it occupies. 
(5)  Construction, reconstruction, remodeling and expansion of a detached residential garage which is used solely for residential storage is permitted on land whose principal use is residential and nonconforming. The size of such garage may not exceed 24 feet by 24 feet. 
(6)  The expansion of any one-family or two-family dwelling unit which was lawful prior to the adoption of this chapter but which subsequently became a nonconforming use as a direct result of the adoption of this chapter shall be permitted. Only one such expansion shall be allowed over the useful life of the dwelling unit. Such expansion shall be no more than 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
(7)  Subsection (d) of this section shall not limit the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling or expansion of a nonconforming structure on any property within the Shoreland-Wetland Overlay District which existed at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which Article XV of this chapter was derived, or of any environmental control facility in existence on May 7, 1982, related to such a structure. The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses located below the ordinary high water mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 30.121, as from time to time amended. 
(e)  Discontinuance. If the nonconforming use of a building, structure, or premises is discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months, it shall not be renewed and any subsequent use of the building, structure, or premises shall conform to the regulations of the district in which such building, structure or premises is located. Exempt from this section are single- and two-family residential structures used for residential purposes which are individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or single- and two-family residential structures used for residential purposes within an Historic Overlay District. 
(f)  Relocation. No building or structure shall be moved in whole or in any part to any other location on the same or any other lot unless every portion of such building or structure which is moved, and the use thereof, is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is to be located. 
(g)  Restoration. If a nonconforming building or structure is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to the extent that the cost of its restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence, together with the cost of the total structural repairs or alterations made during the lifetime of the building or structure exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of the building or structure, such nonconforming building may not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. If the cost of such a restoration of a destroyed or damaged nonconforming building or structure, together with the cost of the total structural repairs or alterations made during the lifetime of the building or structure, is less than 50 percent of the assessed value of the building or structure, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless such restoration is started within one year from the date of partial destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion. If the restoration is not started within one year of said calamity and diligently prosecuted to completion, the building or structure shall be removed and the area cleared. 
(h)  Special exception. The owner of any one- or two-family dwelling unit which was used exclusively for residential use on June 15, 1981, which has been continuously used for residential use since June 15, 1981, up to the date of the casualty referred to hereafter, and which has continuously been located in a business or industrial zoning district since June 15, 1981, shall, in the event of destruction of the residence by fire or other casualty in an amount greater than 50 percent of assessed value, be permitted to reconstruct such residence on the lot where originally located. The size and number of units of the reconstructed residence shall be no greater than the size and number of units of the original residence. The burden of proof of establishing continuous residential use, size and number of units shall be on the land owner. If said reconstruction is not commenced within a period of 12 months following the casualty, any subsequent reconstruction and use of the building, structure or premises shall conform to the regulations of the district in which such building, structure or premises is located. 
(i)  Expansion permitted on existing structures. An existing structure within the districts established by this chapter, which was lawful prior to the adoption of the article from which this chapter is derived but which subsequently became nonconforming only as to setbacks and only as the direct result of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be permitted to continue and may be expanded or extended but only: 
(1)  If such building addition shall not extend beyond the established nonconforming setback line; and 
(2)  In no event shall the total setback of the subject structure be reduced to an amount less than 50 percent of the setback required by this Code; and if the resulting building expansion is no greater than the area of the existing building. 
(Code 1976, § 18.32.050)  
Sec. 42-359. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  General requirements. No permit shall be issued for new construction of buildings, structures or uses or additions thereof, or changes of use, or change in seating capacity, or addition of dwelling units, or gross floor area, or other limits of measurement in the amount specified herein unless there is provided off-street parking areas in accordance with the standards of this section. No permit shall be issued for construction, reconstruction or expansion of an off-street parking lot, open storage lot or loading area unless they are developed in accordance with the standards of this section. For purposes of this section, the term "reconstruction" means the removal of all the existing parking lot, open storage lot or loading area surface and base course to the subgrade. 
(1)  Size. An off-street parking space is a hard-surfaced area with size determined by the parking table in this chapter and designed so there shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking spaces. 
(2)  Ingress and egress aisles. Ingress and egress aisles to and from any parking lot to a public street or alley shall be of the following minimum widths: 
	One-Way 	Two-Way 
Three or more dwelling units or other uses permitted in the residence district 	10 feet 	20 feet 
Office, commercial and industrial uses 	12 feet 	24 feet 
 
(b)  The Site Plan Review Coordinator shall have discretionary authority to increase or decrease the above minimum standards as he or she deems necessary for the specific site and under the particular facts and circumstances, but in no event ever more than two feet per lane. 
(1)  Surfacing. All driveways and open off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with a dustless all-weather material such as bituminous, concrete pavement, or brick. Such parking areas shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water. Single-family residential properties may have no more than three years from the date of issuance of a building permit for that property within which to complete this surfacing. This section shall not apply to driveways and parking areas which were legally nonconforming prior to November 13, 2000. 
(2)  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties and public streets in such a way as not to create a nuisance. 
(3)  Screening and landscaping. 
a.  Screening of parking lots. For all off-street parking areas containing more than four parking spaces there shall be provided and maintained a permanent screening buffer strip along any boundary of such parking lot which adjoins an R1 or R2 district. Such screening may be accomplished by a wall or fence not less than five feet in height or by a living hedge, shrubs or trees which at the time of planting shall be a minimum of three feet in height and three feet in width and shall within a period of four years attain a height and width of at least five feet. When such screening is within the required front or corner side yard, the maximum height shall be 30 inches. The Building Division Director may modify the screening requirements when screening exists on adjoining property. 
b.  Landscaping of parking lots. Each parking lot containing more than four parking spaces shall provide and maintain landscaping within such parking lot. Landscaping shall include natural plantings such as trees, shrubs, or bushes. Such landscaping area shall be not less than five percent of the total parking lot area and shall be reasonably distributed throughout the parking lot. All parking lots shall have a five-foot-wide landscaping strip along all adjoining property lines. The landscape strip adjoining any public street shall contain at least one tree per each 50 feet of street frontage with the remainder of the area left in grass, ground cover or other natural plantings. The Site Plan Review Coordinator may reduce or waive said five-foot-wide landscape strip where the ability of providing such five-foot-wide landscape strip creates a practical difficulty or causes one of the following: 
1.  The reduction of off-street parking below the ordinance minimum for the use it serves. 
2.  The inability to develop or implement a joint driveway use between properties. 
3.  The five percent landscaping requirement may be used to satisfy a portion of the green area requirement. 
c.  Landscaping of open storage lots. All open storage lots for motor vehicles, and other merchandise, service areas, and loading areas shall have a five-foot-wide landscaped planting strip along all adjoining property lines. The landscape strip adjoining any public street shall contain at least one tree per each 50 feet of street frontage with the remainder of the area left in grass, ground cover or other natural plantings. The Site Plan Review Coordinator may reduce or waive said five-foot-wide landscape strip where the ability of providing such five-foot-wide landscape strip creates a practical difficulty or causes one of the following: 
d.  The reduction of off-street parking below the ordinance minimum for the use it serves. 
e.  The inability to develop or implement a joint driveway use between properties. 
(4)  No parking permitted on lawns. No vehicle shall be permitted to park on a required front or corner side setback except upon a paved or hard-surfaced driveway or parking area. 
(c)  Location. All parking spaces required to serve buildings or uses erected or established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be located on the same lot as the building or use served except that parking spaces to serve business buildings or uses may be located no more than 300 feet from the nearest property line of such business building or use. Parking spaces to serve industrial buildings or uses may be located no more than 1,000 feet from the nearest property line of such industrial building or use. 
(d)  Ownership of parking facilities not on same lot as principal use. In cases where parking facilities are not located on the same lot as the building or use they serve, such facilities shall be in the possession of the holder of said building or use either by deed or land contract. 
(e)  Computation. 
(1)  When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this chapter results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of less than one-half may be disregarded, while a fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as one parking space. 
(2)  Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on the premises at any one time. Floor area to be used in determining parking requirements shall be the total usable floor area on all floors as determined by the Building Division Director. 
(3)  For business and office establishments constructed with basement or underground floor space, parking shall be provided for such floor space as follows: 
a.  Basements or underground floors with only one point of ingress/egress shall be limited to only storage associated with the principal use of the structure and there shall be no parking required for such floor space. 
b.  For basements or underground floors with two points of ingress/egress and planned or used for limited occupancy for such uses as storage or support functions accessory to the principal use, as determined acceptable by the Site Plan Review Coordinator, one parking stall shall be provided for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
c.  For basements or underground floors with two points of ingress/egress and planned or used for intensive occupancy by the principal use, one parking stall shall be provided based on the applicable rate for the principal use as delineated in Section 42-359(h). 
(f)  Provisions for two or more uses. Where two or more uses are located on the same lot or within the same building, and with said building or buildings containing an aggregate total of 25,000 or more square feet of gross floor area, parking spaces equal in aggregate to not less than 80 percent in number of the aggregate total of parking spaces that would be required for each use or lot separately shall be provided and are hereby required. 
(g)  Submission of plot plan. Any application for a building permit or for a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required shall include therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this chapter and any additional information as may be required by the Site Plan Review Committee. 
(h)  Exemption; driveway openings. This chapter shall apply only to territory located outside of the parking assessment district. Driveway openings shall be set back from street intersections as delineated in the various district requirements through this chapter except for parking lots located within the downtown parking assessment districts. Within the downtown parking assessment districts the minimum setback from a street intersection shall be 20 feet. The setback shall be measured from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, not the curb or pavement edge. 
(i)  Required spaces. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces accessory to designated uses shall be provided as follows, unless otherwise required by the Site Plan Review Coordinator: The Site Plan Review Coordinator may decrease the required number of off-street parking spaces to be improved by up to 25 percent of the requirement. However, area in reserve for development of future off-street parking spaces must be provided on site to satisfy the parking requirement. Said reserve parking spaces shall be improved when necessary as determined by the Building Division Director. 
(1)  Dwelling and lodging uses. 
a.  Boardinghouses or roominghouses, one space for each lodging room; 
b.  Hotels, motels and tourists homes, one space for each lodging room plus one space for each employee (based upon the maximum number of employees on the premises at any one time); 
c.  Single-family and two-family dwellings, two parking spaces for each dwelling, plus one additional parking space for each two roomers or lodgers accommodated; but no more than four parking spaces for each dwelling unit; 
d.  Multiple-family dwellings: 
1.  Multiple-family dwellings with dwelling units containing two or more bedrooms shall provide two parking spaces for each dwelling unit; 
2.  Multiple-family dwellings with dwelling units containing one bedroom or designed as an efficiency unit shall provide 1½ parking spaces for each dwelling unit; 
3.  Multiple-family dwellings which are located in the R4, O2, and B6 Districts shall provide 1½ parking spaces for each dwelling unit; 
e.  Multiple-family subsidized elderly rental housing, one space per unit. When originally constructed, such a building need only be provided with 50 percent of this requirement unless located within the B5 or B6 District where 25 percent of this requirement may be provided, but sufficient land for the remaining spaces must be reserved for use as needed or for a changed use. In the event that the Building Division Director feels the parking facilities of the subsidized elderly rental housing are not sufficient to accommodate the parking needs, he or she can require the owner to pave additional spaces up to one stall per unit as he or she deems appropriate, subject to site plan review approval. In the event that such multiple-family housing fails to qualify or loses its classification as subsidized elderly rental multiple-family housing under the rules and regulations of the state and/or federal agency under which the housing project has been funded, the provisions for multiple-family housing shall apply. To be classified as multiple-family subsidized elderly rental housing for the purposes of this subsection, the housing project must be so qualified under the rules and regulations of the appropriate state and/or federal agencies; 
f.  Nursing homes, convalescent homes, one space for each two beds; 
g.  Mobile home parks, two spaces per each lot; 
h.  Community living arrangements (CLA), one space for each employee, plus one space for each lodging room. If the clientele of the CLA are not capable of obtaining driver licenses or it is not expected that they would obtain driver licenses, the parking spaces for lodging rooms need not be improved, but shall be reserved on the site. 
Such reserved spaces shall be improved when the clientele of the CLA changes to residents who possess or are expected to obtain driver licenses. Exempted from this requirement are CLAs for eight or fewer occupants located in an R1 or R2 District. Those establishments shall provide a minimum of two off-street stalls. 
(2)  School, institution, auditorium, or other places of assembly uses. 
a.  Colleges, junior colleges, and universities, one parking space for each four students, based upon the maximum number of students that can be accommodated in accordance with design capacity, plus one space for each employee; 
b.  Hospitals, one parking space for each two hospital beds, plus one parking space for each two employees, plus one parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff; 
c.  Libraries and museums, one parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area; 
d.  Medical and dental clinics, one parking space per each 150 square feet of gross floor area for the first 10,000 square feet of building and one parking space per each 200 square feet of gross floor area above 10,000 square feet; 
e.  Meeting halls, convention halls, exhibition halls, funeral homes, and banquet rooms, one parking space for each three people based upon the design occupant load; 
f.  Auditoriums, theaters and churches, one parking space for each three seats based upon design seating capacity; 
g.  Private clubs and lodges, one parking space for each 30 square feet of floor area or one space for each lodging room and one parking space for each three seats in accordance with design seating capacity, whichever is greater; 
h.  Schools, commercial, trade, music, dance or business, one parking space for each two employees, plus one space for each two students based on the maximum number of students that can be accommodated in accordance with such design capacity; 
i.  Schools, child's dance, one parking space for each five students plus one space for each employee; 
j.  Schools, senior high (public or private), one parking space for each six students based on the maximum number of students that can be accommodated in accordance with such design capacity of the building, plus one space for each employee; 
k.  Schools, elementary or junior high (public or private), one parking space for each employee; 
l.  Nursery schools and day care centers, one parking space per employee, plus one space per six children based on the maximum capacity the facility may be licensed for. 
(3)  Recreational uses (commercial or noncommercial). 
a.  Bowling alleys, five parking spaces for each lane, plus such additional spaces as may be required herein for affiliated uses such as restaurants and bars, plus one space for each employee; 
b.  Health salons, swimming pools, skating rinks, dance halls and billiard parlors (commercial), one parking space for each three persons, based upon the maximum number of persons that can be accommodated at one time in accordance with such design capacity, and one parking space for each employee; 
c.  Parks, resorts, recreation areas, grandstands, stadiums or community centers (private, semipublic or public), one parking space for each two employees, plus spaces in adequate number as determined by the Site Plan Review Committee to serve the visiting public. 
(4)  Business, commercial and industrial uses. 
a.  All business and commercial establishments, except those specified hereafter, one parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area, unless the Building Division Director determines that the use is so similar to a use listed in one of the following subsections that the parking requirement for the similar use shall apply; 
b.  Carwash, one parking space for each two employees, plus one space for the owner or manager, and in addition, parking spaces to accommodate automobiles awaiting entrance to the carwash equal in number to five times the maximum capacity of the carwash. Maximum capacity, in this instance, shall mean the greatest possible number of automobiles undergoing some phase of washing at the same time; 
c.  Automobile service stations, one parking space for each employee, plus three spaces for each bay intended for service, repair, or other use; 
d.  Business, professional and public administration or service office building, one parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area, except for a suite of rooms used for offices for physicians or dentists, parking spaces are required herein for medical and dental clinics shall apply; 
e.  Cartage, express, parcel delivery and freight terminal establishments, one parking space for each employee employed on the premises and one parking space for each vehicle maintained on the premises; 
f.  Restaurants, taverns, and other establishments dispensing food or drink: 
1.  Establishments which provide indoor serving areas shall provide parking as follows: 
(i)  One parking space for each 35 square feet of net floor area; and 
(ii)  One parking space for each employee based on the maximum number of employees on the largest shift; 
2.  Drive-in establishments which do not provide indoor serving areas shall provide parking as follows: 
(i)  One parking space for each 35 square feet of gross floor area; and 
(ii)  One parking space for each employee based on the maximum number of employees on the largest shift; 
3.  Establishments which provide primarily take-out or delivery service with indoor seating for 12 or fewer patrons shall provide one parking stall for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. Net floor area equals the area where patrons are served; 
g.  Motor vehicle sales, greenhouses and building materials sales, one parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area, plus one space for each two employees; 
h.  Furniture and appliance stores, wholesale stores, stores for repair of household equipment or furniture, one parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area; 
i.  Industrial uses such as production, processing, assembly, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products warehouse and wholesale, two parking spaces for each three employees on any one shift. However, space for future parking stalls shall be reserved on the site, but does not need to be improved to ordinance standards until an increase in employment or change in use requires the improvement. Such parking reservation shall equal at least one space per 1,000 square feet of floor area up to 20,000 square feet, plus one space per 2,000 square feet in excess of 20,000 square feet. The Chief Building Division Director may reduce or waive the required parking reservation for industrial uses such as mini-warehouses, concrete batching plants, asphalt batching plants or other similar structures with limited adaptive re-use in the opinion of the Chief Building Division Director. 
(5)  Construction and maintenance of parking lot. Construction and maintenance of private streets, drives, parking areas and sidewalks within all developments shall be the responsibility of the property owner. All such improvements shall be constructed in accord with the approved site plan. All facilities shall be properly and routinely maintained to allow continuous and safe vehicle and pedestrian passage and usage. All parking stalls shall be properly striped with industry accepted pavement markings so that they are visible under all weather conditions except snow. 
 
(Code 1976, § 18.32.060)  
Sec. 42-360. - Loading requirements. 
Off-street loading berths accessory to designated uses shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Location. All loading berths shall be located on the same as the use served. All major vehicle loading berths which abut a residence district or intervening alley separating a residence district from a business or industrial district shall be effectively screened therefrom by building walls, or a uniformly painted solid fence, wall or effective screen or any combination thereof, not less than eight feet in height. No loading berth shall be located within 40 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets. No loading berth shall be located in a required front or side yard setback. 
(2)  Area. Unless otherwise specified, an off-street loading berth shall be designed to accommodate vehicles intended to dock at this berth but in no event shall such loading berth be less than 12 feet in width by at least 35 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. 
(3)  Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movement. 
(4)  Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be surfaced with a dustless, all-weather material, such as bituminous, concrete pavement, or brick. 
(5)  Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities. 
(6)  Utilization. Space allowed to any off-street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 18.32.070)  
Sec. 42-361. - Grading and drainage. 
All surface water originating on a site, plus any and all surface water entering a site from adjoining property, shall be suitably collected on the site and shall be discharged to the storm sewer system where available. Determination of availability of storm sewer shall be the responsibility of the City Engineer, whose decision shall be final. Storm sewers shall be constructed in compliance with the Wisconsin Plumbing Code and other applicable regulations, as from time to time amended. If no storm sewer is available, surface water shall be discharged from or retained on a site in a manner approved by the City Engineer. This section shall not apply to single- and two-family developments. 
(Code 1976, § 18.32.080)  
Sec. 42-362. - Accessory buildings (attached and detached), detached garages, structures, and uses. 
The following regulations shall govern accessory buildings, structures, and uses. 
(1)  Accessory buildings, attached and detached garages, structures, and uses shall be compatible with the principal use and shall not be established prior to the establishment of a principal use on a lot. 
(2)  Except as otherwise regulated herein, any accessory building or structure hereafter erected, altered, enlarged, or moved on a lot shall conform with the following: 
a.  No detached garage or accessory building shall be nearer than five feet from the nearest portion of any other building on the lot. 
b.  All detached garages and accessory buildings must comply with the front yard and corner side yard setback requirements as described within each zoning district. 
c.  No detached garage or accessory building directly adjacent to a principal building shall be less than eight feet from any interior side lot line and ten feet from the principal building. 
d.  When a detached garage or accessory structure is located to the rear of the closest perpendicular line of the principal building, no detached structure shall be less than the distance described in this chapter from the principal structure. 
(3)  No detached garage or accessory building accessory to a residence shall have more than one story or exceed 14 feet in height, measured from floor to peak of roof. The Building Division Director may authorize a greater building height not to exceed 22 feet for detached garages which are located in a district listed on the National Register of Historic Places or in an Historic Overlay District, but only in order to construct a roof pitch to be compatible with the roof pitch of the principal building. 
(4)  Attached garages shall be considered part of a principal building and shall comply with the setbacks for a principal building. 
(5)  Detached garages shall comply with the setbacks for accessory buildings. 
(6)  No accessory building accessory to a one or two family residence shall be greater than 120 square feet in area. No detached garage accessory to a one- or two-family residence shall be greater than 750 square feet in area. No attached garage accessory to a one- or two-family residence shall be greater than the gross living area of the principal building as defined in Section 42-119. 
(7)  For each dwelling unit in a single- or two-family residence there shall be no more than one accessory building and no more than one detached garage. 
(Code 1976, § 18.32.090)  
Sec. 42-363. - Building setbacks that apply to all zoning districts. 
No building, accessory building or structure shall be erected within the 15-foot strip of land measured landward from the Rock River from any existing river wall or bulkhead line or encroachment line where a bulkhead line has not been established. This provision does not apply to piers, docks, walks, bridges, culverts, dikes, riverbank erosion control or underground utilities. 
(Code 1976, § 18.32.100)  
Secs. 42-364—42-384. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
Sec. 42-385. - Purpose. 
The following standards and provisions are hereby deemed necessary and are intended to: 
(1)  Protect the health and welfare of the citizenry; 
(2)  Provide a safe environment; 
(3)  Improve the visual image of the City; 
(4)  Encourage physical diversity; 
(5)  Mitigate urban heat islands; 
(6)  Apply best management practices to stormwater management; 
(7)  Protect existing development and improve upon it; 
(8)  Provide adequate public infrastructure and street and highway capacity; 
(9)  Encourage alternative modes of transportation and minimize the visual, physical and environmental impacts of a motor vehicle-dominated transportation system; 
(10)  Minimize light pollution and the creation of sky glow; 
(11)  Recognize the physical, environmental, social and psychological benefits of good design of all aspects of the built environment, including, but not limited to, building construction, site improvement, signs and landscaping. 
(Code 1976, § 18.34.010)  
Sec. 42-386. - Application of standards. 
(a)  The standards codified and established by this chapter shall apply to the physical development of all vacant land and the redevelopment of all other lands that are zoned O1, O2, O3, B1, B2, B3, B4, B5, B6 and BT. For purposes of this chapter, redevelopment is defined as the removal of any building, structure and/or improvement for the purpose or intent of constructing, erecting, creating, or otherwise improving the underlying land area with new buildings, structures, uses and/or improvements. The standards contained herein shall also apply to building additions, which double the gross floor area of any existing building. 
(b)  Compliance with the regulations contained herein shall be determined by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. The Coordinator may, at his or her discretion, consult with the Planning Director, City Engineer, Director of Public Works and Building Director or their designees for their input, information, expertise and opinion regarding the status of compliance with said regulations. Applicants that are in disagreement or aggrieved with the findings of the Site Plan Review Coordinator may request mediation of Coordinator's actions by the Plan Commission as outlined in Section 42-273(f). 
(Code 1976, § 18.34.020)  
Sec. 42-387. - Architectural standards. 
The intent of the following standards is to ensure that development within the district results in the creation of functional and aesthetically pleasing high quality environment. A high quality environment is one that is designed for longevity and flexibility in use, has low or reduced maintenance, is environmentally compatible and pedestrian friendly and will instill pride of use and ownership in those operating and visiting such areas: 
(1)  Maximum building size. In accord with the applicable zoning district standard. 
(2)  The maximum height of any building, structure or use shall be in accord with the applicable zoning district standard. 
(3)  The size, bulk and shape of buildings shall be compatible with those located on parcels in the surrounding neighborhood. When such surrounding buildings consist of dramatically different sizes and styles that may not be compatible with each other, new buildings shall be designed to provide a transition between such other buildings. Where there are few or no surrounding buildings, the size, bulk and shape of buildings shall be consistent with the planned character of what will be the surrounding development as reflected in City's Comprehensive Plan and other adopted plans for the area. The character of buildings and structures constructed in the O3 and B1 Districts shall be consistent with residential buildings in the surrounding area. 
(4)  Buildings, particularly large structures, shall be designed to reduce the physical and visual scale and/or appearance of said structures through the use of varied design elements, including, but not limited to, varied setbacks, building height, roof treatments, door and window openings, and other structural and decorative elements. In addition, consideration should be given to varying the vertical walls of buildings with exterior horizontal wall protrusions and recesses and also the tops of walls, roof eaves and parapet walls through the use of varying vertical heights from the ground plane. Buildings and structures located in the O3 and B1 Districts shall have pitched residential styled gabled or hip roofs, except where the character of surrounding buildings suggest that other roof styles are appropriate. 
(5)  All buildings shall have entrances clearly defined with roofs, canopies, porticos, arches or other features that identify them and invite users of the site to them. If appropriate relative to the location of on-site parking, at least one entrance shall be located on the front or sides of buildings so that it is visible from the adjoining public street right-of-way. Buildings larger than 50,000 square feet and single tenants occupying spaces greater than 50,000 square feet in a multitenant building shall provide multiple entrances convenient to parking and pedestrian improvements. Separate entrances shall be provided for each tenant or tenant space within a building where practical. 
(6)  Exterior building materials shall be durable and low maintenance. Buildings must consist primarily of wood, glass, brick, decorative concrete block, stucco and/or similar materials. The Site Plan Review Coordinator may approve the moderate use of vinyl and seamless metal siding, decorative architectural metal siding with concealed fasteners and standing seam or otherwise architecturally unique metal roofing when such items are sensitively incorporated as design elements and not just building skins. 
(7)  Building design and architectural elements shall be applied to all sides of buildings in the O3 and B1 Districts and only those sides and rears of buildings in the remaining office and commercial districts which are clearly visible from public lands, public streets and residential areas. Under said circumstances, all facades of a building shall contain similar building materials and architectural details. 
(8)  Primary building facades shall have storefront windows or window like displays or details in quantities sufficient to create a recognizable architectural element from the adjoining parking lots, pedestrian ways and public streets. Said windows or window like features shall be provided for each individual tenant or tenant space within a building when such tenant space adjoins an exterior wall of the building. 
(9)  In general, colors used on the exteriors of buildings should be non-reflective, subtle or neutral tones. Bright, vibrant or highly reflective colors or surfaces should be used sparingly as accent features and not applied copiously as an attention getting device. 
(10)  The intent of the O3 and B1 Zone Districts is to provide office, commerce and service uses to smaller, local geographic areas and the residents thereof and not necessarily to the community at-large or regional customers. As such uses within the district should be considered as destinations rather than attractions. Thus the use of standard corporate buildings, signage and images may be inappropriate in size, scale, color and image. Any use of such elements must be subtly incorporated into the overall character of the development and the area. 
(11)  All permanent loading facilities and trash/recyclable storage areas shall be completely screened from view by an opaque vertical wall or fence that is a minimum of five feet in height or greater as necessary to adequately screen the trash enclosure. Said wall or fence shall be constructed of the same or complimentary materials as the building that it serves. Loading and trash storage areas shall be designed in consultation with professional service providers in order to accommodate all desired functions within the screened area. Loading and trash storage areas shall be proximal to the building they serve in order to provide convenience in access for employees using such facilities. 
(12)  Roofs and the tops of building walls shall be designed to sufficiently break planes and horizontal lines, reflect sunlight, and add interest to the structures they are a part and to minimize buildings from appearing as big, flat boxes. Pitched roofs are encouraged when overall building sizes allow their use without creating disproportionately large and/or tall roofs and when pitched roofs are the predominate style of surrounding development or when a building will be proximal to residences. 
(13)  Roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be located behind screening walls or covers that are similar or complimentary in material to those used on the facades of the building. Ground or wall mounted mechanical equipment shall be placed out of site from adjoining public streets and screened with landscaping, walls or fences. 
(14)  Buildings designed or converted for multiple tenant occupancy shall be designed with roofs, canopies, trellises and/or other roof like structures intended to provide maximum covered areas over sidewalks connecting the entrances to the multiple-tenant space. 
(15)  Lots, parcels, sites or developments containing multiple buildings shall incorporate varied building setbacks from the property lines adjoining public streets. Said setback variations must generally be no less than 50 feet; however, the Site Plan Review Coordinator may allow less setback to facilitate good site design. 
(Code 1976, § 18.34.030)  
Sec. 42-388. - Landscaping standards. 
The landscaping standards contained herein establish a point system to determine the appropriateness and effectiveness of plant installation. The system recognizes that the installation and maintenance of live plants is essential to creating a healthy, safe and aesthetically pleasing environment. The system places priority on the planting of deciduous shade trees which results in the highest level of environmental impact mitigation. As such all real property proposed for development shall be landscaped as follows: 
(1)  Planting designs shall concentrate on shading building roofs, parking lots, pedestrian facilities and the adjoining public streets. Secondary importance is focused on foundation and screening plantings intended to soften the transition from the ground plane to the vertical plane. 
(2)  Landscaping requirements. Landscaping shall be provided based on the following requirements or point schedules. The term "landscaping" means living plants normally cultivated for use on residential and business sites. These requirements supersede any other landscaping or screening requirements of this chapter. The requirements of each of the following categories are additive and must be satisfied independently except in the following circumstances: on corner lots, one-half of the trees provided to meet the street frontage requirement may be credited toward satisfying the landscape point/tree requirements of the paved areas standard if said street frontage trees meet the location requirements of both the street frontage and paved areas sections the landscape point totals associated with landscaping planted to meet the buffer yard requirements shall be credited toward the point totals required to meet any other landscape requirement provided the buffer yard plants meet the location requirements of both the buffer yard section and the section for which credit is requested. 
a.  Street frontages. One large deciduous tree shall be planted for each 50 feet of property line along a public street right-of-way. Said trees shall be planted in the public terrace equidistant from the curb and the normal sidewalk line or on the private site and within ten feet of the property line adjoining the public right-of-way. The preference for tree locations is on private property. The trees should be planted as near as possible at intervals of 50 feet on center although the clustering of trees for valid design purposes may be allowed. 
b.  Paved areas. One hundred fifty points of landscaping shall be planted for each 3,000 square feet of paving. At least one-half of the landscape points required shall be satisfied by the planting of large deciduous trees. Paving is defined as all hard-surfaced areas within the ground plane, including, but not limited to, parking stalls, driveways, trash enclosure pads, loading docks, sidewalks, plazas and patios. Plants required by this section shall be installed in landscape islands within or extending into the paved area or generally within 15 feet of the perimeter of the edges of the paved area. Parking lots containing more than 75 stalls shall incorporate at least one-third of the required landscaping within planting islands that are located within the interior of the parking lot. Such islands shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 360 square feet in area and shall contain at least one large deciduous. Said islands should be evenly dispersed throughout the parking lot. Emphasis should be placed on creating islands that function positively with respect to plant physiology, vehicle maneuvering and overall site maintenance. Linear islands located between rows of parking stalls are preferred rather than small islands located at the ends of parking rows. 
c.  Building foundations. Three hundred points of landscaping for each 100 linear feet of exterior building wall. Plants required by this section must generally be installed within 20 feet of the building foundation. Large deciduous trees should not be used as foundation plantings. 
d.  Buffer yards. There shall be provided and maintained a permanent ten-foot-wide buffer yard screening element along any boundary of an office or business zoned property and any residential zone district including any O1 or O2 Zoned site that is developed with a residential use or is vacant. Said buffer yard screening element is intended to visually screen the office or business use from the adjoining residential district. The buffer yard screen shall be located within 25 feet of the common property line between the office or business use and residential property. A buffer yard screen shall consist of any combination of an earthen berm, opaque fence constructed of materials compatible with the materials of buildings within the development and/or landscape plantings and shall be designed to provide a permanent, all-season visual screen that will be a minimum of five feet tall. If plantings are used, such elements must be a minimum of three feet high and wide at the time of planting and of a species that will attain a height and width of at least five feet within four years following planting. When such buffer yard planting is located within the required building setback from a public street right-of-way, the height of the plants within that setback area must be maintained at 30 inches or less. The location of the buffer yard planting should be offset from the property line a distance equal to any utility easement of any nature that may be located along and encompassing said line. 
e.  Development sites. Development sites shall satisfy the street frontage landscaping requirements and shall be graded to a mowable condition and seeded with an acceptable lawn mix. The term "development sites" means any land area that is a separate site, lot, parcel or a vacant portion of a larger site that is included within a development, but which is intended to be developed in the future for building, parking or other physical improvement purposes. 
(3)  Landscaping point credits. Credit for landscaping will be granted based on the following schedule: 
a.  Large deciduous tree: 150 points per tree. 
b.  Small deciduous tree: 60 points per tree. 
c.  Evergreen or conifer tree: 60 points tree. 
d.  Shrub: 20 points per shrub. 
e.  Annual/perennial bed: 20 points per 20 square feet of planted bed. 
(4)  Landscaping elements are defined as follows: 
a.  Large deciduous tree. A large deciduous tree is any deciduous tree that will attain a mature height exceeding 25 feet, is classified as having a hardiness zone standard of two to five and is at least 2½ inches in diameter at the time of planting. Large deciduous trees planted within the public street right-of-way shall be a species normally classified as street trees. Trees will be downsized appropriately when overhead utility lines exist within the terrace area. 
b.  Small deciduous tree. A small deciduous tree is any deciduous tree that will attain a mature height less than 25 feet, is classified as having a hardiness zone standard of two to five and is at least one inch in diameter at the time of planting. 
c.  Evergreen or conifer tree. Evergreen or conifer trees are any upright conifer that will attain a mature height exceeding 12 feet, is classified as having a hardiness zone standard of two to five and is at least four feet tall at the time of planting. 
d.  Shrubs. Shrubs are plants that are both deciduous or evergreen in character, attain mature heights between two and eight or more feet, are classified as having hardiness zone standards of two to five and that are at least 18 inches in height at the time of planting. 
e.  Annual/perennial beds. Annual/perennial beds are any planting area containing annual and perennial bedding plants or other ground covers such as creeping evergreens, that are intensively planted to form a continuous planting mass and are at least 20 contiguous square feet in area. 
(5)  Green areas of the site not used for landscaping shall be seeded or sodded with an acceptable maintainable lawn seed mix. Mulch of plantings or planting beds is acceptable, provided that such mulching consists of organic or natural materials. Mulches shall be installed so that they will not erode, fall, be plowed or otherwise transported into walks, drives, streets or other hard-surfaced portions of the site. Functional weed barriers will be installed in all areas to be mulched. 
(6)  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed consistent with industry accepted standards. Installation shall occur prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the site unless such occupancy occurs during winter, in which case the landscaping shall be completed by July 1 of the next summer. 
(7)  Maintenance. Landscaping required by this article is intended to be a permanent site improvement just as any other building, structure or infrastructure that is necessary to facilitate the intended use of the site. As such, all landscaping shall be continually maintained in a live state. Maintenance shall include periodic and timely watering, fertilizing, pruning and any other such normally required horticulture activity necessary to keep all landscaping in a healthy, safe and aesthetically pleasing state. Recognizing that, over time, plants may mature and die or otherwise expire because of natural or unnatural causes, maintenance shall include the removal and replacement of dead or dying plants. Such replacement shall occur within the same year in which a plant dies or in the spring planting season of the following year. 
(8)  Utility easements. Planting in utility easements should be avoided. If such planting does occur, it is at the risk of the property owner. Any plants that must be removed because of utility work within such easements shall be replaced by the property owner at their cost. Replacement landscaping shall satisfy the minimum standards of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 18.34.040)  
Sec. 42-389. - Exterior lighting and illumination standards. 
The intent of the following standards is to mitigate the impact of exterior illumination related to development on surrounding properties, particularly in areas proximal to residential uses, while providing safe, healthy and visually attractive nighttime environments. In order to achieve said environments, good lighting design shall be practiced. Good lighting design is characterized by: 
(1)  Illumination levels appropriate for the visual task. 
(2)  Reasonably uniform illumination levels on adjoining sites. 
(3)  An absence of glare. 
(4)  Consideration of the compatibility and aesthetics of illumination and the mechanical improvements that create it as those relate to surrounding properties and the character of the community. 
(5)  In order to ensure that proper lighting design occurs, the following standards shall apply to all development within the district. 
a.  All exterior lighting fixtures shall be full cut-off fixtures as defined by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA). All lighting shall be designed and fixtures selected to prevent glare. The Site Plan Review Coordinator may modify the cutoff fixture requirement for security lighting in areas where the exterior lights are not visible from a residential area or a public street. 
b.  Illumination of sites and improvements thereon shall be designed to avoid competition with illumination on adjoining or neighboring properties. 
c.  Illumination levels shall be appropriate for the intended improvement, area and/or function to be illuminated. In general, illumination levels should follow the guidelines and recommendations of the IESNA. 
d.  In no event shall any exterior illumination exceed an average illumination level of 20 footcandles for the surface to be illuminated unless approved otherwise by the Plan Commission as part of a conditional use permit. 
e.  The illumination uniformity ratio (the ratio of the average illumination to the minimum illumination) for the surface to be illuminated shall not exceed 4:1. 
f.  The illumination level at any property line shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle above the ambient lighting conditions on a cloudless night. 
g.  In no instance shall an outdoor lighting fixture be mounted or oriented such that the lighting element is visible from any residence located in a residential zone district. 
h.  The following shall be the maximum mounting height for the respective lighting fixture. The mounting height shall be measured from the surface to be illuminated to the bottom of the light fixture. 
1.  Parking lot light fixtures in lots containing 100 or fewer stalls: 18 feet. 
2.  Parking lot light fixtures in lots containing more than 100 stalls: 25 feet. 
3.  Building or security lighting: ten feet. 
4.  Any other site-lighting fixture 18 feet or as determined appropriate and consistent with the intent of this article by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. 
i.  Hours of operation. When a use is not in operation, only building mounted security lighting and up to 25 percent of all other outdoor lighting fixtures may remain illuminated. 
j.  Exterior illumination of wall-mounted, building-mounted or ground-mounted signs, architecture, landscaping, site amenities or other specialty illumination of any kind shall be designed consistent with the intent of this article. The provisions of Subsection (k) of this section shall apply to any such lighting. 
k.  Alternatives. Alternatives to these standards may be proposed to incorporate the use of a particular architectural style or theme or to incorporate innovative or unique illumination techniques. Such alternatives shall be presented to the Site Plan Review Coordinator with supportive evidence sufficient to determine that the proposal is consistent with intent of the heretofore-established standards. Approval of an alternative illumination plan is at the discretion of the Site Plan Review Coordinator. 
l.  A lighting plan, specifications for all proposed fixtures and photometric plan or other plans delineating illuminance levels that evidence compliance with the established standards are required for all developments in order to determine compliance with these standards. 
(Code 1976, § 18.34.050)  
Sec. 42-390. - Pedestrian and site amenity standards. 
The intent of the following regulations is to further the goal of providing and promoting alternative methods of access and travel to uses established within large-scale developments. Creating developments that provide ease of pedestrian or bicycle access is paramount. As such, the following development standards shall apply. 
(1)  At least one five-foot-wide sidewalk shall be provided between the primary entrance to any building and existing or planned public sidewalks, mid-block walkways and bike trails. 
(2)  If more than one building is proposed on a site or multiple adjoining sites are proposed for building development, on-site sidewalk links shall be provided between buildings. Said sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide and designed to provide convenient pedestrian access. Public sidewalks may satisfy this requirement if deemed appropriate by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. 
(3)  All parking, sidewalks, plazas, patios, and any other hard-surfaced site improvement shall comply with the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Site design shall place a priority of convenience on pedestrian movements rather than motor vehicle movements. 
(4)  Accommodations shall be made for bicycle access and parking. 
(5)  If more than one building is proposed on a site or multiple adjoining sites are proposed for building development, the site plan shall be reviewed by the Janesville Transit System (JTS) for consideration of creating a transit stop. If deemed necessary by JTS, a transit stop shall be constructed as part of the development or within the adjoining public right-of-way. Any such transit stop shall be connected to the development or site by an appropriate sidewalk. The cost of any such transit stop shall be paid for by the developer. 
(6)  If more than one building is proposed on a site or multiple adjoining sites are proposed for building development, site improvements shall include appropriate amenities for employees and patrons. The design of any such amenities shall be functional, inviting and compatible with the adjoining structures and uses. Such items may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Receptacles for refuse and recyclables. 
b.  Benches. 
c.  Information kiosks. 
d.  Potable water fountains. 
e.  Comprehensively designed newspaper boxes. 
f.  Employee lunch areas. 
g.  Flower beds, boxes or hanging baskets. 
h.  Works of art. 
i.  Smoking shelters. 
(Code 1976, § 18.34.060)  
Sec. 42-391. - Motor vehicle standards. 
Motor vehicles, their associated movement and parking represent one of the primary sources of impact from development on surrounding properties, especially residences. In order to reduce the impact associated with motor vehicles, the following standards shall apply to development within the district: 
(1)  Vehicle access for nonresidential development is prohibited from a local residential street unless said point of access is within 500 feet of a through or connecting arterial street as enumerated in Chapter 38, or in the opinion of the City Engineer, said local street will eventually be classified as a through or connecting arterial street. 
(2)  The parking of trucks, trailers of any motor vehicle weighing in excess of 1½ tons for more than a 24 hour period is prohibited. 
(3)  Off-street parking and loading shall be as provided in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. No more than 110 percent of the minimum number of parking stalls required by the aforesaid sections may be provided unless determined appropriate by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. 
(4)  No more than one-half of the parking stalls provided on a site shall be located between the front of the principal building or buildings and public street frontages unless, in the opinion of the Site Plan Review Coordinator, specific site limitations or adjoining land use considerations render such placement impractical or undesirable. The remaining parking shall be located in the side, corner side or rear yards of the site. Within the O3 District, all parking shall be placed in the interior side yard or rear yard unless, in the opinion of the Site Plan Review Coordinator, specific site limitations or adjoining land use considerations render such placement impractical or undesirable. 
(5)  Consideration shall be given to the use of nonreflective parking lot surfacing materials. 
(6)  All parking lots, driveways and other paved surfaces shall be properly striped, marked and signed to adequately define parking stalls, drive lanes, turning movements, fire lanes, prohibited movements or parking and any other such instructions necessary to facilitate safe pedestrian and motor vehicle movement. All such markings shall be designed and installed to place priority on pedestrian movements rather than motor vehicle movement. 
(7)  All pavement stripping, markings and signage shall be permanently maintained in order to provide for continual and safe pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle movements. 
(8)  Consideration shall be given to the use of best management practices for stormwater run-off. The use of on-site retention, rainwater gardens and other mitigation methods or strategies designed to reduce off-site stormwater run-off shall be incorporated into site development plans. All such proposals shall include management plans for any on-site water storage. 
(9)  For parking lots containing more than 25 stalls, poured in place concrete or equivalent curbing shall be installed in all high vehicle volume areas of the lot in order to define traffic movements, protect pavement edges and prevent disturbance or destruction of green areas and landscaping, to prevent erosion and to protect pedestrians. Said curbing shall be six inches tall and shall contain barrier-free design facilities where necessary and appropriate. 
(Code 1976, § 18.34.070)  
Sec. 42-392. - Streets, highway and traffic standards. 
Large developments generally involve significant land area and/or building area. As such they typically generate significant traffic and thus they often negatively impact existing street, highway and traffic improvements. In order to determine the impact from any such development on existing and planned streets, highways and traffic facilities, and to determine what, if any, new improvements are necessary to mitigate such impacts, a traffic study must be completed and submitted with each development proposal. Said study shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  A traffic impact study shall be completed for every large development as defined by the applicable zoning district regulations if determined necessary by the City Engineer. Said study shall be completed by a qualified engineer or equivalent professional or firm having past experience and expertise in completing such studies. 
(2)  The cost of the study shall be paid for by the applicant. 
(3)  The study shall analyze the existing transportation network in the area surrounding the large development site. This would entail identifying or collecting traffic volumes for all arterial, collector, and nonresidential local streets, conducting turning counts at major intersections, and a review of all planned transportation system improvements within an area surrounding the large development site as determined appropriate by the City Engineer. 
(4)  The study shall identify existing and projected traffic volumes and turning movements for the aforesaid transportation network components. Traffic projections should be based on the full build-out of all lands within the study area using City land use plans for those areas that are undeveloped. 
(5)  The study shall determine the existing and project the anticipated levels of service for all components of the transportation network within the study area as such levels of service are defined in the most recent edition of the Transportation Research Board's Highway Capacity Manual. 
(6)  The study shall make recommendations for all improvements that may be necessary to maintain a level of service of D or better for all components of the transportation network. The Plan Commission may modify this requirement if they find that the construction of such improvements are impractical or excessive. 
(7)  The study shall prorate on a percentage basis the portion of the need for any such improvements that can be attributed to the proposed large development covered by the study. 
(8)  The applicant may be responsible for the installation costs of any improvements necessary to maintain a level of service of D or better on the transportation network components that would be adversely affected by the proposed development. The Plan Commission may modify this requirement if they find that the construction of such improvements are impractical or excessive. 
(Code 1976, § 18.34.080)  
Secs. 42-393—42-412. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - MULTIFAMILY HOUSING 
 
Sec. 42-413. - Purpose. 
The following standards and provisions are hereby deemed necessary and are intended to: 
(1)  Protect the health and welfare of the citizenry; 
(2)  Provide adequate design and amenities for multifamily housing for the citizenry; 
(3)  Improve the quality of life for residents who live within multifamily housing; 
(4)  Improve the design quality and standards of amenities for citizens living within multifamily housing by creating developments utilizing long-lasting, high-quality construction and establishing minimum amenities for residents; 
(5)  Improve the visual image of multifamily housing within the City; 
(6)  Ensure that the design and density of multifamily housing is appropriate in relation to the development site and surrounding land uses; 
(7)  Maximize usable open space within multifamily developments; 
(8)  Apply best management practices to stormwater management; 
(9)  Recognize the physical, environmental, social and psychological benefits of good design of all aspects of multifamily housing development, including, but not limited to, building construction, building, design, site layout, landscaping and resident amenities. 
(Code 1976, § 18.35.010)  
Sec. 42-414. - Application of standards. 
(a)  The standards codified and established by this chapter shall apply to the physical development of all multifamily housing development of vacant land and multifamily residential redevelopment of all lands that are zoned R3M, R3, R4, O1, O2 and B6. For purposes of this chapter, redevelopment is defined as the removal of any building, structure and/or improvement for the purpose or intent of constructing, erecting, creating, or otherwise improving the underlying land area with new buildings, structures, uses and/or improvements. The standards contained herein shall also apply to multifamily residential building additions which double the gross floor area or number of units of any existing multifamily residential building. 
(b)  Compliance with the regulations contained herein shall be determined by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. The Coordinator may, at his or her discretion, consult with the Planning Director, City Engineer, Director of Public Works, Chief Building Division Director and Fire Inspector or their designees for their input, information, expertise and opinion regarding the status of compliance with said regulations. Applicants that are in disagreement or aggrieved with the findings of the Site Plan Review Coordinator may request mediation of Coordinator's actions by the Plan Commission as outlined in Section 42-273(f). 
(Code 1976, § 18.35.020)  
Sec. 42-415. - Architectural standards. 
The intent of the following standards is to ensure that multifamily residential development results in the creation of functional, safe and aesthetically pleasing high quality, living environment. A high quality living environment is one that is designed to create living arrangements which meet the needs of the residents with high-quality, long lasting building construction and minimum standards for safety in the design of the built and site environment. It should also provide an environmentally compatible and pedestrian friendly environment, which harmoniously co-exists with lower density residential development and commercial development, which may be located nearby. 
(1)  Maximum building size: in accord with the applicable zoning district standard. 
(2)  The maximum height of any building, structure or use shall be in accord with the applicable zoning district standard. 
(3)  The size, bulk and shape of buildings shall be compatible with the shape and size of the parcel of land which it is located upon. Also the building massing shall be compatible with the buildings located on parcels in the surrounding neighborhood. When such surrounding buildings consist of dramatically different sizes and styles that may not be compatible with each other, new buildings shall be designed to provide a transition between such other buildings. Where there are few or no surrounding buildings, the size, bulk and shape of buildings shall be consistent with the planned character of what will be the surrounding development as reflected in City's Comprehensive Plan and other adopted plans for the area. 
(4)  When a single building is constructed on an individual lot, the front facade of the structure shall be oriented towards the street frontage of the site. 
(5)  Front building facades shall not utilize a garage as the most predominant architectural element visible from the street, depending upon the overall layout of the site. When attached individual garages are constructed, the garage should be connected to the residential unit through the rear or side, in a manner that de-emphasizes the garage. Detached garages shall also be located in a manner which does not make it a predominant architectural element. 
(6)  Buildings, particularly large structures, shall be designed to reduce the physical and visual scale and/or appearance through the use of varied design elements, including, but not limited to, varied setbacks, building height, roof treatments, multiple gables, door and window openings, balconies and patios, and other structural and decorative elements. In addition, consideration should be given to varying the vertical walls of buildings with exterior horizontal wall protrusions and recesses and also the tops of walls and roof eaves through the use of varying vertical heights from the ground plane. Multifamily residential buildings shall have residential-styled gabled or hip roofs, except where the character of surrounding buildings suggest that other roof styles are appropriate. 
(7)  All buildings shall have structure or dwelling unit entrances clearly visible from parking areas and defined with varied facade materials, roofs, canopies, porticos or other features that identify them and invite residents and visitors to them. Large buildings with central doors/hallways to individual units shall provide multiple entrances convenient to parking and pedestrian improvements. Separate entrances shall be provided for each residential unit for smaller buildings, where practical. 
(8)  Exterior building materials shall be durable and low maintenance. Buildings must consist primarily of wood, brick, stucco and/or similar materials. The Site Plan Review Coordinator may approve the moderate use of residential character vinyl and seamless metal siding, when the building incorporates architectural features which limit long sections of siding along any elevation. 
(9)  Building design and architectural elements shall be applied to all sides of buildings with particular attention to elevations that face lower density residential uses and public streets. 
(10)  Multiple buildings on one lot or multiple buildings constructed in a single development on individual lots shall include consistent architectural design elements which create a unified development pattern. 
(11)  Roof materials shall be consistent with that of Section 42-440(a)(11)(f), unless an alternative roof material is architecturally appropriate in a particular location as determined by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. 
(12)  In general, colors used on the exteriors of buildings should be nonreflective, subtle or neutral tones. Bright, vibrant or highly reflective colors or surfaces shall not be used. 
(13)  All permanent trash/recyclable storage areas shall be completely screened from view by an opaque vertical wall or fence that is a minimum of five feet in height or greater as necessary to adequately screen the trash enclosure. Said wall or fence shall be constructed of the same or complimentary materials as the building that it serves. Loading and trash storage areas shall be designed in consultation with professional service providers in order to accommodate all desired functions within the screened area. Loading and trash storage areas shall be proximal to the building they serve in order to provide convenience in access for residents using such facilities. 
(14)  Ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be located out of site from adjoining public streets and screened with landscaping, walls which are incorporated into the facade by the same or similar building material or fences. 
(15)  Site layouts shall be done in a manner which maximizes open space on a site. This is particularly important for sites which have multiple buildings. Surface parking shall be prohibited in front and corner side yard setback areas. Methods to maximize open space include, but are not limited to, promoting multiple-story buildings, utilizing underground parking and clustering of buildings on a development site. Buildings which incorporate 30 or more units shall be constructed with secure, underground parking. 
(Code 1976, § 18.35.030)  
Sec. 42-416. - Landscaping standards. 
The landscaping standards contained herein establish a point system to determine the appropriateness and effectiveness of plant installation. The system recognizes that the installation and maintenance of live plants is essential to creating a healthy, safe and aesthetically pleasing environment. The system places priority on the planting of deciduous shade trees, which results in the highest level of environmental impact mitigation. As such all real property proposed for multifamily development shall be landscaped as follows: 
(1)  Planting designs. Planting designs shall concentrate on shading building roofs, parking lots, pedestrian facilities and the adjoining public streets. Secondary importance is focused on foundation and screening plantings intended to soften the transition from the ground plane to the vertical plane. 
(2)  Landscaping requirements. Landscaping shall be provided based on the following requirements or point schedules. Landscaping is defined as living plants normally selected for use on residential sites. These requirements supersede any other landscaping or screening requirements of the zoning ordinance. The requirements of each of the following categories are additive and must be satisfied independently, including buffer yard requirements. 
a.  Street frontages. One large deciduous tree shall be planted for each 50 feet of property line along a public street right-of-way. Said trees shall be planted in the public terrace equidistant from the curb and the normal sidewalk line or on the private site and within ten feet of the property line adjoining the public right-of-way. The preference for tree locations is on private property. The trees should be planted as near as possible at intervals of 50 feet on center although the clustering of trees for valid design purposes may be allowed. 
b.  Paved areas. One hundred fifty points of landscaping shall be planted for each 3,000 square feet of paving. At least one-half of the landscape points required shall be satisfied by the planting of large deciduous trees. Paving is defined as all hard-surfaced areas within the ground plane, including, but not limited to, parking stalls, driveways, trash enclosure pads, sidewalks, plazas and patios. Paving areas shall not include pools or playgrounds. Plants required by this section shall be installed in landscape islands within or extending into the paved area or generally within 15 feet of the perimeter of the edges of the paved area. Parking lots containing more than 25 stalls shall incorporate at least one-third of the required landscaping within planting islands that are located within the interior of the parking lot. Such islands shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 360 square feet in area and shall contain at least one large deciduous. Said islands should be evenly dispersed throughout the parking lot. Emphasis should be placed creating islands that function positively with respect to plant physiology, vehicle maneuvering and overall site maintenance. Linear islands located between rows of parking stalls are preferred rather than small islands located at the ends of parking rows. 
c.  Building foundations. Three hundred points of landscaping for each 100 linear feet of exterior building wall. Plants required by this section must generally be installed within 20 feet of the building foundation. Large deciduous trees shall not be used as foundation plantings. Foundation plantings should be concentrated along the front elevation of the building. 
d.  Large open spaces. Where large open spaces are created by the layout of a multifamily development that exceeds one acre in area, the large open space shall include large deciduous trees to create shade within the open space. A large open space is an area of at least 3,000 square feet and shall include at least one large deciduous tree, in addition to other planting requirements found in this section. 
e.  Buffer yards. There shall be provided and maintained a permanent 25-foot-wide buffer yard screening element along any boundary of a multifamily residential development or building and any single- or two-family residential district. Said buffer yard screening element is intended to visually screen the multifamily structure from the adjoining low-density residential development. The buffer yard screen shall be located along the common property line between the multifamily residential development and the single- or two-family residential district. A buffer yard screen shall consist of any combination of an earthen berm, opaque fence constructed of materials compatible with the materials of buildings within the development and/or landscape plantings and shall be designed to provide a permanent all-season visual screen that will be a minimum of five feet tall. If plantings are used, such elements must be a minimum of three feet high and wide at the time of planting and of a species that will attain a height and width of at least five feet within four years following planting. When such buffer yard planting is located within the required building setback from a public street right-of-way the height of the plants within that setback area must be maintained at 30 inches or less. The location of the buffer yard planting should be offset from the property line a distance equal to any utility easement of any nature that may be located along and encompassing said line. 
f.  Development sites. Development sites shall satisfy the street frontage landscaping requirements and shall be graded to a mowable condition and seeded with an acceptable lawn mix. Development sites are defined as any land area that is a separate site, lot, parcel or a vacant portion of a larger site that is included within a development but which is intended to be developed in the future for building, parking or other physical improvement purposes. 
(3)  Landscaping point credits. Credit for landscaping will be granted based on the following schedule: 
a.  Large deciduous tree: 150 points per tree. 
b.  Small deciduous tree: 60 points per tree. 
c.  Evergreen or conifer tree: 60 points tree. 
d.  Shrub: 20 points per shrub. 
e.  Annual/perennial bed: 20 points per 20 square feet of planted bed. 
(4)  Landscaping elements are defined as follows: 
Evergreen or conifer tree means any upright conifer that will attain a mature height exceeding 12 feet, is classified as having a hardiness zone standard of two to five and is at least four feet tall at the time of planting. 
Large deciduous tree means any deciduous tree that will attain a mature height exceeding 25 feet, is classified as having a hardiness zone standard of two to five and is at least 2½ inches in diameter at the time of planting. Large deciduous trees planted within the public street right-of-way shall be a species normally classified as street trees. Trees will be downsized appropriately when overhead utility lines exist within the terrace area. 
Shrubs means plants that are both deciduous or evergreen in character, attain mature heights between two to eight or more feet, are classified as having hardiness zone standards of two to five and that are at least 18 inches in height at the time of planting. 
Small deciduous tree means any deciduous tree that will attain a mature height less than 25 feet, is classified as having a hardiness zone standard of two to five and is at least one inch in diameter at the time of planting. 
(5)  Green areas of the site not used for landscaping shall be seeded or sodded with an acceptable maintainable lawn seed mix. Mulch of plantings or planting beds is acceptable, provided that such mulching consists of organic or natural materials. Mulches shall be installed so that they will not erode, fall, be plowed or otherwise transported into walks, drives, streets or other hard surfaced portions of the site. Functional weed barriers will be installed in all areas to be mulched. 
(6)  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed consistent with industry accepted standards. Installation shall occur prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the site unless such occupancy occurs during winter, in which case the landscaping shall be completed by July 1 of the following summer. 
(7)  Maintenance. Landscaping required by this chapter is intended to be a permanent site improvement just as any other building, structure or infrastructure that is necessary to facilitate the intended use of the site. As such, all landscaping shall be continually maintained in a live state. Maintenance shall include periodic and timely watering, fertilizing, pruning and any other such normally required horticulture activity necessary to keep all landscaping in a healthy, safe and aesthetically pleasing state. Recognizing that over time plants may mature and die or otherwise expire because of natural or unnatural causes, maintenance shall include the removal and replacement of dead or dying plants. Such replacement shall occur within the same year in which a plant dies or in the spring planting season of the following year. 
(8)  Utility easements. Planting in utility easements should be avoided. If such planting does occur, it is at the risk of the property owner. Any plants that must be removed because of utility work within such easements shall be replaced by the property owner at their cost. Replacement landscaping shall satisfy the minimum standards of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 18.35.040)  
Sec. 42-417. - Safe layout and site design standards. 
(a)  The intent of the following regulations is to promote safe design of multifamily developments by creating safe, defensible living environments through design which creates an environment that limits dark and hidden spaces, provides clear pedestrian connections between buildings and parking areas, allows for residents to take ownership of their living space and to provide an environment which police can adequately patrol. Creating developments where residents are safe is the paramount goal. In order to promote these goals, the following development standards shall apply. 
(b)  Buildings and site layouts shall meet the prescribed building and fire code requirements. 
(c)  Multiple residential buildings on a site shall have a minimum separation of 40 feet. This dimension may be reduced to 20 feet when the narrow side of the buildings adjoin each other, provided that the buildings are oriented in a manner which does not align windows on one building with windows on another. 
(d)  No detached parking garage may be located within 20 feet of a residential structure and may not be located closer to the front property line than the principal building. 
(e)  Buildings with interior corridors shall be constructed with secure entryways. Secured entryways shall require that residents of the structure, either remotely or at the entry door to the building allow persons to enter the structure. 
(f)  Building entrances shall be constructed in a manner that provides a safe, inviting environment. A building entry shall not be hidden from view from the front of the building or from a parking area and shall not create dark, hidden spaces between the entry and a parking area. 
(g)  Each exterior entry for an individual unit or entry into a larger building with corridors to individual units shall be provided with a light with a minimum 60-watt incandescent lamp which shall illuminate automatically at dusk and shall be dark during the daylight hours. Full cutoff fixtures shall be utilized whenever possible. 
(h)  Buildings with garage/underground parking shall provide secured doors allowing only residents of the building to gain entry. 
(i)  Pedestrian sidewalks providing connections (other than parking lots) between multiple buildings and other on-site amenities shall be provided. Said sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide and designed to provide convenient pedestrian access. Public sidewalks may satisfy this requirement if deemed appropriate by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. 
(j)  Site layouts should provide a logical system of building/street addressing or numbering to allow for easy access by emergency vehicles as determined by the Chief of Police, Fire Inspector and the Site Plan Review Coordinator, jointly and/or severally. 
(k)  Sites with multiple buildings shall orient facades towards one another or towards common open areas and green spaces. Structures with individual garages for vehicles shall de-emphasize the garage through the building/site layout. 
(l)  Lighting of parking areas shall meet the requirements of Section 42-389 except that the maximum average illumination may not exceed five footcandles and the maximum height for any parking lot light fixture shall be 18 feet. 
(m)  Lighting of major walkways must be provided, either by residential style lights on the front facades, or by residential style and scale yard lamps. If more than one building is proposed on a site or multiple adjoining sites are proposed for building development, on-site sidewalk links shall be provided between buildings. 
(n)  Multiple buildings on a site are to be oriented in a manner which does not align windows on one building with windows on another. 
(o)  Slopes on a site shall not exceed a 4:1 ratio unless the natural topography of the site already exceeds such 4:1 slope. In that case, the slope shall not be disturbed. 
(p)  All parking, sidewalks, plazas, patios, and any other hard-surfaced site improvement shall comply with the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Site design shall place a priority of convenience on pedestrian movements rather than motor vehicle movements. 
(q)  No driveway or paved vehicular surface may be located within ten feet of any multiple-family residential structure or within five feet of any property line. 
(r)  Projects developed as a single, unified project, which requires shared functional elements (drives, parking, pedestrian connections, etc.) shall not be further divided to create separate fee simple ownership, regardless of the ability of the subdivision plat or Certified Survey Map meeting the regulations of the subdivision regulations. Only developments approved as a planned unit development and specifically designed for fee simple ownership shall be permitted to be divided for fee simple ownership. 
(Code 1976, § 18.35.050)  
Sec. 42-418. - Site amenity standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The intent of the following regulations is to further the goal of providing additional amenities for residents within multifamily housing structures and complexes. Creating developments that provide amenities to improve the minimum living standards for those residents who reside in multifamily housing is paramount. As such, the following development standards shall apply. 
(1)  At least one five-foot-wide sidewalk shall be provided between the primary entrance to any building and existing or planned public sidewalks, mid-block walkways, bike trails and parking areas. 
(2)  All residential units shall be provided with a private open space of at least 32 square feet in area. This can be accomplished through construction of a patio space or a balcony for an upper-story unit. 
(3)  If more than one building is proposed on a site or multiple adjoining sites are proposed for building development, on-site sidewalk links shall be provided between buildings and amenities on a site. Said sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide and designed to provide convenient pedestrian access. Public sidewalks may satisfy this requirement if deemed appropriate by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. 
(4)  All parking, sidewalks, plazas, patios, and any other hard-surfaced site improvement shall comply with the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(5)  Accommodations shall be made for bicycle access and parking. 
(6)  If more than 50 units are to be developed on one site or adjoining sites, the site plan shall be reviewed by the Janesville Transit System (JTS) for consideration of creating a transit stop. If deemed necessary by JTS, a transit stop shall be constructed as part of the development or within the adjoining public right-of-way. Any such transit stop shall be connected to the development or site by an appropriate sidewalk. The cost and ongoing maintenance of any such transit stop shall be paid for by the developer and/or property owner. 
(7)  Multifamily developments containing more than 50 units either on a single lot or multiple lots shall include site amenities which are commensurate with the scale of the project in land area, number of units and the anticipated market for the project as listed below. The design of any such amenities shall be functional, inviting and compatible with the adjoining structures and uses. Such amenities include: 
a.  Porch/balcony swings. 
b.  Benches. 
c.  Large patio/congregation areas. 
d.  Playgrounds. 
e.  Tennis/basketball courts. 
f.  Clubhouses/party or meeting room. 
g.  Site internal walkway systems and/or exercise trails. 
h.  Indoor workout/weight training/aerobics space. 
i.  Garden plots. 
(b)  Enhancement of stormwater detention facilities designed for and maintained as a site amenity. 
(Code 1976, § 18.35.060)  
Sec. 42-419. - Motor vehicle standards. 
Impacts from motor vehicles and necessary parking for multifamily residential uses, especially large complexes can create significant impacts on surrounding uses, especially lower density residential housing. In order to address the potential impacts from motor vehicles in multifamily developments, the following standards shall apply to multifamily residential development constructed under these regulations. 
(1)  Vehicle access for large multifamily residential development (over 200 units) is prohibited from a local residential street unless said point of access is within 500 feet of a through or connecting arterial street as enumerated in Chapter 38 or, in the opinion of the City Engineer, said local street will eventually be classified as a through or connecting arterial street. 
(2)  Off-street parking and loading shall be as provided in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. Parking shall be provided for visitors, in excess of the required minimum number of parking spaces. Visitor parking shall be provided at a ratio of one parking space for every eight units. The required visitor parking space cannot be assigned to an individual apartment unit. 
(3)  Parking shall not be located in any front or corner side yard setback area. 
(4)  If a structure includes over 30 units, at least 40 percent of the required parking shall be located within secured, underground parking. Such parking shall be located either underneath the structure or underneath a green area on the site. Building footprints shall not be significantly raised or stilted to accommodate parking underneath the structure. 
(5)  No driveway or paved vehicular surface may be located within ten feet of any multiple-family residential structure or within five feet of any property line. 
(6)  Required parking provided in an enclosed garage cannot be separately leased to tenants. 
(7)  Consideration shall be given to the use of non-reflective parking lot surfacing materials. 
(8)  All parking lots, driveways and other paved surfaces shall be properly striped, marked and signed to adequately define parking stalls, drive lanes, turning movements, fire lanes, prohibited movements or parking and any other such instructions necessary to facilitate safe pedestrian and motor vehicle movement. All such markings shall be designed and installed to place priority on pedestrian movements rather than motor vehicle movement. 
(9)  All pavement stripping, markings and signage shall be permanently maintained in order to provide for continual and safe pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle movements. 
(10)  Consideration shall be given to the use of best management practices for stormwater run-off. The use of on-site retention, rainwater gardens and other mitigation methods or strategies designed to reduce off-site stormwater run-off shall be incorporated into site development plans. All such proposals shall include management plans for any on-site water storage. 
(11)  For parking lots containing more than 25 stalls, poured in place concrete or equivalent curbing shall be installed in all high vehicle volume areas of the lot in order to define traffic movements, protect pavement edges and prevent disturbance or destruction of green areas and landscaping, to prevent erosion and to protect pedestrians. Said curbing shall be six inches tall and shall contain barrier free design facilities where necessary and appropriate. 
(Code 1976, § 18.35.070)  
Sec. 42-420. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the provisions of this article are severable in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this article to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this article not specifically included in the judgment. 
(2)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this article to a particular property, building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in the judgment. 
(Code 1976, § 18.35.080)  
Secs. 42-421—42-438. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS 
 
Sec. 42-439. - Zoning districts and maps. 
(a)  General requirements for districts. 
(1)  Zoning districts established. In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this article, the following zoning districts are established: 
a.  Residence districts. 
1.  R1 Single-Family and Two-Family Residence District. 
2.  R1D Two-Family Residence District. 
3.  R2 Limited General Residence District. 
4.  R3M Medium Density Residence District. 
5.  R3 General Residence District. 
6.  R4 Central Residence District. 
b.  Office/residence districts. 
1.  O1 Office/Residence District. 
2.  O2 Central Office/Residence District. 
3.  O3 Neighborhood Office District. 
c.  Business districts. 
1.  B1 Neighborhood Convenience District. 
2.  B2 Community Shopping District. 
3.  B3 General Commercial District. 
4.  B4 Business Highway. 
5.  B5 Central Business District. 
6.  B6 Central Service District. 
7.  BT Business Technology District. 
d.  Industrial districts. 
1.  M1 Light Industrial District. 
2.  M2 General Industrial District. 
3.  M3 Central Light Industrial District. 
4.  M4 Central General Industrial District. 
e.  Special purpose districts. 
1.  A Agriculture District. 
2.  M Mining District. 
3.  C Conservancy District. 
f.  Overlay districts. 
1.  F Floodplain Overlay District. 
2.  P Parking Overlay District. 
3.  H Historic Overlay District. 
(b)  Zoning district maps. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are established as shown on maps entitled "zoning district map" on file in the office of the City Planner. The zoning district map, together with all information shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully set forth and described herein. 
(c)  Rules for location of district boundary lines. Boundaries of zoning district lines that follow streets and alleys shall be drawn to the centerline. Where a dimensional boundary line appears to coincide with a lot, parcel, or section line which existed on the effective date of incorporation of such boundary line into the zoning map, the said line shall be construed to be the lot, parcel, or section line at that location. Streets and alleys which are shown on the zoning district map and which heretofore have been vacated, or which may be vacated hereafter, shall be in the same zoning district as the lots, or parcels abutting both sides of the street or alley involved. 
(Code 1976, § 18.36.010)  
Sec. 42-440. - Residence districts. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  A permitted use is a use of land or buildings which is specifically allowed in the regulations applicable to a particular residence district. No land or building shall be devoted to any use other than one listed as a permitted use in the applicable zone with the exception of the following: 
a.  Uses lawfully established on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; and 
b.  Conditional uses allowed in accordance with the provisions of Section 42-272. 
Uses lawfully established on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof, shall be subject to those regulations of Section 42-359 governing nonconforming uses. 
(2)  Green area. Green area shall be permanently provided and properly maintained on each lot devoted to any permitted or conditional use as set forth in each residential zoning district. This area shall be unobstructed to the sky and shall not be devoted to service driveways, walks, off-street parking spaces, loading berths, or other similar uses, but shall be usable for greenery, recreational space, and other leisure activities normally carried on outdoors. At least 50 percent of the green area requirement shall be provided in the front or corner side yard between the principal building and the front or corner side property line. In no event shall this requirement necessitate the principal building be set back a distance greater than the minimum front setback of the zoning district in which the property is located. 
(3)  Open space. Open space shall be provided on each lot devoted to any permitted or conditional use as set forth in each residential district. Open space may be devoted to service driveways, walks, off-street parking space, swimming pools, tennis courts, green area, or other similar uses, but no building or structure shall be permitted within the required open space. The open space requirement specified in the R1 and R2 Districts may include the required green area. 
(4)  Parking of camping and recreational equipment on private residential property. 
a.  Any owner of camping and recreational equipment may park or store such equipment on private residential property subject to the following conditions: 
1.  At no time shall such parked or stored camping and recreational equipment be occupied or used for living or housekeeping purposes. 
2.  If the lot is equipped with a garage of sufficient size, any such camping or recreational equipment shall be parked or stored inside the garage. 
3.  If the camping and recreational equipment is parked or stored outside a garage it shall be parked or stored to the rear of the front building line of the building, providing that there is reasonable access to the rear of said line via an existing driveway to allow such parking or storing. 
4.  If the lot is not equipped with a garage or reasonable access to the rear of the front line of the building via an existing driveway, then the camping and recreational equipment shall be parked or stored in the driveway of the lot, providing that such parking or storage does not interfere with normal use of any public sidewalk. 
5.  No camping and recreational equipment shall be permitted to be parked or stored in the required side yard setback unless it is parked or stored in the driveway. 
6.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (4)a.2 through (4)a.5 of this section, camping and recreational equipment may be parked anywhere on the premises for loading or unloading purposes for a period of time not to exceed 48 hours. 
7.  No more than two camping and recreational equipment vehicles designed for human habitation shall be permitted on any one lot. 
b.  For the purposes of this section, camping and recreational equipment includes, but is not limited to, boats, boat trailers, camping trailers, fifth wheel travel trailers, motor homes, private buses, snowmobiles, travel trailers, and truck campers. Motor-driven cycles and mopeds shall not be considered recreational equipment for purposes of this section. 
(5)  Established setback line. Where at least 50 percent of the three adjacent lots improved with residences on either side of the building lot in question on one side of the street within the same block have a front/corner side setback less than required by this chapter, an average front/corner side setback shall be computed for the defined area. Any new residence and new alteration of any existing residence may conform to that average front/corner side setback. For the purpose of computing such an average front/corner side setback, vacant lots within the defined area shall be considered as having the minimum front/corner side setback required in that zone district. 
(6)  Setbacks for L-shaped, two-family residences. Where a two-family residence is located on a corner lot, is L-shaped, and is addressed on two different streets, the minimum setback requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  Any yard abutting a street: 25 feet; 
b.  Side yard (unattached end of each unit): eight feet; 
c.  Rear yard (area behind each unit): 25 feet. 
(7)  Greater side and rear setbacks required for multiple-family 2½ stories or higher and nonresidential. Where a multiple-family building greater than 2½ stories in height or a nonresidential building is to be constructed on a lot adjoining a residential use in an R1 or R2 District, side and rear yard setback shall be 25 feet or equal in dimension to the height of such multiple-family or nonresidential building as it sits above grade, whichever is greater. 
(8)  Use of trucks, travel trailers or mobile homes. 
a.  Trucks, travel trailers or mobile homes shall not be permitted in any residence district as principal or accessory buildings except as provided for in mobile home courts or travel trailer camp regulations in compliance with this chapter or for temporary offices for construction sites. The parking or storage of semitrailer cab units, truck trailers, or trucks over 12,000 pounds g.v.w. is prohibited in any residence district except as provided in Subsection (a)(8)b; 
b.  The following vehicles are exempt from the maximum weight restriction in this section: 
1.  Human service vehicles as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(23g) as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
2.  Registered vehicles bearing antique license plates issued by the State of Wisconsin. 
3.  Registered vehicles bearing collector license plates issued by the State of Wisconsin. 
4.  Registered vehicles bearing hobbyist license plates issued by the State of Wisconsin. 
5.  Medium-duty wrecker tow trucks or flat beds that are currently on-call through the no-preference tow rotation and meet the following requirements: 
(i)  Do not have a towed vehicle attached to or at the property. 
(ii)  Parked in the driveway not encroaching onto the sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
(iii)  The address of the on-call employee has been previously provided to the City of Janesville. 
(iv)  A home occupation is not being conducted at a residential location. 
(9)  Driveway openings. Driveway openings shall be located at least 40 feet from a block corner with the exception of single- and two-family driveway openings which shall be located at least 25 feet from a block corner. The maximum driveway opening shall be no greater than 24 feet at the sidewalk line and 30 feet at the curb. For single- or two-family residences which have garages that accommodate three or more cars and that have direct access to a public street, the Building Division Director may increase the maximum driveway width to 30 feet at the sidewalk line and 36 feet at the curb. The Building Division Director may increase the maximum driveway opening to a width not greater than 36 feet at the sidewalk line and 42 feet at the curb to accommodate access to two-car garages for side-by-side two-family dwellings. Where a drive is in joint use with adjoining properties, there shall be at least ten feet of drive on each parcel. The Site Plan Review Coordinator shall have the discretionary authority to increase described single- and two-family driveway opening standards as he or she deems necessary for the specific lot and under the particular facts and circumstances, but in no event ever more than 20 percent of the requirement. 
(10)  Revocation of community living arrangements by City Council. A permit to operate a community living arrangement may be revoked by the City Council if it is determined that a community living arrangement poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the community following a public hearing in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(i) 9 and 10. 
(11)  Standards for single-family dwellings. Single-family dwellings, except those in designated mobile home parks, shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
a.  Installed on an enclosed permanent foundation; 
b.  Minimum floor area excluding the garage, decks, porches, and basement: 800 square feet of heated living space; 
c.  Minimum width of short side of dwelling: 24 feet; 
d.  Minimum core area of heated living space: 24 feet by 24 feet; 
e.  Pitched roof required with a minimum slope of three inches in height for each foot of width; 
f.  Permitted roof surfacing materials (including accessory garages and carports): wood shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or wood shingles, clay, concrete or metal tiles, slate, rubber membrane, built-up gravel materials; 
g.  Exterior siding shall extend to the top of the foundation. If the top of the foundation is below grade, the siding shall extend to the ground; and 
h.  Permitted exterior siding materials (including accessory garages and carports): wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, vinyl, metal lap. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may waive one or more of the above minimum standards, except the standard in Subsection (a)(16) of this section, upon a finding that the proposed architectural style provides compensating design features and the dwelling will be compatible with other dwellings in the neighborhood. 
(12)  Enclosure of refuse storage area. With the exception of properties which are provided curbside pickup from the City, trash or refuse storage areas are permitted outside the principal building, provided that: 
a.  Such storage areas are adequately screened from view from any point on the perimeter of the site except as approved otherwise by the Site Plan Review Coordinator; 
b.  Such storage area enclosure shall be made of the same material as the immediate adjacent wall of the principal building or such material as would not detract from the immediate surrounding neighborhood as approved by the Site Plan Review Coordinator; 
c.  Such storage area enclosure shall extend from the ground level to a minimum height of five feet and in no case shall be lower in height than that of trash receptacles. 
This section shall not apply to refuse storage areas which were legally nonconforming prior to November 13, 2000. 
(13)  Temporary real estate sales offices. A temporary real estate sales office does not require prior Plan Commission or City Council review or approval, but shall be permitted by the Site Plan Review Coordinator, but only in strict conformity with the following provisions: 
a.  A temporary use permit shall be required for every temporary real estate sales office in any new residential subdivision or residential planned unit development, but only in the event such new residential subdivision or residential planned unit development has been approved in accordance with this chapter and the other applicable City of Janesville Subdivision Regulations. One temporary real estate sales office may be allowed per builder or developer within a new residential subdivision or residential planned unit development. The temporary permit for a temporary real estate sales office shall be initially valid for not more than one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewable annually thereafter by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. The temporary real estate sales office use shall fully terminate and discontinue, and the office shall be removed, within 30 days after the sale of the last unit or lot in the development or subdivision. All sales and related activities conducted within the temporary sales office at all times shall be directly related to the sale of properties within the particular development or subdivision solely for the initial sale of the homes therein. The temporary sales office shall not be used for general office operation, retail sales of merchandise or building materials, storage, or other use by the permittee or by any other firm, business, associate or persons. 
b.  A temporary real estate sales office may be established by a builder and/or developer of the subdivision who either owns or has the options to purchase at least ten lots or units within the subdivision or development for which the use is located. 
c.  Parking noise, congestion, unwanted vehicular activities, and other complaints filed with the City regarding the operation of the temporary real estate sales office shall be immediately remedied by the permittee and all violations immediately terminated upon notice from the City. All City of Janesville ordinances, including, but not limited to, parking, lighting, noise, debris, littering, nuisance, signage, building and zoning codes shall be strictly adhered to by the permittee at all times. 
d.  If off-street parking is requested by the permittee or required by the Site Plan Review Coordinator, a temporary parking lot may be installed as an addendum to the Temporary Real Estate Sales Office permit. The parking lot shall be paved, landscaped and appropriately graded and drained to dispose of all surface water by the permittee. The parking lot shall be removed and appropriately seeded and landscaped by the permittee when the temporary sales office use is discontinued. At the time of parking lot approval, the Site Plan Review Coordinator may require that a performance bond be filed by the permittee and held by the City in an amount determined by the Site Plan Review Coordinator to be sufficient to cover the removal cost of the parking lot and landscaping restoration of the parking lot area. 
e.  A site plan, prepared in accordance with the Site Plan Review Ordinance Section 42-274, including exterior elevations (four sides), interior floor plans, and landscape plans shall be provided with the site plan permit application. 
f.  The hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. each day or as otherwise determined by the Site Plan Review Coordinator, including more limited hours. 
g.  Signage placed on the temporary real estate sales office lot shall be limited to one monument-style sign, 16 square feet in area, and comply with the standards of Chapter 28. 
h.  The Site Plan Review Coordinator shall have the authority to suspend, revoke, or modify a temporary use permit immediately upon his or her determination that any of the conditions or requirements set forth in the permit or directions by the Site Plan Review Coordinator have been violated. Written notice of the Site Plan Review Coordinator's determination to suspend, revoke, or modify the permit shall be promptly provided to the permittee by any reasonable means including, but not limited to, personal service, mail or posting upon the temporary real estate sales office. The permittee shall have 48 hours (based on business days/work week calendar) to contact the Site Plan Review Coordinator and present the permittee's plan to cure. The Site Plan Review Coordinator will then give the permittee a timetable to cure, not to exceed 48 hours, except for noise, litter, traffic and parking matters which shall be corrected immediately upon notice. If the permittee fails to cure the violation, the temporary real estate sales office permit may be suspended or revoked by the Coordinator upon notice to the permittee and violations may be prosecuted. All City rights and remedies are cumulative and not exclusive. The reinstatement of the temporary real estate sales office permit may be granted by the Site Plan Review Coordinator or designee upon his or her determination of the adequacy of the cure. 
i.  There shall be no more than five employees maximum on-site conducting sales activities or other work activities in such temporary real estate sales office at any one time. 
(b)  District requirements. 
(1)  R1 Single-Family and Two-Family Residence District. The R1 District is created to allow for low density residential areas with limited concentrations of two-family dwellings allowed by conditional use permit. The R1 district is generally mapped in outlying urban parts of the City. 
a.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Single-family dwellings; 
2.  Parks, playgrounds and open spaces; 
3.  Schools: elementary, junior high and senior high; 
4.  Church facilities but not including related convention or assembly facilities or the storage of buses or other motor vehicles on the premises; 
5.  Home occupations in accord with Section 42-275; 
6.  Community living arrangements for eight or fewer individuals and adult family homes subject to the following provisions: 
(i)  Those which provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, defined in Section 18-21 as from time to time amended, shall not be subject to a minimum spacing requirement from another community living arrangement or adult family home; 
(ii)  Those which do not provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, including, but not limited to, housing for parolees or juveniles who are not disabled, shall be located no closer than 2,500 feet from another community living arrangement or adult family home; 
7.  Raising grain or hay crops for cash sale or for use as feed, provided such feed use is conducted on-premises located outside the City. Such use shall be permitted only on unplatted land of five or more contiguous acres; 
8.  Family day care homes; 
9.  Bed and breakfast establishments for one to four boarders. 
b.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in R1 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272, conditional uses: 
1.  Public utility and public service facilities, such as, electric substations, water reservoirs, fire stations, telephone transmission equipment buildings, telephone exchanges. Sewage lift stations and water pumping stations located above ground; 
2.  Pre-schools, day care centers and nursery schools; 
3.  Community living arrangements for nine to 15 residents, provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Those which provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, defined in Section 18-21, as from time to time amended, shall not be subject to a minimum spacing requirement from another community living arrangement or adult family home; 
(ii)  Those which do not provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, including, but not limited to, housing for parolees or juveniles who are not disabled, shall be located no closer than 2,500 feet from another community living arrangement or adult family home; 
(iii)  The facility shall be designed and maintained to appear as a one-family or two-family residence and landscaped to be in keeping with the surrounding neighborhood; 
(iv)  Such facility shall be located on a lot of no less than 12,000 square feet in area; 
4.  Planned unit developments, as provided for in Section 42-274, for uses permitted in the R1 district; 
5.  Raising grain or hay crops for cash sale or for use as feed on unplatted parcels less than five acres in size or on platted land provided such feed use is conducted on premises located outside the City; 
6.  Community facilities, such as, public community centers, public recreation facilities; 
7.  Bed and breakfast establishments for five to eight boarders, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(i)  The establishment has a valid permit from the County Health Department; 
(ii)  The establishment is located in an owner-occupied, single-family dwelling; 
(iii)  No outside employees are permitted; 
(iv)  The maximum designed occupancy is limited to eight boarders plus the residents of the home. A building floor plan shall be placed on file with the Building Division indicating the number of rooms available for rental lodging and the maximum occupancy of each room indicated, the total of which may not exceed eight occupants; 
(v)  One parking stall shall be provided for each boarding room in addition to the two required for the principal residence; 
(vi)  Any site signage shall be limited to four square feet in size, shall have no illumination and shall be less than five feet in height; 
(vii)  Length of stay shall not exceed 14 consecutive days for each registered boarder; 
8.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing; 
9.  Two-family dwellings on any lot containing 10,000 square feet or more upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Plan Commission following the procedures outlined in Section 42-272 and subject to the exceptions outlined in Subsection (b)(1)b.9.(viii) of this section which follows. In reviewing the appropriateness of lots for two-family dwelling construction, the Plan Commission may consider the following location criteria: 
(i)  Corner lots; 
(ii)  Lots fronting on through arterial streets as those are identified by Chapter 10 of the Janesville Code of General Ordinance or on those streets identified by the City Engineer as future through arterial streets; 
(iii)  Lots that are contiguous to land zoned for more intensive residential, commercial, or industrial development or other property not used for single-family residences, such as schools and churches; 
(iv)  Lots identified as appropriate for two-family dwellings shall generally not exceed 20 percent of all the lots in the final plat; 
(v)  Lots located adjacent or opposite areas in which two-family dwellings have been expressly prohibited by public or private restrictions should be discouraged as locations for two-family dwellings; 
(vi)  Generally, no more than two two-family dwellings should be located adjacent each other. Adequate spacing should occur between clusters of two-family dwellings to avoid concentration of such type of dwelling; 
(vii)  For any conversion of an existing single-family home to a two-family dwelling, the razing of an existing single-family home for the purpose of redeveloping a site or sites with a two-family dwelling, or the redivision of an existing residential lot for the purpose of creating new development sites for the construction of two-family dwellings, the architectural compatibility of the proposed structure or structures with existing buildings in the surrounding area may also be considered; 
(viii)  Exceptions. 
A.  Two-family dwellings shall be permitted in locations identified on land divisions occurring after September 13, 1999, through the procedures outlined in Chapter 36 after approval of the proposed two-family lot locations by the Plan Commission following a public hearing on the designation of said two-family lots. The public hearing and approval shall occur during review of preliminary land divisions. The public hearing shall be noticed in accord with the procedures outlined in Section 42-272(e). The Plan Commission may consider the criteria in Subsections (b)(1)9(i)—(b(1)9(vi) of this section during such reviews. Lots approved as appropriate for two-family dwelling construction shall be clearly identified on the face of the final land division through the affixation of a large, bold letter "D" and the following note shall be placed on the final land division: "Lots labeled "D" may be developed with either a single-family or two-family dwelling or any other use permitted within the zone district." Any lot so identified shall remain appropriate for construction of a two-family dwelling until such time as this chapter's zoning regulations in effect at that time are repealed in their entirety and subsequently rewritten or recreated and such new regulations are adopted by the City Council; 
B.  Prior to September 13, 2000, any person presenting the Planning Director with copy of a recorded plat, survey, deed, covenant, restriction or other document, with said instrument having been recorded prior to September 13, 1999, that indicates that a residential lot in existence before September 13, 1999 was identified as appropriate for construction of a two-family dwelling shall be issued a conditional use permit for said lot by the Planning Director. A fee shall not be charged for the conditional use permit. There shall be no review or hearing by the Plan Commission. Any permit issued under this provision shall be valid until such time as the Chapter 42 zoning regulations in effect at that time are repealed in their entirety and subsequently rewritten or recreated and such new regulations are adopted by the City Council; 
C.  Prior to September 13, 2000, any person may request approval of a conditional use permit for construction of a two-family dwelling for any lot in existence before September 13, 1999. The Plan Commission shall conduct their review following the procedures of Section 42-272. A fee shall not be charged for the conditional use permit or the review. There shall be a presumption of conditional use permit approval for such lots unless there is compelling evidence presented to the Plan Commission that said approval is inappropriate. The Plan Commission may consider criteria in Subsections (b)(1)9(i)—(b)(1)9(vi) of this section during such review. Any permit issued under this provision shall be valid until such time as the Chapter 42 zoning regulations in effect at that time are repealed in their entirety and subsequently rewritten or recreated and such new regulations are adopted by the City Council. 
c.  Lot area. 
1.  Single-family detached: not less than 7,700 square feet; 
2.  Two-family detached: not less than 10,000 square feet. 
d.  Lot width. Not less than 70 feet as measured at the setback line. 
e.  Minimum setback requirements for principal use. 
1.  Front yard: 25 feet; 
2.  Side yard: Eight feet; 
3.  Rear yard: 25 feet (except corner lots); 
4.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from all street lines; 
5.  Corner interior, side yard: side yard shall be eight feet, provided rear yard is 15 feet, or 15 feet, provided rear yard is eight feet. 
f.  Minimum setback requirements for accessory structures. 
1.  Front yard: as set forth in Section 42-119, as from time to time amended or renumbered; 
2.  Side yard: two feet plus the eave (except as provided in Section 42-363); 
3.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from all street lines; 
4.  Rear yard: two feet, plus the eave. 
g.  Green area. 25 percent of the gross lot area shall be devoted to green area; 
h.  Open space. 40 percent of the gross lot area shall be left in open space. Green area may be included to satisfy this open space requirement; 
i.  Maximum building height. Two and one-half stories or 30 feet, whichever is greater; 
j.  Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in Section 42-360. 
(2)  R1D Two-Family Residence District. The Two-Family Residence District is designed to allow for low-density residential development where single- and two-family dwellings are permitted. The R1D District is generally mapped in the outlining urban parts of the City. 
a.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the R1 District. 
2.  Two-family dwellings, provided that no more than 50 percent of the lots in a land division of record or a proposed land division are developed with said two-family dwellings. If more than 50 percent of the lots within a land division of record or a proposed land division are proposed to be developed with two-family dwellings, then the development must be reviewed as a Planned Unit Development under the procedure outlined in Section 42-274. 
b.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in R1D District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Public utility and public service facilities, such as, electric substations, water reservoirs, fire stations, telephone transmission equipment buildings, telephone exchanges, sewage lift stations and water pumping stations located above ground; 
2.  Pre-school, day care centers and nursery schools; 
3.  Community living arrangements for nine to 15 residents, provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Those which provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, defined in Section 18-21 as from time to time amended, shall not be subject to a minimum spacing requirement from another community living arrangements or adult family home; 
(ii)  Those which do not provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, including, but not limited to, housing for parolees or juveniles who are not disabled or handicapped, shall be located no closer than 2,000 feet from another community living arrangement or adult family home; 
(iii)  The facility shall be designed and maintained to appear as a one- or two-family residence and landscaped to be in keeping with the surrounding neighborhood; 
(iv)  Such facility shall be located on a lot of no less than 12,000 square feet in area. 
4.  Planned unit developments as provided for in Section 42-274, for uses permitted in the R1 District; 
5.  Raising grain or hay crops for cash sale or for use as feed on unplatted parcels less than five acres in size or on platted land provided such feed use is conducted on premises located outside the City; 
6.  Community facilities, such as: public community centers, public recreation facilities; 
7.  Bed and breakfast establishments; 
8.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing. 
c.  Lot area. 
1.  Single-family dwelling: not less than 7,700 square feet; 
2.  Two-family dwelling: not less than 10,000 square feet. 
d.  Lot width. Not less than 70 feet as measured at the setback line. 
e.  Minimum setback requirements for principal use. 
1.  Front yard: 25 feet; 
2.  Side yard: Eight feet; 
3.  Rear yard: 25 feet (except corner lots); 
4.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from all street lines; 
5.  Corner interior side yard: side yard shall be eight feet, provided rear yard is 15 feet, or 15 feet provided rear yard is eight feet. 
f.  Minimum setback requirements for accessory structures. 
1.  Front yard: as set forth in Section 42-119, as from time to time amended or renumbered; 
2.  Side yard: two feet plus the eave (except as provided in Subsection (b) of Section 42-363); 
3.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from all street lines; 
4.  Rear yard: two feet plus the eave. 
g.  Green area. 25 percent of the gross lot area shall be devoted to green area. 
h.  Open space. 40 percent of the gross lot area shall be left in open space. Green area may be included to satisfy this open space requirement. 
i.  Maximum building height. Two and one-half stories or 30 feet, whichever is greater. 
j.  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in Section 42-360. 
(3)  R2 Limited General Residence District. The R2 Limited General Residence District is designed to provide areas which are to be occupied substantially by single-family and two-family dwellings. This district is intended to accommodate existing platted lots with areas of 5,000 through 7,700 square feet to prevent numerous dwellings from becoming nonconforming and to accommodate new higher-density development. 
a.  Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the R1 District. 
b.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in R2 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Conditional uses permitted in the R1 District; 
2.  Planned unit developments as provided for in Section 42-274, for uses permitted in the R2 District. 
c.  Lot area. 
1.  Single-family detached: not less than 5,000 square feet; 
2.  Two-family detached: not less than 8,000 feet. 
d.  Lot width. Not less than 50 feet, as measured at the setback line. 
e.  Minimum setback requirements for principal use. 
1.  Front yard: 25 feet; 
2.  Side yard: Eight feet; 
3.  Rear yard: 25 feet (except corner lots); 
4.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from all street lines; 
5.  Corner interior side yard: side yard shall be eight feet, provided rear yard is 15 feet, or 15 feet provided rear yard is eight feet. 
f.  Minimum setback requirements for accessory structures. 
1.  Front yard: As set forth in Section 42-119, as from time to time amended or renumbered; 
2.  Side yard: Two feet plus the eave (except as provided in Section 42-363); 
3.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from all street lines; 
4.  Rear yard: Two feet, plus the eave. 
g.  Green area. 25 percent of the gross lot area shall be devoted to green area. 
h.  Open space. Forty percent of the gross lot area shall be left in open space. Green area may be included to satisfy this open space requirement. 
i.  Maximum building's height. Two and one-half stories or 30 feet, whichever is greater. 
j.  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in Section 42-360. 
(4)  R3M Medium Density Residence District. The R3M Medium Density Residence District is primarily intended to provide a low- to medium-density multiple-family area where townhouses, fourplex and garden apartments are the predominate land use. Such districts could be located along collector and arterial streets or between low density and more intensive land uses. 
a.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the R2 District; 
2.  Two-family dwellings; 
3.  Multiple-family dwellings containing no more than five units per building. 
b.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in the R3M District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272, conditional uses: 
1.  Conditional uses permitted in the R2 District; 
2.  Planned Unit Developments as provided for in Section 42-274 for uses permitted in the R3M District; 
3.  Multiple-family dwellings containing six to eight units per building; 
4.  Community living arrangements for more than 15 residents, provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Those which provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, defined in Section 18-21, as from time to time amended, shall not be subject to a minimum spacing requirement from another community living arrangement or adult family home. 
(ii)  Those which do not provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, including, but not limited to, housing for parolees or juveniles who are not disabled or handicapped, shall be located no closer than 2,500 feet from another community living arrangement or adult family home. 
(iii)  The facility shall be adequately designed and landscaped to be in keeping with the neighborhood and to prevent an institutional setting. 
(iv)  The facility shall be located on a lot no less than 18,000 square feet in area for the first 16 residents, plus an additional 3,000 square feet of land for each additional residents. 
c.  Lot area. 
1.  Single-family detached: not less than 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Two-family: not less than 8,000 square feet. 
3.  Three- to eight-family units: multiple-family dwelling units that contain more than two units shall have at least 3,000 square feet of land area for each unit. 
d.  Lot width. Not less than 50 feet, as measured at the front setback line. 
e.  Minimum setback requirements for principle uses. 
1.  Front yard: 25 feet; 
2.  Side yard: Eight feet for single-family and two-family units. 
3.  Side yard, ten feet for three or more units and nonresidential uses; 
4.  Rear yard: 25 feet (except corner lots); 
5.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from all street lines; 
6.  Corner interior side yard: Side yard shall be eight feet, provided rear yard is 15 feet, or 15 feet, provided rear yard is eight feet. 
f.  Minimum setback requirements for accessory structures. 
1.  Front yard: As set forth in Section 42-119, as from time to time amended or renumbered; 
2.  Side yard: Two feet plus the eave width for single- and two-family dwellings (except as provided in Section 42-363) and ten feet for all other uses; 
3.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from property lines; 
4.  Rear yard: Two feet plus the eave width for single- and two-family dwellings and ten feet for all other purposes. 
g.  Green area. 25 percent of the gross lot area shall be devoted to green area. 
h.  Open space. 40 percent of gross lot area shall be left in open space. Green area may be included to satisfy this open space requirement. 
i.  Maximum building height. Two and one-half stories or 30 feet, whichever is greater. 
j.  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in Section 42-360. 
(5)  R3 General Residence District. The R3 General Residence District is intended to protect and enhance the character and value of residential areas primarily occupied by varied dwelling types of moderate density and to accommodate areas planned for new residential development of moderate density. 
a.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the R2 District; 
2.  Two-family dwellings; 
3.  Multiple-family dwellings, after a favorable recommendation by the Site Plan Review Committee; 
4.  Community living arrangements for 15 or fewer residents and adult homes, subject to the following provisions: 
(i)  Those which provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, defined in Section 18-21, as from time to time amended, shall not be subject to a minimum spacing requirement from another community living arrangement or adult family home. 
(ii)  Those which do not provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, including, but not limited to, housing for parolees or juveniles who are not disabled, shall be located no closer than 2,500 feet from another community living arrangement or adult family home. 
(iii)  Community living arrangements for nine to 15 residents shall be located on a lot containing at least 12,000 square feet. 
b.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in the R3 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Conditional uses permitted in the R2 District. 
2.  Community living arrangements for more than 15 residents, provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Those which provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, defined in Section 18-21, as from time to time amended, shall not be subject to a minimum spacing requirement from another community living arrangement or adult family home. 
(ii)  Those which do not provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, including, but not limited to, housing for parolees or juveniles who are not disabled, shall be located no closer than 2,500 feet from another community living arrangement or adult family home. 
(iii)  The facility shall be adequately landscaped and designed to be in keeping with the neighborhood and to prevent an institutional setting. 
(iv)  The facility shall be located on a lot of no less than 12,000 square feet for the first 16 residents, plus an additional 1,000 square feet of land for each five additional residents. 
3.  Colleges, universities, and schools that provide residence halls for on-campus living. 
4.  Cemeteries. 
5.  Mausoleums provided the mausoleum located within a cemetery. 
6.  Planned unit developments as provided for in Section 42-274 for uses permitted in the R3 District. 
7.  Roominghouses, boardinghouses or lodginghouses. 
8.  Nursing homes, rest homes for the elderly and convalescing. 
9.  Mobile home courts as provided for in Section 42-276. 
10.  City-owned museums or museums owned by nonprofit organizations, provided the museum is established in a building existing at the time of the adoption of this zoning title. 
c.  Lot area. 
1.  Single- and two-family units. Single- and two-family dwelling units shall have minimum lot areas in accordance with the following schedule: 
Minimum Lot Area in Square Feet 
Single-family 	5,000 
Two-family 	8,000 
 
2.  Three- to eight-family units. Multiple-family dwelling units that contain more than two units but less than nine units shall have at least 8,000 feet of land area for the first two units, plus an additional 1,300 square feet of land for each unit greater than two units and less than nine units. 
3.  Nine units and greater. Units containing more than eight units shall have a minimum lot area in accordance with the following schedule: 
Minimum Lot Area in Square Feet 
	Where 1½ 
Stalls/Unit 
is Required 	Where 2 
Stalls/Unit 
is Required 
3 bedroom or more 	2,200 per unit 	2,400 per unit 
2 bedroom 	2,000 per unit 	2,100 per unit 
1 bedroom or efficiency 	1,800 per unit 	1,800 per unit 
Elderly subsidized rental housing as defined in housing as defined in Section 42-359(i)(1)e 	1,500 per unit 	1,500 per unit 
 
d.  Lot width. Not less than 50 feet, as measured at the setback line. 
e.  Minimum setback requirements for principal use. 
1.  Front yard: 25 feet; 
2.  Side yard: eight feet for single- and two-family units. Side yard: ten feet for three or more units and nonresidential uses; 
3.  Rear yard: 25 feet (except corner lots); 
4.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from all street lines; 
5.  Corner interior side yard: Side yard shall be eight feet provided rear yard is 15 feet, or 15 feet provided rear yard is eight feet. 
f.  Minimum setback requirements for accessory structures. 
1.  Front yard: as set forth in Section 42-119, as from time to time amended or renumbered; 
2.  Side yard: two feet plus the eave (except as provided in Section 42-363); 
3.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from street lines; rear yard, two feet plus the eave. 
g.  Green area. 25 percent of the gross lot area shall be devoted to green area. 
h.  Maximum building height. None. 
i.  Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in Section 42-360. 
(6)  R4 Central Residence District. The R4 Central Residence District is primarily designed to be mapped in areas immediately surrounding the Central Business District. This district accommodates the highest residential densities and is designated in locations with direct access to convenience services, including shopping, civic functions and public transportation. 
a.  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the R3 District. 
b.  Conditional uses. Conditional uses permitted in R3 District except mobile home courts. 
c.  Lot area. 
1.  Single- and two-family units. Single- and two-family dwelling units shall have minimum lot areas in accordance with the following schedule: 
Minimum Lot Area in Square Feet 
Single-family 	5,000 
Two-family 	5,400 
 
2.  Three- to eight-family units. Multiple-family dwelling units that contain more than two units but less than nine units shall have at least 5,400 square feet of land area for the first two units, plus an additional 400 square feet of land for each unit greater than two units and less than nine units. 
3.  Nine units and greater. Units containing more than eight units shall have a minimum lot area in accordance with the following schedule: 
Minimum Lot Area in Square Feet 
	Where 1½ 
Stalls/Unit 
is Required 	Where 2 
Stalls/Unit 
is Required 
3 bedroom or more 	1,100 per unit 	1,200 per unit 
2 bedroom 	1,000 per unit 	1,100 per unit 
1 bedroom efficiency 	900 per unit 	900 per unit 
Elderly subsidized rental housing as defined in Section 42-359(i)(1)e 	500 per unit 	500 per unit 
 
d.  Lot width. None. 
e.  Minimum setback requirements for principal use. 
1.  Front yard: 25 feet; 
2.  Side yard: Eight feet for single- and two-family units. Side yard, ten feet for three or more units and nonresidential uses; 
3.  Rear yard: 25 feet (except corner lots); 
4.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from all street lines; 
5.  Corner interior side yard: Side yard shall be eight feet provided rear yard is 15 feet, or 15 feet provided rear yard is eight feet. 
f.  Minimum setback requirements for accessory structures. 
1.  Front yard: As set forth in Section 42-119, as from time to time amended or renumbered; 
2.  Side yard: Two feet plus the eave (except as provided in Section 42-363); 
3.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from street lines; 
4.  Rear yard: Two feet plus the eave. 
g.  Green area. Twenty-five percent of the gross lot area shall be devoted to green area. 
h.  Maximum building height. None. 
Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in Section 42-360. 
(Code 1976, § 18.36.020)  
Sec. 42-441. - Office/residence districts. 
(a)  General requirements. Office/residence district regulations are intended to govern the development and use of residences, particularly high density apartments, in a compatible setting with office buildings, civic and governmental structures, and educational and institutional structures. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Each building, structure and parcel and the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving occupied in conformity with all the provisions specified for the district in which it is located. No land or buildings shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the office/residence district in which such land, structure, or building shall be located. 
(2)  Nonconforming uses. All buildings, structures and land which were lawful before the ordinance from which this article is derived was adopted or amended, and which become legally nonconforming as a result of the ordinance from which this article is derived was adopted or amended, shall be subject to the provisions of Section 42-359. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses may be allowed as listed in each office/residence district. Said conditional uses shall be subject to the issuance of conditional use permits in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 42-272. 
(4)  Outside display of merchandise. Storage of materials and equipment, business servicing and processing and display of merchandise shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings with the exception of seasonal merchandise which may be displayed on the premises, provided such display does not encroach upon a required setback, a required off-street parking area, required green area or obstruct vehicular or pedestrian access. 
(5)  Use of trucks, travel trailers or mobile homes as principal or accessory uses. 
a.  No truck, travel trailer, or mobile home or similar vehicle shall be permitted in office/residence districts as a principal building. 
b.  No truck, travel trailer, panel truck, mobile home or similar vehicle shall be permitted on any premises in an office/residence district for more than 72 consecutive hours or for more than 96 hours in any 168-hour period as an accessory building or use or for storage of materials except as provided below: 
1.  Such vehicle is completely screened from view; 
2.  Such vehicle is used as a construction office, parked on the construction site and only for the duration of the construction; or 
3.  Seasonal sales not exceeding six weeks and subject to outside display of merchandise in Subdivision (4) of this section. 
(6)  Green area. 
a.  Green area shall be permanently provided and properly maintained on each lot devoted to any permitted or conditional use as set forth in each office/residence zoning district. Such green area shall not be devoted to service driveways, walks, off-street parking spaces, loading berths, or other similar uses, but shall include landscaping such as grass, shrubs, bushes, rock gardens, trees, flowers, and other types of aesthetic treatment. 
b.  The green area requirement is based on gross lot area. Gross lot area does not include the area between the sidewalk and the future curbline as shown in the JATS plan; however, such area may be used to fulfill up to 25 percent of the green area requirement if authorized by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. The Site Plan Review Coordinator will consider in his or her review of such a credit one or more of the following: 
1.  The quality and size of landscape plantings within the green areas provided on-site, and installation of terrace trees within the adjoining terrace; 
2.  Redevelopment sites where the ability of providing green area in front of the building is limited; and 
3.  The amount of green area provided in front of the building over the minimum requirement. 
c.  At least 50 percent of the green area shall be provided in the front or corner side yard between the principal building and the front or corner side property line. 
(7)  Enclosure of refuse storage area. Trash or refuse storage areas are permitted outside the principal building, provided that: 
a.  Such storage areas are screened from view from any point on the perimeter of the site except as approved otherwise by the Site Plan Review Committee; 
b.  Such storage area enclosure shall be made of the same material as the immediate adjacent wall of the principal building or such other material as would not detract from the immediate surrounding neighborhood as approved by the Site Plan Review Committee; 
c.  Such storage area enclosure shall extend from the ground level to a minimum height of five feet and in no case shall be lower in height than that of trash receptacles. 
(8)  Driveway openings. Driveway openings shall be located at least 40 feet from a block corner with the exception of single- and two-family driveway openings which shall be located at least 25 feet from a block corner. The maximum driveway opening shall be 36 feet at the curb and 30 feet at the sidewalk line. Where a driveway is in joint use with adjoining properties, there shall be at least ten feet of drive on each parcel. 
(9)  Setback. Setbacks shall be as provided in each of the office/residence districts, except where at least 50 percent of the lots improved with buildings on one side of the street within the same block have a front setback on said street less than required by this chapter, an average front setback shall be computed for the block. Any new building and new alteration of any existing building may conform to that average front setback. For the purpose of computing such an average front setback, vacant lots within such block shall be considered as having the minimum front setback required in that district. 
(10)  Setbacks for L-shaped two-family residences. Where a two-family residence is located on a corner lot, is L-shaped, and is addressed on two different streets, the minimum setback requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  Any yard abutting a street: 25 feet; 
b.  Side yard (unattached end of each unit): eight feet; 
c.  Rear yard (area behind each unit): 25 feet. 
(11)  Standards for single-family dwellings. Single-family dwellings, except those in designated mobile home parks, shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
a.  Installed on an enclosed permanent foundation; 
b.  Minimum floor area, excluding the garage, decks, porches, and basement: 800 square feet of heated living space; 
c.  Minimum width of short side of dwelling: 24 feet; 
d.  Minimum core area of heated living space: 24 feet by 24 feet; 
e.  Pitched roof required with a minimum slope of three inches in height for each foot of width; 
f.  Permitted roof surfacing materials (including accessory garages and carports): Wood shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or wood shingles; clay, concrete or metal tiles; slate; rubber membrane; built-up gravel materials; 
g.  Exterior siding shall extend to the top of the foundation. If the top of the foundation is below grade, the siding shall extend to the ground; and 
h.  Permitted exterior siding materials (including accessory garages and carports): wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, vinyl, metal lap. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may waive one or more of the above minimum standards, except the standard in Subsection (a)(11)a of this section upon a finding that the proposed architectural style provides compensating design features and the dwelling will be compatible with other dwellings in the neighborhood. 
(b)  District requirements. 
(1)  O1 Office/Residence District. The O1 Office/Residence District is designed primarily to accommodate residences, particularly moderate-density apartments in a compatible setting with office buildings, civic and governmental structures, and educational and institutional structures. Such uses would maintain the basic residential character of the district and of adjoining residential districts, with regard to building appearance and yard requirements. 
a.  General condition. The parking of trucks when used in the conduct of a permitted use in the O1 District shall be limited to vehicles of not over 1½ tons capacity. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Single- and two-family dwellings; 
2.  Offices, business, professional and public; 
3.  Libraries; 
4.  Art galleries, museums and cultural institutions; 
5.  Clubs and lodges, private, religious or fraternal; 
6.  Medical and dental clinics; 
7.  Educational and institutional uses (public and hilanthropic); 
8.  Funeral homes; 
9.  Fire stations; 
10.  Churches; 
11.  Group care and family care facilities, nursery schools; 
12.  Parks, playgrounds and open spaces; 
13.  Nursing homes, rest homes for the elderly and convalescing; 
14.  Hospitals. Setback requirements for hospitals only: 
(i)  Front yard: 25 feet; 
(ii)  Corner, side yard: 25 feet; 
(iii)  Any yard abutting a street: 25 feet; 
(iv)  Side yard: ten feet or none if common party fire wall provided; 
(v)  Rear yard: ten feet or 25 feet if adjoining a residence district. 
15.  Community living arrangements for 15 or fewer residents and adult family homes, subject to the following provisions: 
(i)  Those which provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, defined in Section 18-21, as from time to time amended, shall not be subject to a minimum spacing requirement from another community living arrangement or adult family home; 
(ii)  Those which do not provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, including, but not limited to, housing for parolees or juveniles who are not disabled, shall be located no closer than 2,500 feet from another community living arrangement or adult family home; 
(iii)  Community living arrangements for nine to 15 residents shall be located on a lot containing at least 12,000 square feet; 
16.  Community facilities, such as public community centers, public recreation facilities, public and private elementary and secondary schools; 
17.  Interior design studios, art studios and photographic studios, provided there is no warehousing or on-site storage of merchandise and no retail sales of materials or supplies; 
18.  Schools, music, dance and business; 
19.  Radio and TV recording studios; 
20.  Personal services salon, offering services such as hair care, nails, facials, tanning, myofascial and massage therapy is permitted except in instances where a single- or two-family dwelling is established as a principle permitted use on the premises. The retail sale of beauty supplies or products is permitted as an accessory use only. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in the O1 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Public utility uses, such as electric substations, water reservoirs, telephone transmission equipment buildings, telephone exchanges and gas regulator stations. Sewage lift stations and water pumping stations located above ground; 
2.  Planned unit developments as provided for in Section 42-274 for permitted and conditional uses in the O1 District; 
3.  Community living arrangements for more than 15 residents, provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Those which provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, defined in Section 18-21, as from time to time amended, shall not be subject to a minimum spacing requirement from another community living arrangement or adult family home; 
(ii)  Those which do not provide housing and supportive services for residents with a disability or handicap, including, but not limited to, housing for parolees or juveniles who are not disabled, shall be located no closer than 2,500 feet from another community living arrangement or adult family home; 
(iii)  The facility shall be adequately landscaped and designed to be in keeping with the neighborhood and to prevent an institutional setting; 
(iv)  The facility shall be located on a lot of no less than 12,000 square feet for the first 16 residents, plus an additional 1,000 square feet of land for each five additional residents; 
4.  Banks and other types of financial institutions with drive-in facilities; 
5.  Private outdoor recreational activity accessory to a listed permitted use; 
6.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing; 
7.  Lodginghouses, roominghouses and boardinghouses; 
8.  Residential shelter care facilities; 
9.  Large developments as defined by having any one of the following characteristics: 
(i)  Any development containing a building with a ground floor footprint of 25,000 square feet or more, as measured at the building foundation; 
(ii)  Any development on a single site containing five or more acres or the development of multiple sites that collectively total five acres or more when said multiple sites are developed with any common link or nexus, including, but not limited to, shared infrastructure or physical site improvements; 
(iii)  Any development that contains more than one building per site, lot or parcel; 
10.  Multiple-family dwellings are defined as any building containing three or more dwelling units. 
d.  Lot area. 
1.  Residential uses. 
(i)  Single-family and two-family units. Single- and two-family dwelling units shall have minimum lot areas in accordance with the following schedule: 
Minimum Lot Area in Square Feet 
Single-family 	5,000 
Two-family 	8,000 
 
(ii)  Three- to eight-family units. Multiple-family dwelling units that contain more than two units but square feet of land area for the first two units, plus an additional 1,300 square feet of land for each unit greater than two units and less than nine units, 
(iii)  Nine units and greater. Units containing more than eight units shall have a minimum area in accordance with the following schedule: 
Minimum Lot Area in Square Feet 
	Where 1½ 
Stalls/Unit 
is Required 	Where 2 
Stalls/Unit 
is Required 
3 bedroom or more 	2,200 per unit 	2,400 per unit 
2 bedroom 	2,000 per unit 	2,100 per unit 
1 bedroom efficiency 	1,800 per unit 	1,800 per unit 
Elderly subsidized rental housing as defined in Section 42-359(i)(1)e 	1,500 per unit 	1,500 per unit 
 
2.  Nonresidential uses. None. 
e.  Lot width. None. 
f.  Minimum setback requirements for principal use. 
1.  Front yard: 25 feet; 
2.  Side yard: eight feet; 
3.  Rear yard: 25 feet (except corner lots); 
4.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from all streets lines; 
5.  Corner interior side yard: Side yard shall be eight feet, provided rear yard is 15 feet, or 15 feet, provided rear yard is eight feet; 
6.  Adjoining a residence district, where a multiple-family building greater than 2½ stories in height or nonresidential building is to be constructed on a lot adjoining an R1 or R2 District, side and rear setback shall be 25 feet or equal in dimension to the height of such multiple-family or nonresidential building as it sits above grade, whichever is greater. 
g.  Minimum setback requirements for accessory uses. 
1.  Front yard: five feet to the rear of the principal building; 
2.  Side yard: two feet, plus the eave (except as provided in Section 42-363); 
3.  Corner side yard: 25 feet from all street lines; 
4.  Rear yard: two feet plus the eave. 
h.  Maximum building height. None. 
i.  Green area. Not less than 20 percent of the gross lot area shall be permanently set aside, planted and maintained as green area. 
j.  Screening. There shall be provided and maintained a permanent screening buffer strip along any boundary of an O1 District which adjoins a residence district. Such screening shall be a living hedge, shrubs or trees which, at the time of planting, shall be a minimum of three feet in height and three feet in width and shall, within a period of four years, attain a height and width of at least five feet. When such screening is within the required front or corner side yard, the maximum height shall be 30 inches. These screening provisions shall not apply to residential uses which are located in an O1 District. The Building Division Director may modify the screening requirements when screening exists on adjoining property. 
k.  Off-street parking and loading shall be as provided in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
(2)  O2 Central Office/Residence District. The O2 Central Office/Residence District is developed to accommodate office buildings, civic and governmental structures, educational and institutional structures, and certain art-related uses in a compatible setting with residences, particularly high-density apartments, located in the Central City. It is intended that the application of the O2 District be limited to the following area: 
Beginning at the point where the centerline of East Wall Street intersects the centerline of North Division Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of East Wall Street to the centerline of North Atwood Avenue; thence southeasterly along the centerline of North Atwood Avenue to the centerline of East Milwaukee Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of East Milwaukee Street to the centerline of Wisconsin Street; thence Southeasterly along the centerline of South Wisconsin Street to the centerline of St. Lawrence Avenue; thence southwesterly along the centerline of St. Lawrence Avenue to the centerline of South Division Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of South Division Street to the centerline of East Van Buren Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of East Van Buren Street to the middle of the block between South Parker Drive and South Main Street; thence southeasterly along said mid-block line a distance of about 2½ blocks to the southeast corner of Lot 3 in McKey's Addition; thence southwesterly along the southeast lot line of Lot 3 in McKey's Addition to the centerline of South Main Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of South Main Street to the centerline of East Racine Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of East Racine Street to the middle of the block between South River Street and South Franklin Street; thence northwesterly along said mid-block line to the centerline of West Holmes Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of West Holmes Street to the centerline of South Franklin Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of South Franklin Street to the centerline of West Van Buren Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of West Van Buren Street to the centerline South High Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of South High Street to the centerline of West Court Street; thence west along the centerline of West Court Street to the centerline of Locust Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Locust Street to the centerline of West Milwaukee Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of West Milwaukee Street to the centerline of High Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of High Street to the centerline of Dodge Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Dodge Street to the centerline of South Franklin Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of South Franklin Street to the centerline of West Court Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Court Street to the centerline of South Division Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of South and North Division Street to the centerline of East Wall Street, which is the point of beginning. 
a.  General condition. The parking of trucks when used in the conduct of a permitted use in the O2 District shall be limited to vehicles of not over 1½ tons capacity. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Uses permitted in the O1 District; 
2.  Design, production, display and sales of art related merchandise and services including interior design studios, art or craft studios and photographic studios, provided there is no warehousing or on-site storage of merchandise; sale of art materials or supplies is permitted as an accessory use only. 
c.  Conditional uses. Conditional uses permitted in the O1 District. 
d.  Lot area. 
1.  Residential uses. 
(i)  Single-family and two-family units. Single- and two-family dwelling units shall have minimum lot areas in accordance with the following schedule: 
Minimum Lot Area in Square Feet 
Single-family 	5,000 
Two-family 	5,400 
 
(ii)  Three- to eight-family units. Multiple-family dwelling units that contain more than two units, but less than nine units shall have at least 5,400 square feet of land area for the first two units, plus an additional 400 square feet of land for each unit greater than two units and less than nine units. 
(iii)  Nine units and greater. Units containing more than eight units shall have a minimum lot area in accordance with the following schedule: 
Minimum Lot Area in Square Feet 
	Where 1½ 
Stalls/Unit 
is Required 	Where 2 
Stalls/Unit 
is Required 
3 bedroom or more 	1,100 per unit 	1,200 per unit 
2 bedrooms 	1,000 per unit 	1,100 per unit 
l bedroom efficiency 	900 per unit 	900 per unit 
Elderly subsidized rental housing as defined in Section 42-359(i)(1)e 	500 per unit 	500 per unit 
 
2.  Nonresidential uses. None. 
e.  Lot width. None. 
f.  Minimum setback requirements. None, except as provided below:If a lot in the O2 District is situated adjoining a residence district, the following setback requirements shall apply: 
1.  Side yard: eight feet; 
2.  Rear yard: 25 feet. 
The above setback requirements shall apply only to that portion of the lot adjoining the residence district. 
g.  Maximum height. None. 
h.  Green area. Not less than ten percent of the gross lot area shall be permanently set aside, planted and maintained as green area. Off-street parking and loading shall be as provided in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
(3)  O3 Neighborhood Office District. This district is intended to accommodate high quality office and institutional land uses at intensities compatible with residential districts in locations where traffic volumes and adjacent land use dictate a transition between residential and more intensive nonresidential uses. It is not intended that this zoning district replace the O1 and O2 Districts but instead provide another zoning alternative to accommodate small scale office development. 
a.  General provisions. 
1.  Generally, the O3 District shall be mapped in quantities not exceeding five acres; 
2.  Residential uses are prohibited, except that a single dwelling unit is permitted if located within a structure erected to accommodate a use allowed within the district; 
3.  Retail and commercial services are prohibited except where clearly accessory to a listed permitted use; 
4.  Drive-in facilities, drive-up facilities or any other type of service providing or offering goods, service or products directly to customers waiting in motor vehicles are not permitted, including drive-up telephones. 
The outside conduct, display or storage of any product, inventory, materials, equipment or service is prohibited, including, but not limited to, seasonal merchandise, beverage machines, ice machines, LP gas tank storage, pallets, landscape plants or materials, and children's amusement rides. This prohibition does not apply to outside trash and recyclable storage when in an approved screen enclosure. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Offices, business, professional and public; 
2.  Medical and dental clinics; 
3.  Funeral homes; 
4.  Churches; 
5.  Public libraries; 
6.  Underground public utility uses, such as, electric substations, water reservoirs, telephone transmission equipment, gas regulator stations, sewage lift stations, water pumping stations and other similar utility use; 
7.  Interior design studios, art studios and photographic studios. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in the O3 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272, conditional uses: 
1.  Above ground public utility uses, such as, electric sub-stations, water reservoirs, telephone transmission equipment, gas regulator stations, sewage lift stations, water pumping stations and other similar utility use. 
2.  Planned unit developments as provided in Section 42-274 for permitted and conditional uses in the O3 District. 
3.  Retail and commercial service uses accessory to listed permitted or conditional uses. 
4.  Large developments as defined by having any one of the following characteristics: 
(i)  Any development on a single site containing five or more acres or the development of multiple sites that collectively total five acres or more when said multiple sites are developed with any common link or nexus, including, but not limited to, shared infrastructure or physical site improvements. 
(ii)  Any development that contains more than one building per site, lot or parcel. 
5.  One-story principle buildings between 5,000 and 10,000 gross square feet in size; 
6.  Fire stations; 
7.  Day care centers (nine or more children). 
d.  Minimum lot area. None. 
e.  Minimum lot width fronting a public street. None. 
f.  Maximum building size. 
1.  Principal buildings. 5,000 square feet per floor and 10,000 square feet total except as provided in Subsection (c) of this section. 
2.  Accessory buildings. 750 square feet. 
Only one accessory building is permitted per lot or parcel. 
g.  Maximum height. The maximum height of any building, structure or use shall not exceed 35 feet and any such building shall not contain more than two stories above grade. 
h.  Minimum setbacks. Minimum setbacks required from the property line to principal and accessory buildings, structures, and uses and off-street parking: 
1.  Front yard, corner yard and any other property line adjoining a public street right-of-way line: 25 feet; 
2.  Side yard: ten feet; 
3.  Rear yard: 25 feet except for corner lots, which shall be treated as having two side yards; 
4.  Adjoining a residence district: 25 feet or equal in dimension to the height of the building, whichever is greater; 
5.  Parking shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any front or corner yard property line and five feet from all other property lines except when adjoining a residence district where the setback shall be ten feet. 
i.  Green area. Not less than 20 percent of the gross lot area shall be permanently set aside, planted and maintained as green area except that sites containing one-story principle buildings between 5,000 and 10,000 square feet shall provide 30 percent of the total lot area as green area. 
j.  Site access. Vehicle access for nonresidential development is prohibited from a local residential street unless said point of access is within 500 feet of a through or connecting arterial street as enumerated in Chapter 38 or, in the opinion of the City Engineer, said local street will eventually be classified as a through or connecting arterial street. 
k.  Signs. The intent of the following provisions is to reduce the impacts of sign installation and associated lighting on properties surrounding development on sites located within the O3 District. The standards contained herein recognize that the general sign provisions found within Chapter 28 allow a multitude of under-regulated sign options that are not compatible with development intended to adjoin residential land uses. As such the following standards regarding sign installation shall apply in addition to those applicable from said Chapter 28. 
1.  Standards of this section that are more restrictive than those found in Chapter 28 shall prevail. 
2.  Installation or use of any of the following types of sign, as they are defined in Chapter 28, is prohibited: Attention-getting devices, banners, directional signs, electronic message signs, instructional signs, mobile signs, off-premises signs, roof signs. 
3.  On-premises ground signs shall comply with the following regulations: 
(i)  The ground sign is located where otherwise permitted but in no event less than two feet from a parking lot, driveway, highway, other right-of-way, sidewalk, or property line and in no event within a vision triangle as defined in Section 42-354(a). For uncontrolled intersections, which shall be applied to the following areas of the property: 
A.  All property corners located at street intersections and along all side property lines; and 
B.  At all intersections of driveways and sidewalks leading from the site to the adjoining property line or right-of-way lines. For these locations, the outside pavement, curb or sidewalk edges shall be used as the interior leg of the vision triangle and the intersecting property line as the other. 
(ii)  The ground sign shall not exceed 32 square feet of total area including the sign base except for parcels having 600 linear feet or more of frontage on public streets, in which case the ground sign area may not exceed 48 square feet, including the sign base. The surface area of the sign base shall be calculated based on the total perimeter boundary of the base from the ground plane to the bottom of the sign area and from outside edge to outside edge of the vertical sides. Any openings in the base shall be included within the area calculation. 
(iii)  No more than one such ground sign shall be permitted or located per parcel. 
(iv)  Ground signs shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(v)  Changeable message boards or signs are not permitted as separate signs or components of a primary sign. 
4.  Wall signs may only be installed on facades of buildings that face a public street or parking area. No internally illuminated wall sign shall be placed on a wall or building elevation that adjoins or is opposite a residential zone district. 
5.  Within this district window signs shall be considered wall signs and thus subject to all regulations pertaining to wall signs. 
(Code 1976, § 18.36.030)  
Sec. 42-442. - Business districts. 
(a)  General requirements. Business district regulations are intended to govern the development and use of a full range of business establishments needed to provide service to the citizens of Janesville and its trading area. The various business district regulations are designed to secure compatible groupings of business and commercial establishments in accordance with their intended functions and extent of services. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Each building, structure and parcel and the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving or structural alteration of such shall hereafter be used or occupied in conformity with all the provisions specified for the district in which it is located. No land or buildings shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the business district in which such land, structure, or building shall be located. 
(2)  Nonconforming uses. All buildings, structures and land which were lawful before the ordinance codified in this chapter was adopted or amended, and which become legally nonconforming as a result of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or amendment, shall be subject to the provisions of Section 42-359. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses, as listed in each business district, may be allowed only in the business district indicated. Said conditional use shall be subject to the issuance of conditional use permits in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 42-272. 
(4)  Outside display of merchandise. 
a.  Storage of materials and equipment, business servicing and processing and display of merchandise shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings with the exception of seasonal merchandise which may be displayed on the premises, provided such display does not encroach upon a required setback, a required off-street parking area, a required green area or obstruct vehicular or pedestrian access. 
b.  This section does not apply to the display of operable motor vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, snowmobiles, and snowmobile trailers; however, these vehicles shall not be parked on the required green area or on the required off-street parking area. In addition this section shall not apply to a once annual special tent sale as defined in this chapter and approved through a site plan review in accordance with Subsection 42-273 to ensure compliance with Subsection (4) of this section. 
(5)  Use of trucks, travel trailers or mobile homes as principal or accessory uses. 
a.  No truck, travel trailer, mobile home or similar vehicle shall be permitted in business districts as a principal building. 
b.  No truck, travel trailer, panel truck, mobile home or similar vehicle shall be permitted on any premises in a business district for more than 72 consecutive hours or for more than 96 hours in any 168-hour period as an accessory building or use or for storage of materials except as provided below: 
1.  Such vehicle is completely screened from view; 
2.  Such vehicle is used as a construction office parked on the construction site and only for the duration of the construction; or 
Seasonal sales not exceeding six weeks and subject to outside display of merchandise in Subsection (4) of this section. 
(6)  Green area. 
a.  Green area shall be permanently provided and properly maintained on each lot devoted to any permitted district. Such green area shall not be devoted to service driveways, walks, off-street parking spaces, loading berths, or other similar use, but shall include landscaping such as grass, shrubs, bushes, rock gardens, trees, flowers, and other types of aesthetic treatment. 
b.  The green area requirement is based on gross lot area. Gross lot area does not include the area between the sidewalk and the future curbline as shown in the JATS plan; however, such area may be used to fulfill up to 25 percent of the green area requirement authorized by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. The Site Plan Review Coordinator will consider in his or her review of such a credit one or more of the following: 
1.  The quality and size of landscape planting within the green areas provided on-site, and installation of terrace trees within the adjoining terrace; 
2.  Redevelopment sites where the ability of providing green area in front of the building is limited; and 
3.  The amount of green area provided in front of the building over the minimum requirement. 
c.  At least 50 percent of the green area shall be provided in the front or corner side yard between the principal building and the front or corner side property line. 
(7)  Enclosure of refuse storage area. Trash or refuse storage areas are permitted outside the principal building, provided that: 
a.  Such storage areas are screened from view from any point on the perimeter of the site except as approved otherwise by the Site Plan Review Committee. 
b.  Such storage area enclosure shall be made of the same material as the immediate adjacent wall of the principal building or such other material as would not detract from the immediate surrounding neighborhood as approved by the Site Plan Review Committee. 
c.  Such storage area enclosure shall extend from the ground level to a minimum height of five feet and in no case shall be lower in height than that of trash receptacles. 
(8)  Driveway openings. Driveway openings shall be located at least 40 feet from a block corner. The maximum driveway opening shall be 36 feet at the curb and 30 feet at the sidewalk line. Where a driveway is in joint use with adjoining properties, there shall be at least ten feet of drive on each parcel. 
(9)  Screening. There shall be provided and maintained a permanent screening buffer strip along any boundary of a business district which adjoins a residence district. Such screening shall be a living hedge, shrubs or trees which, at the time of planting, shall be a minimum of three feet in height and three feet in width and shall, within a period of four years, attain a height and width of at least five feet. When such screening is within the required front or corner side yard, the maximum height shall be 30 inches. The Building Division Director may modify the screening requirements when screening exists on adjoining property. 
(10)  Setback. Setbacks shall be as provided in each of the business districts, except where at least 50 percent of the lots improved with buildings on one side of the street within the same block have a front setback less than required by this chapter, an average front setback shall be computed for the block. Any new building and new alteration of any existing building may conform to that average front setback. For the purpose of computing such an average front setback, vacant lots within such block shall be considered as having the maximum front setback required in that district. 
(b)  District requirements. 
(1)  B1 Neighborhood Convenience District. This district is intended to accommodate high quality convenience shopping and service uses at intensities compatible with residential districts and where traffic volumes and adjacent land uses dictate a transition between residential and more intensive nonresidential uses. The district is primarily intended to permit commerce and services that are necessary to satisfy basic shopping needs which occur daily or frequently, thus requiring that such uses be located in relative proximity to places of residence. The desired compatibility and transition is achieved within the district through the application of detailed requirements for green areas, landscaping, architecture, site lighting, traffic and pedestrian improvements, signage and other site plan and amenity standards. 
a.  General conditions. 
1.  All business establishments shall be office, retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. 
2.  Dwelling units are permitted above the first floor of a building at densities allowed in the R3M Medium Density Residence District. A dwelling unit shall be permitted on the first floor if the dwelling unit is occupied by the owner of a business located in the same building. Only one business may be located in a building that also contains a residence on the first floor. 
3.  The outside conduct, display or storage of any product, inventory, materials, equipment or service is prohibited, including, but not limited to, seasonal merchandise, beverage machines, ice machines, LP gas tank storage, pallets, landscape plants or materials, and children's amusement rides. This prohibition does not apply to outside trash and recyclable storage when in an approved screen enclosure. 
4.  Hospitals are prohibited. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in O3 District except as specified in Subsection (b)(1)a of this section; 
2.  Apparel and apparel accessory stores; 
3.  Art and craft stores; 
4.  Banks and other types of financial institutions; 
5.  Barbershops; 
6.  Beauty shops; 
7.  Book, stationery, newspaper or magazine stores; 
8.  Camera and photographic stores; 
9.  Candy, confectionery, or ice cream stores; 
10.  Card, curio and gift shops; 
11.  Coffee shops; 
12.  Drugstores; 
13.  Dry cleaning establishments retail only; 
14.  Florist shops; 
15.  Food stores, bakeries, grocery stores, meat and fish markets, delicatessens, and fruit and vegetable markets, convenience stores without petroleum product dispensing, sales or storage; 
16.  Garden supply stores; 
17.  General merchandise stores; 
18.  Hardware stores; 
19.  Laundries, self-service, coin-operated; 
20.  Liquor stores; 
21.  Locksmith shops; 
22.  Photography studios; 
23.  Optical goods stores; 
24.  Post offices (branch only); 
25.  Radio, music and musical instruments and computer stores; 
26.  Retail bakeries; 
27.  Small electrical appliance, clock, watch and jewelry sales and repair shops; 
28.  Sport equipment and clothing stores; 
29.  Shoe repair shops; 
30.  Tax return preparation stores; 
31.  Underground public utility uses such as, electric substations, sewage lift stations, water pumping stations, water reservoirs, telephone transmission equipment, gas regulator stations; 
32.  Video tape rental and sales stores; 
33.  Exercise studio. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in B1 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Planned unit developments for permitted and conditional uses allowed within the B1 district subject to compliance with the standards outlined in this chapter and Section 42-274; 
2.  Drive-up or drive-through facilities in conjunction with any use permitted within the district except that such facilities in conjunction with any restaurant or food service use are prohibited within the district; 
3.  Private outdoor recreational activity accessory to a listed permitted use; 
4.  Above ground public utility uses such as: electric substations, water reservoirs, telephone transmission equipment, gas regulator stations, sewage lift stations, water pumping stations and other similar utility use; 
5.  Restaurants no greater than 7,500 gross square feet in total building size and with no banquet or meeting rooms seating more than 50 people, and also with no drive-up or drive-through facilities. Outdoor cafe seating shall be included in the total allowed square footage; 
6.  Large developments as defined by having any one of the following: 
(i)  Any development containing a building of more than 15,000 gross square feet. 
(ii)  Any development on a single site containing five or more acres or the development of multiple sites that collectively total five acres or more when said multiple sites are developed with any common link or nexus, including, but not limited to, shared infrastructure, improvements, design theme or elements, or development or subdivision name. 
(iii)  Any development which contains more than one building per site, lot or parcel. 
d.  Minimum lot area. None. 
e.  Minimum lot width fronting a public street. 100 feet. 
f.  Maximum building size. Principal buildings, 15,000 square feet, except that restaurants shall not exceed a total gross floor area of 7,500 square feet and buildings greater than 15,000 square feet may be permitted by Plan Commission approval of a conditional use permit for a large development containing such a structure. 
Accessory buildings, 750 square feet. Only one accessory building is permitted per lot or parcel. 
g.  Maximum height. The maximum height of any building, structure or use shall not exceed 40 feet and any such building shall not contain more than two stories above grade. 
h.  Minimum setbacks. Minimum setbacks required from the property line to principal and accessory buildings, structures and uses and off-street parking. Property which adjoins any of the following roadways shall provide setbacks as specified within each category. 
1.  Major U.S. or state highways. 
(i)  Special setback requirement. The setback for buildings and structures from property line along the following major U.S. or State highways shall be 80 feet from such highway or 50 feet from an access or frontage road adjacent to said highway, whichever is greater. Parking shall meet the local street setback requirements. 
Center Avenue (U.S. Highway 51) 	(Kellogg Avenue to south City limits) 
Milton Avenue (STH 26) 	(Blackbridge Road to north City limits) 
North Parker Drive (U.S. Highway 51) 	(U.S. Highway 14 to north City limits) 
East Racine Street (STH 11) 	(Interstate 90 to east City limits) 
U.S. Highway 14 	
STH 351 	
 
(ii)  Setback requirements for principal and accessory buildings, structures, uses and off-street parking from the property lines for the remainder of the property not adjoining a major U.S. or State highway shall be as required for local streets as set out in Subsection h.2 of this section. 
2.  Local street. 
(i)  Front yard, corner yard and any other property line adjoining a public street right-of-way line: 25 feet; 
(ii)  Side yard: ten feet or none if common party fire wall is provided; 
(iii)  Rear yard: ten feet except corner lots which will be treated as having two side yards; 
(iv)  Adjoining a residence district: Where a building or structure is located on a lot which adjoins a residence district, a side yard setback equal in dimension to the height of the building or structure and a rear yard setback equal in dimension to the height of the building or structure or 25 feet, whichever is greater, shall be provided. The above setback requirements shall apply only to that portion of the lot adjoining the residence district. 
3.  Parking shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any front or corner yard property line and five feet from all other property lines except when adjoining a residence district where the set back shall be ten feet. 
i.  Green area. Not less than 20 percent of the gross lot area shall be permanently set aside planted and maintained as green area except sites that contain buildings greater than 15,000 square feet in size shall provide 30 percent of the total lot area as green area. 
j.  Site access. Vehicle access for nonresidential development is prohibited from a local residential street unless said point of access is within 500 feet of a through or connecting arterial street as enumerated in Chapter 38 or, in the opinion of the City Engineer, said local street will eventually be classified as a through or connecting arterial street. 
k.  Signs. The intent of the following provisions is to reduce the impacts of sign installation and associated lighting on properties surrounding development on sites located within the B1 District. The standards contained herein recognize that the general sign provisions found within Chapter 28 allow a multitude of under regulated sign options that are not compatible with development intended to adjoin residential land uses. As such the following standards regarding sign installation shall apply in addition to those applicable from said Chapter 28. 
1.  Standards of this section that are more restrictive than those found in Chapter 28 shall prevail. 
2.  Installation or use of any of the following types of sign, as they are defined in Chapter 14, is prohibited: Attention-getting devices, banners, directional signs, electronic message signs, instructional signs, mobile signs, off-premises signs, roof signs. 
3.  On-premises ground signs shall comply with the following regulations: 
(i)  The ground sign is located where otherwise permitted but in no event less than two feet from a parking lot, driveway, highway, other right-of-way, sidewalk, or property line and in no event within a vision triangle as defined in Section 42-354(a) for uncontrolled intersections, which shall be applied to the following areas of the property: 
A.  All property corners located at street intersections and along all side property lines; and 
B.  At all intersections of driveways and sidewalks leading from the site to the adjoining property line or right-of-way lines. For these locations, the outside pavement, curb or sidewalk edges shall be used as the interior leg of the vision triangle and the intersecting property line as the other. 
(ii)  The ground sign shall not exceed 32 square feet of total area, including the sign base except for parcels having 600 lineal feet or more of frontage on public streets, in which case, the ground sign area may not exceed 64 square feet, including the sign base. The surface area of the sign base shall be calculated based on the total perimeter boundary of the base from ground plane to the bottom of the sign area and from outside edge to outside edge of the vertical sides. Any openings in the base shall be included within the area calculation. Properties adjoining state and federal highways may increase the above-noted ground sign areas to 75 and 125 square feet respectively. 
(iii)  No more than one such ground sign shall be permitted or located per parcel. 
(iv)  Ground signs shall not exceed six feet in height except where a property adjoins a state or federal highway then the ground sign shall not exceed a height of ten feet. 
4.  Wall signs may only be installed on facades of buildings that face a public street or parking area. No internally illuminated wall sign shall be placed on a wall or building elevation that adjoins or is opposite a residential zone district. 
5.  Within this district, window signs shall be considered wall signs and thus subject to all regulations pertaining to wall signs. 
(2)  B2 Community Shopping District. The B2 Community Shopping District is designed to provide for the needs of a much larger consumer population than is served by the neighborhood convenience district; thus a wider range of uses and structure sizes is permitted for both daily and occasional shopping. This district is generally located astride major commercial arterials and designed to be mapped for the larger shopping center. 
a.  General conditions. 
1.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. 
2.  Dwelling units are permitted only above the first floor except in the following two situations: 
(i)  A dwelling unit shall be permitted on the first floor if the dwelling unit is occupied by the owner of a business located in the same building; 
(ii)  Lodging rooms shall be permitted on the first floor of a hotel or motel. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in B1 District; 
2.  Antique shops; 
3.  Appliance stores, household; 
4.  Arcade establishments with mechanical amusements; 
5.  Art and school supply stores; 
6.  Automobile supply store, retail sales only; 
7.  Banks and financial institutions having no drive-in facilities; 
8.  Bicycle sales, rental and repair; 
9.  Camping and recreation equipment; but not including sale of motorized vehicles; 
10.  Carpet and rug stores; 
11.  China and glassware stores; 
12.  Clothing stores; 
13.  Custom dressmaking; 
14.  Department stores; 
15.  Furniture and home furnishing stores; 
16.  Glass and window shops; 
17.  Golf equipment sales, retail; 
18.  Gun shops; 
19.  Health clubs; 
20.  Hobby shops; 
21.  High fidelity and stereophonic equipment; 
22.  Interior decorating shops; 
23.  Jewelry stores; including watch repair; 
24.  Leather goods and luggage stores; 
25.  Mail order service stores; 
26.  Music instrument sales and repairs; 
27.  Music stores; sheet music, phonographs; 
28.  Needlework and notions; 
29.  Newsstands; 
30.  Offices and shop facilities for building, electrical, plumbing, painting, and heating and air conditioning contractors, provided there shall be no outside storage of materials, heavy equipment, or trucks over 8,000 pounds g.v.w.; 
31.  Office supply stores; 
32.  Outdoor cafes; 
33.  Paint and wallpaper stores; 
34.  Pet shops; 
35.  Picture framing, when conducted on-premises for retail trade; 
36.  Printers and printing shops; 
37.  Production and repair of artwork, needlework, clothing, and jewelry, retail; 
38.  Radio, TV, electronic equipment, retail sales and repair; 
39.  Radio and TV recording studios; 
40.  Rental equipment stores, no outdoor display or storage of equipment; 
41.  Restaurants, not including drive-in types; 
42.  Restaurants with liquor licenses, provided at least 50 percent of gross revenues are from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages; 
43.  Schools, music, dance and business; 
44.  Secondhand stores and rummage shops, retail sales of clothing and household goods; 
45.  Sewing machine sales and service; 
46.  Shoe stores; 
47.  Sporting goods stores; 
48.  Tailor shops; 
49.  Taxidermy shops; 
50.  Theaters, not including drive-in theaters; 
51.  Tobacco stores; 
52.  Toy shops; 
53.  Upholstery repair; 
54.  Variety stores. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in B2 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Animal hospitals and veterinary services in enclosed buildings; 
2.  Archery lanes; 
3.  Bowling alleys; 
4.  Drive-in banks and other types of financial institutions with drive-in facilities; 
5.  Drive-in restaurants; 
6.  Hospitals; 
7.  Hotels; 
8.  Motels; 
9.  Planned unit developments as provided for in Section 42-274 for permitted and conditional uses as provided in the B2 District; 
10.  Taverns and cocktail lounges, with or without a beer garden; 
11.  Private outdoor recreational activities accessory to a listed permitted use; 
12.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing. 
13.  Lodginghouses, roominghouses or boardinghouses located above the first floor; 
14.  Gasoline service stations. Gasoline service stations shall be permitted only in accordance with the following procedures, regulations and standards: 
(i)  Approval of new stations. No building permit for a new gasoline station shall be issued until a conditional use permit has first been issued by the Plan Commission. The applicant shall apply for such conditional use permit as provided in Section 42-272. 
(ii)  Location. No station shall be permitted unless it adjoins one of the following streets: 
Afton Road 	Rockport Road to south City limits 
Beloit Avenue 	South City limits to West Delavan Drive 
Center Avenue 	West Court Street to south City limits 
East and West Centerway 	West Court Street to Garfield Avenue 
West Court Street 	Jackson Street to west City limits 
East and West Delavan Drive 	Center Avenue to east City limits 
North and South Franklin Street 	Mineral Point Avenue to Racine Street 
North and South Jackson Street 	Mineral Point Avenue to Racine Street 
Milton Avenue 	North City limits to East Centerway 
East Milwaukee Street 	East City limits to East Centerway 
Mineral Point Avenue 	North Franklin Street to Terrace Street 
North Parker Drive 	Centerway to north City limits 
East and West Racine Street 	Center Avenue to east City limits 
North River Street 	Mineral Point Avenue to Highland Avenue 
Rockport Road 	Center Avenue to Afton Road 
North Terrace Street 	Mineral Point Avenue to North Washington Street 
U.S. Highway 14 	Within the City limits 
North Washington Street 	North Terrace Street to northwest City limits. 
Memorial Drive 	Railroad Street to Harding Street 
 
(iii)  Plan Commission findings. The Plan Commission shall, in addition to the standards established for conditional uses, Section 42-272, also consider the following conditions prior to taking action on the request: 
A.  Will the use of the site for a service station impair, endanger, inhibit or in some manner impede the proper flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in, about or on the street upon which such service station fronts? 
B.  Will the auxiliary service unit, such as bulk tank trucks and other serving units, be inherently dangerous in the geographical location due to population or traffic density or pattern? 
C.  Will the proposed station comply with all applicable standards presented herein or with other applicable laws or codes? 
D.  In determining its findings, the Plan Commission shall take into account the character and use of adjoining buildings and those in the vicinity, the number of persons residing or working in such buildings and traffic conditions in the vicinity. 
E.  If the applicant owns, controls or owned within the past 36 months any station which is abandoned, vacant or inoperative, the applicant shall provide a complete plan for the future use of such station. Such plan shall be approved by the City Plan Commission before or as part of the approval of application for the new station, and the Plan Commission shall establish a reasonable time limit within which such plan must be carried out. 
(iv)  Standards. 
A.  Lot area. 
(1)  Gasoline dispensing station: 10,000 feet; 
(2)  Gasoline dispensing and service: 10,000 square feet, 2,000 square feet per bay. 
B.  Lot width. 
(1)  Gasoline dispensing station: 100 feet; 
(2)  Gasoline dispensing and service: 120 feet. 
C.  General provisions. 
(1)  All activities necessary for or incidental to the operation of the station shall be conducted entirely within the building with the following exceptions: 
(a)  Emergency services and tire changing; 
(b)  Dispensing of gasoline and those minor service functions which are customarily performed while dispensing gasoline. 
(2)  Seasonal merchandise as defined in this article may be displayed on the premises, provided such display does not encroach upon a required setback, a required off-street parking area, a required green area or obstruct vehicular or pedestrian access. In addition, the following shall be permitted, provided they conform to all setback lines: 
(a)  Outside tire cabinets or tire merchandisers for the display and storage of tires only will be permitted outside the building, provided that such cabinets are of a totally enclosed type. 
(b)  Coin-operated machines for vending of soft drinks and similar items will be permitted outside the building, provided that such machines are located in an orderly manner. 
D.  Inoperative, vacant or abandoned service stations. Any inoperative, vacant or abandoned service station shall not be permitted to apply for a building permit to reopen such station until the following provisions are complied with: 
(1)  A complete set of plans as required in site plan review Subsection (d) of Section 42-273 that show compliance with: 
(a)  Location: Subsection (b)(2)c.15(ii) of this section; 
(b)  Driveway openings: Subsection (a)(8) of this section; 
(c)  Green area requirements: Subsection (a)(6) of this section; 
(d)  Sign ordinance: Chapter 28; 
(e)  General provisions: Subsection (b)(2)c.15(iv) of this section. 
(2)  A complete plan of the future use of any other abandoned, vacant or inoperative stations: Subsection (b)(2)c.15(iii) of this section 
(3)  A favorable recommendation of the Site Plan Review Committee. A negative recommendation will be automatically forwarded to the Plan Commission which will have authority to grant or deny such request. 
For the purposes of this subsection, any station which has been abandoned, vacant or inoperative for any seven consecutive days in the 60-day period prior to the application for the new station, or which has been used for other than a gasoline station for any seven consecutive days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays in the 60-day period shall be considered an abandoned, vacant or inoperative station. 
15.  Motorized recreational vehicle sales and repair (and uses incidental thereto) to include motorcycles, snowmobiles, small personal watercraft, ATVs, side-by-sides, scooters and go carts. 
16.  Large developments as defined by having any one of the following characteristics: 
(i)  Any development containing a building with a ground floor footprint of 25,000 square feet or more, as measured at the building foundation. 
(ii)  Any development on a single site containing five or more acres or the development of multiple sites that collectively total five acres or more when said multiple sites are developed with any common link or nexus, including, but not limited to, shared infrastructure or physical site improvements 
(iii)  Any development that contains more than one building per site, lot or parcel. 
d.  Lot area. None. 
e.  Lot width. None. 
f.  Maximum building height. None. 
g.  Minimum setback requirements. The requirements for setbacks in the B2 District shall be the same provided in the B1 District. 
h.  Green area. Not less than ten percent of the gross lot area shall be permanently set aside, planted and maintained as green area. Planted and provided as regulated in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
i.  Off-street parking and loading. Provided as regulated in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
(3)  B3 General Commercial District. The B3 General Commercial District is intended to accommodate those motorist-oriented commercial activities which may be incompatible with uses in other business districts, and whose service area is not confined to any one neighborhood or community. This district is generally located along major commercial arterials. 
a.  General conditions. 
1.  Dwelling units are permitted only above the first floor, except that in a hotel or motel, lodging rooms are permitted on the first floor. 
2.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments unless otherwise provided herein. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the B2 District, except as specified in Subsection (b)(3)a of this section; 
2.  Amusement establishments within enclosed buildings: Bowling alleys, gymnasiums, swimming pools, skating rinks, handball court, archery lanes, tennis courts and other similar uses; 
3.  Animal hospital or veterinary services, provided all kennels are within completely enclosed buildings; 
4.  Auction rooms; 
5.  Automobile rental; 
6.  Automotive repair shops but not body shops; 
7.  Bakeries with retail, wholesale and garage facilities; 
8.  Boat storage, sales and repairs and uses incidental thereto; 
9.  Bus stations; 
10.  Exterminating shops; 
11.  Furniture refinishing shops; 
12.  Hotel; 
13.  House and office cleaning service; 
14.  Greenhouses, retail sales on-premises; 
15.  Golf driving ranges and par three courses; 
16.  Lawnmower shops; 
17.  Machinery, vehicle and equipment sales all within enclosed buildings; 
18.  Cemetery monument sales, including outdoor display of monuments; 
19.  Motel; 
20.  Motor vehicle sales and automotive equipment sales; 
21.  Outdoor cafe/beer garden; 
22.  Parking lots and storage garages for motor vehicles; 
23.  Railroad passenger stations; 
24.  Recreational vehicle sales; 
25.  Schools, commercial or trade; 
26.  Taverns and cocktail lounges; 
27.  Trailer sales; 
28.  Truck rental; 
29.  Used car lots. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in B3 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272. 
1.  Planned unit developments as provided for in Section 42-273 for permitted and conditional uses in the B3 District; 
2.  Gasoline service stations in accordance with Subsection (b)(2)c.14 of this section; 
3.  Feed stores; 
4.  Kennels; 
5.  Drive-in establishments: 
(i)  Restaurants; 
(ii)  Banks and financial institutions; 
(iii)  Carwashes; 
(iv)  Theaters; 
(v)  Hospitals; 
(vi)  Body shops; 
(vii)  Welding shops; 
(viii)  Wholesale establishments; 
6.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing; 
7.  Storage and warehousing establishments; 
8.  Building material sales with accessory outdoor display of merchandise within a screened area as approved by the Plan Commission; 
9.  Sheltered workshops; 
10.  Private outdoor recreational activity as either the principal or accessory use; 
11.  Hatcheries within completely enclosed buildings. No hatchery shall in any manner create or cause any nuisance, including, but not limited to, noise or odor; 
12.  Research and development activities; 
13.  Miniwarehouses, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(i)  All storage materials shall be kept entirely within the buildings. No outdoor storage is permitted; 
(ii)  The selection of building materials and design shall be compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood; 
14.  Production of cabinets, countertops, mattresses and other household furnishings for retail sale only, not manufacturing for wholesale; 
15.  Microbreweries with or without on-site food sales; 
16.  Lodginghouses, roominghouses or boardinghouses located above the first floor; 
17.  Large developments as defined by having any one of the following characteristics: 
(i)  Any development containing a building with a ground floor footprint of 25,000 square feet or more, as measured at the building foundation; 
(ii)  Any development on a single site containing five or more acres or the development of multiple sites that collectively total five acres or more when said multiple sites are developed with any common link or nexus, including, but not limited to, shared infrastructure or physical site improvements; 
(iii)  Any development that contains more than one building per site, lot or parcel; 
18.  Brewpubs. 
d.  Lot area. None. 
e.  Lot width. None. 
f.  Maximum building height. None. 
g.  Minimum setback requirements: 
1.  Front yard: 25 feet; 
2.  Corner side yard: 25 feet; 
3.  Side yard: Ten feet or none if a common party fire wall is provided; 
4.  Rear yard: Ten feet. 
Adjoining a residence district: where a building or structure is located on a lot which adjoins a residence district, a side yard setback equal in dimension to the height of the building or structure and a rear yard setback equal in dimension to the height of the building or structure or 25 feet, whichever is greater, shall be provided. 
h.  Green area. Not less than ten percent of the gross lot area shall be permanently set aside, planted and maintained as green area. 
i.  Off-street parking and loading. Provided as required in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
(4)  B4 Business Highway District. The B4 Business Highway District is intended to accommodate the special needs of the persons and vehicles traveling on the freeway and intersecting highways. The B4 District is generally located around the interchanges and intersecting highways. 
a.  General conditions. Dwelling units are permitted above the first floor, except that in a hotel or motel, lodging rooms are permitted on the first floor. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the B3 District. 
2.  Adult entertainment or adult oriented establishments. Such adult entertainment or oriented establishment is a permitted use only upon compliance with each and every one of the following conditions: 
(i)  Such premises has been granted an adult entertainment license, pursuant to, and the establishment is otherwise in conformity with, Chapter 4, as from time to time amended, renumbered or otherwise modified. 
(ii)  The adult entertainment or adult oriented establishment shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any established public school, parochial school, hospital, medical clinic, church, licensed youth entertainment center, residential district, public park, day care center and other adult-oriented establishment, or an establishment with either any Class B or Class A fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor alcohol beverage license. Such distances shall be measured from the property line or boundary line of the above-listed use. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in B4 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Gasoline service stations subject to provisions of Subsection (b)(2)c.14 of this section; 
2.  Feed stores; 
3.  Kennels; 
4.  Drive-in establishments: 
(i)  Restaurants; 
(ii)  Banks and financial institutions; 
(iii)  Carwashes; 
(iv)  Theaters; 
5.  Body shops; 
6.  Welding shops; 
7.  Travel trailer parks with recommendation by the Plan Commission and approval by City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 42-276; 
8.  Building material sales with accessory outdoor display of merchandise within a screened area as approved by the Plan Commission; 
9.  Storage and warehousing establishments; 
10.  Wholesale establishments; 
11.  Private outdoor recreational activity as either the principal or accessory use; 
12.  Research and development activities; 
13.  Public utility and public service facilities with accessory outdoor storage within a screened area as approved by the Plan Commission; 
14.  Production of cabinets, countertops, mattresses and other household furnishings for retail sale only, not manufacturing for wholesale; 
15.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing; 
16.  Lodginghouses, roominghouses or boardinghouses located above the first floor; 
17.  Large developments as defined by having any one of the following characteristics: 
(i)  Any development containing a building with a ground floor footprint of 25,000 square feet or more, as measured at the building foundation; 
(ii)  Any development on a single site containing five or more acres or the development of multiple sites that collectively total five acres or more when said multiple sites are developed with any common link or nexus, including, but not limited to, shared infrastructure or physical site improvements; 
(iii)  Any development that contains more than one building per site, lot or parcel. 
18.  Hospitals; 
19.  Brewpubs; 
20.  Microbreweries with or without on-site food sales; 
21.  Sheltered workshops. 
d.  Lot area. None. 
e.  Lot width. None. 
f.  Maximum building heights. None. 
g.  Minimum setback requirements. The requirements for setbacks in the B4 District shall be the same as provided in the B2 District. 
h.  Green area. Not less than 20 percent of the gross lot area shall be permanently set aside, planted and maintained as green area. 
i.  Off-street parking and loading. Provided as required in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
(5)  B5 Central Business District. The B5 Central Business District constitutes the downtown core area of the City. It is intended to accommodate all those retail, service, housing, recreation, specialty shops and necessary civic services that are characteristic of the traditional central area. 
a.  General conditions. 
1.  Dwelling units are permitted only above the first floor except in the following two situations: 
(i)  Lodging rooms shall be permitted on the first floor of a hotel or motel; 
(ii)  Dwelling units shall be permitted on the first floor subject to the provisions of Section 42-272, conditional uses, and Subsection (5)c.10 of this section as approved by the Plan Commission. 
2.  All business and servicing, except off-street parking and loading shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
3.  Except for banks and financial institutions, drive-in establishments dealing directly with consumers are prohibited. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the B2 District, except as specified in Subsection (b)(5)a of this section; 
2.  Radio, TV and recording studios; 
3.  Outdoor cafe/beer garden; 
4.  Taverns and cocktail lounges; 
5.  Hotels and motels; 
6.  Community living arrangements for more than 15 individuals, provided such facility is located no closer than 2,000 feet from an existing community living arrangement. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in a B5 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Drive-in banks or other types of financial institutions; 
2.  Auction rooms; 
3.  Community living arrangements for more than 15 individuals provided such facility is located no closer than 2,000 feet from an existing community living arrangement; 
4.  Research and development activities; 
5.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing; 
6.  Lodginghouses, roominghouses or boardinghouses located above the first floor; 
7.  Large developments as defined by having any one of the following characteristics: 
(i)  Any development containing a building with a ground floor footprint of 25,000 square feet or more, as measured at the building foundation; 
(ii)  Any development on a single site containing five or more acres or the development of multiple sites that collectively total five acres or more when said multiple sites are developed with any common link or nexus, including, but not limited to, shared infrastructure or physical site improvements; 
(iii)  Any development that contains more than one building per site, lot or parcel; 
8.  Brewpubs; 
9.  Microbreweries with or without food sales; 
10.  First floor residential dwelling units, subject to the following restrictions: 
(i)  First floor residential use may be established if at least 25 percent of the ground floor area remains devoted to retail or business use, as permitted in the district, for buildings located along Main and Milwaukee Streets. The business use shall occupy the traditional store front area of the building and the Plan Commission may reduce this standard, as necessary, in the establishment of a business use in the store front area of the structure; 
(ii)  Access to residential dwellings may occur along front entryways of buildings adjoining Main and Milwaukee Streets in accordance with the subsections provided herein; 
(iii)  Exterior features and architectural elements of existing building facades must not be altered in a manner which detracts significantly from the character of other buildings within the same block, or across the street from the property; 
(iv)  Clear ingress and egress shall be established pursuant to all applicable building and fire codes, as amended from time to time; 
(v)  Compliance with all other applicable city codes and regulations as may be required to allow for residential occupancy of first floor areas. 
d.  Lot area. None. 
e.  Lot width. None. 
f.  Maximum building height. None. 
g.  Minimum setback requirements. None, except as provided below: 
1.  If a lot in the B5 District is situated adjoining a residence district, the following setback requirements shall apply: 
(i)  Side yard: eight feet; 
(ii)  Rear yard: 25 feet; 
2.  The above setback requirements shall apply only to that portion of the lot adjoining the residence district; 
h.  Green area. None. 
i.  Off-street parking and loading. None. 
(6)  B6 Central Service District. The B6 Central Service District is designed primarily to furnish areas served by the Central Business District with a wide variety of services or functions which may be incompatible if located directly within the core area. The B6 District also serves as potential expansion area for the B5 District. 
a.  General conditions. All business, servicing excepting off-street parking and loading shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the B3 District and/or B5 District; 
2.  Publication and newspaper printing. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in B6 District subject to the provisions in Section 42-272: 
1.  Drive-in establishments; 
2.  Gasoline service stations subject to provisions of Subsection (b)(1)c.14 of this section; 
3.  Body and paint shops; 
4.  Dams and electrical generating facilities; 
5.  Multifamily apartment buildings not less than two stories in height; 
6.  Warehouse establishments; 
7.  Correctional institutions; 
8.  Building material sales with accessory outdoor display of merchandise within a screened area as approved by the Plan Commission; 
9.  Wholesale establishments; 
10.  Private outdoor recreational activities as either the principal or accessory use; 
11.  Research and development activities; 
12.  Production of cabinets, countertops, mattresses and other household furnishings for retail sale only, not manufacturing for wholesale; 
13.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing; 
14.  Lodginghouses, roominghouses or boardinghouses located above the first floor; 
15.  Large developments as defined by having any one of the following characteristics: 
(i)  Any development containing a building with a ground floor footprint of 25,000 square feet or more, as measured at the building foundation; 
(ii)  Any development on a single site containing five or more acres or the development of multiple sites that collectively total five acres or more when said multiple sites are developed with any common link or nexus, including, but not limited to, shared infrastructure or physical site improvements; 
(iii)  Any development that contains more than one building per site, lot or parcel; 
16.  Brewpubs; 
17.  Microbreweries with or without on-site food sales. 
d.  Lot area. None. 
e.  Lot width. None. 
f.  Maximum building height. None. 
g.  Minimum setback requirements. None, except as provided below: 
1.  If a lot in the B6 District is situated adjoining a residence district, the following setback requirements shall apply: 
(i)  Side yard: eight feet; 
(ii)  Rear yard: 25 feet. 
2.  The above setback requirements shall apply only to that portion of the lot adjoining the residence district; 
h.  Green area. Not less than five percent of the gross lot area shall be permanently set aside, planted and maintained as green area. 
i.  Off-street parking and loading. Provided as required in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
(7)  BT Business Technology District. The Business Technology District is intended to permit high quality office, education, research and technology, light manufacturing, and business service uses that would provide a transition between industrial and commercial uses. The district permits a mix of commercial and manufacturing uses that have limited outside storage needs. In addition, the district prohibits large scale warehousing and wholesaling distribution uses which generate high levels of semi-truck traffic and require large areas devoted to loading docks, semi-truck parking and/or outdoor storage. The business technology district is intended to be located adjacent to arterial streets and highways. The district provides large green areas and significant amounts of landscaping and building design in accordance with the physical development standards to ensure an attractive high quality corporate environment. 
a.  General conditions. 
1.  Dwelling units are permitted only above the first floor, except that in a hotel or motel, lodging rooms are permitted on the first floor. 
2.  No parking is permitted in required setback areas. 
3.  The outside sale, display or storage of any product, inventory, materials, equipment or service is prohibited including seasonal merchandise, except as provided in Section 42-357(b)(7)k. This prohibition does not apply to outside trash and recyclable storage when in an approved screen enclosure. 
4.  Wholesaling and warehousing uses are prohibited except as an accessory activity to a permitted use. In no case may the wholesale and warehouse activity comprise more than 50 percent of the square footage of the area associated with the principal use. 
5.  Architectural and landscaping requirements including construction shall be in compliance with the physical development standards, Article XI of this chapter. 
6.  All uses shall be conducted in such a manner so as to preclude any nuisance, hazard, or commonly recognized offensive conditions, or characteristics, including creation or emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, particulate matter, chemical compounds, electrical disturbance, humidity, heat, cold, glare, or night illumination. Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit, the Building Division Director may require evidence that adequate controls, measures, or devices have been provided to ensure and protect the public interest, health, comfort, convenience, safety, and general welfare from such nuisance, hazard, or offensive condition. 
b.  Permitted uses. Any light assembly, production, processing, cleaning, servicing, or testing uses which may include the repair of materials, goods or products, located within completely enclosed buildings, including the following: 
1.  Electronic and electrical products and instruments, such as transistors, semiconductors, small computers, scanners, monitors and compact communication devices; 
2.  High technology products related to the fields of physics, chemistry and biology; 
4.  Laser technology, radiology, x-ray and ultrasound products, manufacturing and assembly; 
5.  Medical and dental supplies; 
6.  Optical, fiber optical and photographic products and equipment; 
7.  Orthopedic and medical appliances, such as artificial limbs, brace supports and stretchers; 
8.  Scientific and precision instruments and components, including robotics; 
9.  Specific products not listed above but similar in intent and character may be permitted as provided in Section 42-357; 
10.  Research and development activities and testing laboratories; 
11.  Telecommunication centers; 
12.  Mail-order establishments; 
13.  Printing and publishing; 
14.  Data entry or processing; 
15.  Computer support or development operations; 
16.  Sheltered workshops; 
17.  Business technology incubators; 
18.  Business and professional offices; 
19.  Medical and dental clinics; 
20.  Professional or personal services; 
21.  Hotel and motels; 
22.  Banks and other types of financial institutions; 
23.  Hospitals; 
24.  Business, commercial or trade schools; 
25.  Training centers; 
26.  Health clubs; 
27.  Restaurants; 
28.  Educational and institutional uses (public and philanthropic); 
29.  Day care centers (nine or more children); 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in the BT District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Public utility uses, such as, electric substations, water reservoirs, fire stations, telephone transmission equipment buildings, telephone exchanges and gas regulator stations. 
2.  Planned unit developments as provided in Section 42-274 for permitted and conditional uses in the BT District. 
3.  Private outdoor recreational activities, accessory to listed permitted uses. 
4.  Drive-up or drive-through facilities in conjunction with any use permitted within the district. 
5.  Banquet facilities and convention centers. 
6.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing. 
d.  Lot area. One acre. 
e.  Lot width. 100 feet. 
f.  Minimum setback requirements. The requirements for setbacks in the BT District shall be the same provided in the B1 District. 
g.  Maximum building height. None. 
h.  Green area. Not less than 20 percent of the gross lot area shall be permanently set aside, planted and maintained as green area. 
i.  Screening. There shall be provided and maintained a ten-foot-wide permanent screen buffer strip along the boundary of an BT District which adjoins a residence district. Such screening shall be a living hedge, shrubs or trees, which at the time of planting shall be a minimum of three feet in height and three feet in width and shall within a period of four years obtain a height of at least five feet. When such screening is within the required front and corner side yard maximum height shall be 30 inches. The Site Plan Review Coordinator may modify the screening requirements when screening exists on adjoining property. The Site Plan Review Coordinator may also substitute an opaque fence in addition to or in combination with the screening requirement. 
j.  Off-street parking and loading. As provided in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
k.  Storage areas. All storage, except for licensed motor vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings, or effectively screened with an opaque screening not less than six nor more than eight feet in height, and no storage shall exceed the height of such screening. All outside storage areas shall be located to the rear of buildings and shall be limited to not more than five percent of the total lot area. 
(Code 1976, § 18.36.040; Ord. No. 2019-763, §§ I, II, 9-9-2019)  
Sec. 42-443. - Industrial districts. 
(a)  General requirements. Industrial district regulations are intended to govern the development and use of a full range of industrial establishments. 
(1)  Permitted uses. All buildings, structures and land, and the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving or structural alteration of such shall hereafter be used or occupied in conformity with all the provisions specified for the district in which it is located. No land or buildings shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the industrial district in which such land, structures, or buildings shall be located. 
(2)  Nonconforming uses. All buildings, structures and land which were lawful before this article was adopted or amended and which become legally nonconforming, as a result, to the provisions of Section 42-359. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses, as listed in each industrial district, may be allowed only in the industrial district indicated. The conditional use shall be subject to the issuance of conditional use permits in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 42-272. 
(4)  Green area. 
a.  Green area shall be permanently provided and properly maintained on each lot devoted to any industrial use as set forth in each industrial zoning district. Such green area shall not be devoted to service driveways, walks, off-street parking spaces, loading berths, or other similar uses, but shall include landscaping such as grass, shrubs, bushes, rock gardens, trees, flowers, and other types of aesthetic treatment. 
b.  The green area requirement is based on gross lot area. Gross lot area does not include the area between the sidewalk and the future curbline as shown in the JATS plan; however such area may be used to fulfill up to 25 percent of the green area requirement if authorized by the Site Plan Review Coordinator. The Site Plan Review Coordinator may consider in his or her review of such a credit one or more of the following: 
1.  The quality and size of landscape plantings within the green areas provided on-site, and installation of terrace trees within the adjoining terrace; 
2.  Redevelopment sites where the ability of providing green area in front of the building is limited; and 
3.  The amount of green area provided in front of the building over the minimum requirement. 
c.  At least 50 percent of the green area shall be provided in the front or corner side yard between the principal building and the front or corner side property line. 
(5)  Driveway openings. Driveway openings shall be located at least 40 feet from a block corner. The maximum driveway opening shall be 36 feet at the curb and 30 feet at the sidewalk line. Where a driveway is in joint use with adjacent property, there shall be at least ten feet of driveway on each parcel. 
(6)  Screening. There shall be provided and maintained a permanent screening buffer strip at least ten feet in width along any boundary of any industrial district which adjoins or is opposite from a residence district. Such screening shall be a living hedge, shrubs or trees which, at the time of planting, shall be of sufficient density to effectively screen the industrial use from view of the adjoining or opposite residence district. Such screening shall be, at the time of planting, a minimum of three feet in height and shall, within a period of four years, attain a height of at least five feet. When such screening is located in the required front or corner side setback, the maximum height shall be 30 inches. 
(7)  Enclosure of refuse storage area. Trash or refuse storage areas are permitted outside the principal building, provided that: 
a.  Such storage areas are adequately screened from view from any point on the perimeter of the site except as approved otherwise by the Site Plan Review Coordinator; 
b.  Such storage area enclosure shall be made of the same material as the immediate adjacent wall of the principal building or such material as would not detract from the immediate surrounding neighborhood as approved by the Site Plan Review Coordinator; 
c.  Such storage area enclosure shall extend from the ground level to a minimum height of five feet and in no case shall be lower in height than that of trash receptacles. 
This section shall not apply to refuse storage areas which were legally nonconforming prior to November 13, 2000. 
(b)  District requirements. 
(1)  M1 Light Industrial District. The M1 Light Industrial District is designed to provide a suitable environment for those industrial activities that require a pleasant environment which is substantially hazard and nuisance free and also for those activities which do not create appreciable hazards or nuisances. 
a.  General conditions. 
1.  Residential uses are prohibited except for watchman's quarters. Retail sales are prohibited except if incidental to the primary industrial use. 
2.  All uses shall be conducted in such manner so as not to exceed the standards established in Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended, as it relates to noise, dust, fumes, gases and storage of flammable liquids. 
All manufacturing activities shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings except for off-street parking and loading. Outside storage of materials and merchandise shall be effectively screened from view when adjoining or opposite from a nonindustrial zoned district. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Agriculture; 
2.  Any production, processing, assembling, cleaning, servicing, testing; 
3.  Building material sales; 
4.  Bakery, dairy and other food products; 
5.  Bottling or distribution plants, milk or soft drinks; 
6.  Cleaning and dyeing establishments; 
7.  Contractors' offices and shops; 
8.  Parks, playgrounds and open spaces; 
9.  Frozen food stores, lockers; 
10.  Garages for repair and servicing of motor vehicles including body repair, painting or motor rebuilding; 
11.  Greenhouses, wholesale; 
12.  Laboratories, research, development and testing; 
13.  Machine shops; 
14.  Mail order houses; 
15.  Metal finishing, plating, grinding, sharpening, polishing, cleaning, rustproofing and heat treatment; 
16.  Metal stamping; 
17.  Miniwarehouses; 
18.  Monument works including accessory open sale lots; 
19.  Parking lots and storage garages; 
20.  Plumbing, heating and ventilating; 
21.  Printing and publishing; 
22.  Public utility and public service facilities, such as, sewage treatment plants, bus terminals, garages and lots, electric substations, gas regulator stations, telephone transmission equipment buildings, telephone exchanges, sewage lift stations, water pumping stations, water reservoirs, fire stations, public safety training facilities; 
23.  Storage and warehouse establishments, including wholesaling; 
24.  Storage yards, but not including junk or salvage yards. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in the Ml District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Industrial planned unit developments; 
2.  Airports and heliports and aircraft landing fields; 
3.  Railroad freight terminals, switching; 
4.  Motor freight terminals; 
5.  Commercial uses if they are incidental to a permitted use; 
6.  Correctional institutions; 
7.  Archery lanes and rifle and pistol ranges within an enclosed building that has met the minimum NRA standards for safe ranges; 
8.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing; 
9.  Day care centers; 
10.  Placement and operation of temporary and portable power generating equipment or facilities not to exceed two years; 
11.  Trade schools; 
12.  Recreation facilities (public and private) in enclosed buildings, gymnastics, dance schools, skating rinks, tennis courts, soccer, fitness centers and other similar uses. 
d.  Lot area. None. 
e.  Lot width. None. 
f.  Maximum building height. None. 
g.  Minimum setback requirements. 
1.  Front yard: 50 feet; 
2.  Corner side yard: 50 feet; 
3.  Side yard: ten feet or none if a common party fire wall is provided; 
4.  Rear yard: 25 feet; 
5.  Adjoining a residence district, where a building or structure is located on a lot which adjoins a residence district, a side yard setback equal in dimension to the height of the building or structure and a rear yard setback equal in dimension to the height of the building or structure, or 50 feet, whichever is greater, shall be provided. 
h.  Green area. Not less than 20 percent of the gross lot area shall be permanently set aside, planted and maintained as green area. 
i.  Off-street parking and loading. Provided as required in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
(2)  M2 General Industrial District. The M2 General Industrial District is designed to accommodate those industrial activities which may produce moderate nuisances or hazards in areas that are relatively remote from residential development in areas so designated on the comprehensive plan. 
a.  General conditions. 
1.  Residential uses are prohibited except for watchman's quarters. Retail sales are prohibited except if incidental to the primary industrial use. 
2.  All uses shall be conducted in such manner so as not to exceed the standards established in Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended, as it relates to noise, dust, fumes, gases and storage of flammable liquids. 
3.  All manufacturing activities shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings except for off-street parking and loading. Outside storage of materials and merchandise shall be effectively screened from view when adjoining or opposite from a nonindustrial zoned district. 
b.  Permitted uses. Any use permitted in Ml District. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in M2 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Industrial planned unit developments; 
2.  Airports and heliports and aircraft landing fields; 
3.  Asphalt and concrete batching or ready-mix plants located no closer than 500 feet from a residence district; 
4.  Chemical manufacturer; 
5.  Concrete products castings; 
6.  Junkyards, salvage yards, provided they are licensed by the City Council, fully screened, and located no closer than 300 feet from a residence district; 
7.  Motor freight terminals; 
8.  Restaurant or commercial uses if they are incidental to a permitted use; 
9.  Railroad freight terminals, railroad; 
10.  Storage of petroleum products; 
11.  Archery lanes and rifle and pistol ranges within an enclosed building that has met the minimum NRA standards for safe ranges; 
12.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing; 
13.  Placement and operation of temporary and portable power generating equipment or facilities not to exceed two years; 
14.  Seasonal migrant labor housing, on the same or adjacent site and accessory to the industrial use being served, subject to Section 18.24.085. 
d.  Lot area. None. 
e.  Lot width. None. 
f.  Maximum building height. None. 
g.  Minimum setback requirements. 
1.  Front yard: 25 feet; 
2.  Corner side yard: 25 feet; 
3.  Side yard: Ten feet or none if common party fire wall provided; 
4.  Rear yard: 25 feet; 
5.  Adjoining a residence district: where a building or structure is located on a lot which adjoins a residence district, side and rear yard setbacks equal in dimension to the height of the building or structure or 100 feet whichever is greater, shall be provided. 
h.  Green area. Not less than ten percent of the gross lot and shall be permanently set aside, planted and maintained as green area. 
i.  Off-street parking and loading: shall be provided as required in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
(3)  M3 Central Light Industrial District. The M3 Central Light Industrial District is designed to accommodate industrial activities that are substantially hazard and nuisance free, and commercial activities located around the central core of the City. The M3 District regulations shall apply only to the land within the limits described below: 
Area 1. Beginning at the point where the centerline of West Court Street intersects the centerline of South Franklin Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of South Franklin Street to the centerline of West Van Buren Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of West Van Buren Street to the Rock River; thence northwesterly along the west bank of the Rock River to the centerline of West Court Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of West Court Street to the point of beginning. 
Area 2. Beginning at the point where the centerline of East Centerway intersects the centerline of North Main Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of West Centerway to the centerline of Center Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Center Avenue to the centerline of West Holmes Street; thence west along the centerline of West Holmes Street to the centerline of South Washington Street, hence south along the centerline of South Washington Street to the centerline of Johnson Street, then west along the centerline of Johnson Street to the centerline of the vacated South Terrace Street; thence south along the centerline of vacated South Terrace Street to the centerline of West Racine Street; thence east along the centerline of West Racine Street to the centerline of South Washington Street; thence south along the centerline of South Washington Street to the centerline of Rockport Road; thence west along the centerline of Rockport Road to the centerline of South Pearl Street; thence north along the centerline of South Pearl Street to the centerline of West Court Street; thence east along the centerline of West Court Street to the centerline of North Washington Street; thence north along the centerline of North Washington Street to the centerline of West Wall Street; thence east one-half block along the centerline of West Wall Street to the centerline of an alley lying between North Washington Street and Madison Street from West Wall Street to Laurel Avenue; thence north along the centerline of said alley to the centerline of Laurel Avenue; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Laurel Avenue to a point where the east line of Lot 11 in Mitchell's Addition to the City of Janesville if extended in a southeasterly direction would intersect said centerline of Laurel Avenue; thence northwesterly along the said southeasterly extension of the east line of said Lot 11 through 13 to a point on the south lot line of Lot 14 in Mitchell's Addition to the City of Janesville, which is 198.72 feet southwesterly of the west line of North Academy Street; thence northeasterly along the south line of Lot 14 to a point 170 feet southwesterly of the westerly line of North Academy Street; thence northwesterly 15 feet parallel to and 170 feet southwesterly from the westerly line of North Academy Street; thence northeasterly along a line 15 feet north of and parallel to the southerly lot line of Lot 14 in said Mitchell's Addition to the centerline of North Academy Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of North Academy Street to the centerline of Race Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Race Street to the centerline of North Franklin Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of North Franklin Street to the centerline of Ravine Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Ravine Street to the centerline of North River Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of North River Street to the west extension of the centerline of Hyatt Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Hyatt Street extended and Hyatt Street to the centerline of North Parker Drive; thence northwesterly along the centerline of North Parker Drive to the centerline of St. Mary's Court; thence west along the centerline of St. Mary's Court to the centerline of North Water Street; thence north along the centerline of North Water Street to the centerline of Sherman Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Sherman Avenue to the centerline of North Parker Drive; thence southerly, along the centerline of North Parker Drive to the centerline of East Memorial Drive; thence east along the centerline of East Memorial Drive to the centerline of Harding Street; thence south along the centerline of Harding Street to the centerline of Glen Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Glen Street to the centerline of Avon Street; thence southerly and westerly along the centerline of Avon Street to the centerline of North Main Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of North Main Street to the centerline of East Centerway, which is the point of beginning. 
a.  General conditions. 
1.  Residential uses are prohibited except for watchman's quarters. 
2.  All uses shall be conducted in such manner so as not to exceed the standards established in Wisconsin Administrative Code (as amended) as it relates to noise, dust, fumes, gases and storage of flammable liquids. 
3.  All manufacturing activities shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings except for off-street parking and loading. Outside storage of materials and merchandise shall be effectively screened from view when adjoining or opposite from a nonindustrial zoned district. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Uses permitted in the Ml District. 
2.  Uses permitted in the B6 District. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in the M3 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272. 
1.  Industrial planned unit developments; 
2.  Railroad freight terminals, switching yards, roundhouses; 
3.  Motor freight terminals; 
4.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing; 
5.  Brewpubs; 
6.  Microbreweries with or without on-site food sales. 
d.  Lot area. None. 
e.  Lot width. None. 
f.  Maximum building height. None. 
g.  Minimum setback requirements. 
1.  Front yard: none except as provided below; 
2.  Corner side yard, side yard, and rear yard: none except as provided below. 
(i)  If a lot in the M3 District is situated adjoining a residence district, the following setback requirements shall apply: 
A.  Side yard: eight feet; 
B.  Rear yard: 25 feet. 
The above setback requirements shall apply only to that portion of the lot adjoining the residence district. 
(ii)  If a lot in the M3 District is located on a U.S. or state highway as designated on the official numbering map of the City, the front, corner side, or rear yard setback shall be 25 feet for that front, corner side and/or rear yard of the lot which adjoins the designated highway. 
h.  Green area. None. 
i.  Off-street parking and loading. shall be provided as required in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
(4)  M4 Central General Industrial District. The M4 Central General Industrial District is designated to accommodate industrial activities which may be of moderate nuisance or hazard and commercial activities located around the central core of the City. The M4 regulations shall apply only to land within the limits described below: 
Area 1. Beginning at the point where the centerline of West Court Street intersects the centerline of South Franklin Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of South Franklin Street to the centerline of West Van Buren Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of West Van Buren Street to the Rock River; thence northwesterly along the west bank of the Rock River to the centerline of West Court Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of West Court Street to the point of beginning. 
Area 2. Beginning at the point where the centerline of East Centerway intersects the centerline of North Main Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of West Centerway to the centerline of Center Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Center Avenue to the centerline of West Holmes Street; thence west along the centerline of West Holmes Street to the centerline of South Washington Street; thence south along the centerline of South Washington Street to the centerline of Johnson Street; thence west along the centerline of Johnson Street to the centerline of the vacated South Terrace Street; thence south along the centerline of vacated South Terrace Street to the centerline of West Racine Street; thence east along the centerline of West Racine Street to the centerline of South Washington Street; thence south along the centerline of South Washington Street to the centerline of Rockport Road; thence west along the centerline of Rockport Road to the centerline of South Pearl Street; thence north along the centerline of South Pearl Street to the centerline of West Court Street; thence east along the centerline of West Court Street to the centerline of North Washington Street; thence north along the centerline of North Washington Street to the centerline of West Wall Street; thence east one-half block along the centerline of West Wall Street to the centerline of an alley lying between North Washington Street and Madison Street from West Wall Street to Laurel Avenue; thence north along centerline of said alley to the centerline of Laurel Avenue; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Laurel Avenue to a point where the east line of Lot 11 in Mitchell's Addition to the City of Janesville if extended in a southeasterly direction would intersect said centerline of Laurel Avenue thence northwesterly along the said southeasterly extension of the east line of said Lot 11 through Lot 13 to a point on the south lot line of Lot 14 in Mitchell's Addition to the City of Janesville, which is 198.72 feet southwesterly of the west line of North Academy Street; thence northeasterly along the south line of Lot 14 to a point 170 feet southwesterly of the westerly line of North Academy Street; thence northwesterly 15 feet parallel to and 170 feet southwesterly from the westerly line of North Academy Street; thence northeasterly along a line 15 feet north of and parallel to the southerly lot line of Lot 14 in said Mitchell's Addition to the centerline of North Academy Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of North Academy Street to the centerline of Race Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Race Street to the centerline of North Franklin Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of North Franklin Street to the centerline of Ravine Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Ravine Street to the centerline of North River Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of North River Street to the west extension of the centerline of Hyatt Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Hyatt Street extended and Hyatt Street to the centerline of North Parker Drive; thence northwesterly along the centerline of North Parker Drive to the centerline of St. Mary's Court; thence west along the centerline of St. Mary's Court to the centerline of North Water Street; thence north along the centerline of North Water Street to the centerline of Sherman Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Sherman Avenue to the centerline of North Parker Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of North Parker Drive to the centerline of East Memorial Drive; thence east along the centerline of East Memorial Drive to the centerline of Harding Street; thence south along the centerline of Glen Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Glen Street to the centerline of Avon Street; thence southerly and westerly along the centerline of Avon Street to the centerline of North Main Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of North Main Street to the centerline of East Centerway, which is the point of beginning. 
1.  General conditions. 
(i)  Residential uses are prohibited except for watchman's quarters. 
(ii)  All uses shall be conducted in such manner so as not to exceed the standards established in Wisconsin Administrative Code (as amended) as it relates to noise, dust, fumes, gases and storage of flammable liquids. 
(iii)  All manufacturing activities shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings except for off-street parking and loading. Outside storage of materials and merchandise shall be effectively screened from view when adjoining or opposite from a nonindustrial zoned district. 
2.  Permitted uses. 
(i)  Any use permitted in the M1 District. 
(ii)  Any use permitted in the B6 District. 
3.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in the M4 District subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
(i)  Industrial planned unit developments; 
(ii)  Asphalt and concrete batching or ready-mix plants located no closer than 500 feet from a residence district; 
(iii)  Chemical manufacturer; 
(iv)  Concrete products castings; 
(v)  Junkyards, salvage yards, provided they are licensed by the City Council, fully screened, and located no closer than 300 feet from a residence district; 
(vi)  Motor freight terminals; 
(vii)  Railroad freight terminals, railroad; 
(viii)  Storage of petroleum products; 
(ix)  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing. 
4.  Lot area. None. 
5.  Lot width. None. 
6.  Minimum setback requirements. None. 
7.  Setback requirements. 
(i)  Front yard: None except as provided below; 
(ii)  Corner side yard, side yard, and rear yard: None except as provided below. 
A.  If a lot in the M4 District is situated adjoining a residence district, the following setback requirements shall apply: 
(a1)  Side yard: Eight feet; 
(a2)  Rear yard: 25 feet. 
The above setback requirements shall apply only to that portion of the lot adjoining the residence district. 
B.  If a lot in the M4 District is located on a U.S. or state highway as designated on the official numbering map of the City, the front, corner side, or rear yard setback shall be 25 feet for that front, corner side and/or rear yard of the lot which adjoins the designated highway. 
8.  Green area. None. 
9.  Off-street parking and loading. Provided as required in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
(Code 1976, § 18.36.050; Ord. No. 2019-769, § III, 10-14-2019)  
Sec. 42-444. - Special districts. 
(a)  General requirements. Special districts are intended to govern areas that are either not intended for conventional development in the near future, such as the outlying agricultural areas and gravel mines or those areas that are to be in permanent public use such as community parks and public open spaces. 
(1)  Permitted uses. All buildings, structures and land, and the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving or structural alteration of such shall hereafter be used or occupied in conformity with all the provisions specified for the district in which it is located. No land or buildings shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the special district in which such land, structures, or buildings shall be located. 
(2)  Nonconforming uses. All buildings, structures and land which were lawful before the ordinance from which this article was adopted or amended and which become legally nonconforming as a result of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be subject to the provisions of Section 42-359. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses, as listed in each special district, may be allowed only in the special district indicated. Said conditional use shall be subject to the issuance of conditional use permits in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 42-272. 
(b)  District requirements. 
(1)  A Agricultural District. The purpose of this district is to prevent tracts of agricultural lands located on the fringe of the City from being prematurely subdivided. The intent of the agriculture district is to hold land in tracts until such time as public utilities can be made available to serve urban development in an orderly manner of sequential rather than leapfrog development. 
a.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Raising grain or hay crops for cash sale or for use as feed, provided such feed use is conducted on premises located outside the City; 
2.  Forestry, nurseries, orchards, greenhouses and truck farming; 
3.  In-season roadside stands, offering for sale only, agricultural products produced on the premises; 
4.  Parks, playgrounds and open spaces; 
5.  Sewage lift stations, water pumping stations; 
6.  Public recreation facilities. 
b.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in the agriculture district subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Public utility and public service facilities, such as electric substations, gas regulator stations, radio and television towers, telephone exchanges, telephone transmission equipment buildings, water reservoirs, correctional institutions, fire stations, public safety training facilities; 
2.  Single- and two-family dwellings if used in conjunction with a permitted use; 
3.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing. 
c.  Lot area. Not less than five acres. 
d.  Lot width. Average lot width not less than 330 feet. 
e.  Minimum setback. Minimum setback requirements for property adjoining the following types of roadways as designated on the official numbering map of the City: 
	U.S. and State Highway 	County Highway 	Local Highway 
Front yard 	80 feet or 50 feet from access or frontage road, whichever is greater 	50 feet 	25 feet 
 
1.  Corner side yard: 50 feet. 
2.  Side yard: 20 feet. 
3.  Rear yard: 50 feet. 
(2)  M Mining District. The Mining District is designed to accommodate mining and quarry operations in areas that are relatively remote from residential and business development. Mining Districts shall only be approved in areas so designated on the adopted comprehensive plan and reclaimed in accord with such plan since mining is an interim use. 
a.  General conditions. 
1.  Residences, businesses and industrial uses are prohibited in the Mining District unless otherwise permitted. 
2.  All operations shall be conducted in such smoke, particulate matter or noxious gases at the boundaries of such use and where applicable, in accordance with Wisconsin Administration Code, as amended. 
3.  Mining operations shall follow an adopted phasing plan and be managed and reclaimed in accordance with a management and reclamation plan. Such plans shall be approved when a Mining District is established and any amendments to the phasing and management reclamation plans shall be approved by the City Council. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Mining, loading and hauling of sand, gravel, limerock, topsoil or other aggregate; 
2.  Parks, open space and public recreation uses; 
3.  Public landfill and waste disposal operations. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in the mining district subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: phalt and concrete batching or ready-mix plants located no closer than 500 feet from a residence district. 
d.  Lot area. None. 
e.  Lot width. None. 
f.  Minimum setback requirements. None. 
g.  Green area. None. 
h.  Off-street parking and loading. Provided as required in Sections 42-360 and 42-361. 
i.  Signs. Regulations related to Overlay Sign District C shall apply when landfill, mining or concrete batching uses are in operation. When said uses cease, the sign regulations for residence districts shall apply. 
(3)  C Conservancy District. The C Conservancy District is designed to preserve and perpetuate in an open state, certain areas such as rivers and drainageways, wetlands and marshes, parks, floodplains and greenbelts, natural habitats (prairie) for plant and animal life, which because of their unique physical features, are deemed desirable and functional as natural and beneficial to the City. 
a.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Public recreation facilities; 
2.  Sewage lift stations and water pumping stations; 
3.  Floodplains, greenbelts and waterways; 
4.  Fishing and live trapping; 
5.  Forestry; 
6.  Parks, playgrounds and open spaces. 
b.  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed in the conservancy district subject to the provisions of Section 42-272: 
1.  Agriculture uses as permitted in the agriculture district; 
2.  Dredging, excavating and filling of lands and removal of topsoil within floodplains; 
3.  Campgrounds and facilities; 
4.  Public utility and public service facilities, such as electric substations, gas regulator stations, radio and television towers, telephone exchanges, telephone transmission buildings, water reservoirs, fire stations, public safety training facilities, dams and electric generating facilities; 
5.  Outdoor recreational premises, clubs and grounds for hunting, swimming, tennis, boating, horse riding, skiing and other sports. Accessory clubhouses and maintenance buildings shall be located not less than 100 feet from any lot in a residence district, except buildings for shelter and keeping of horses and buildings and facilities for boating not less than 300 feet from any such lot; 
6.  Communication towers, including, but not limited to, radio, television, microwave relay, cellular phone and all other towers. Television and radio antennas 30 feet or less in height are not included in this listing. 
c.  Lot area. None. 
d.  Lot width. None. 
e.  Minimum setback requirements. 
1.  Front yard: 50 feet; 
2.  Corner side yard: 50 feet; 
3.  Side yard: ten feet; 
4.  Rear yard: 50 feet. 
(Code 1976, § 18.36.060)  
Sec. 42-445. - Overlay Supplemental Districts. 
(a)  General requirements. Overlay Supplemental Districts are intended to add additional controls to certain areas of the underlying zoning districts to govern development in the floodplains, additional parking areas, areas of historic significance, and the former General Motors Janesville Assembly Plant. Where an Overlay Supplemental District is applied, the underlying zoning and regulations remain in full force and effect. 
(b)  District requirements. 
(1)  P Parking Overlay District. The P Parking Overlay District is intended to lessen congestion in the streets, to facilitate the adequate provision of off-street parking while conserving value of property and encouraging proper development. 
a.  General conditions. There shall be no parking other than that of motor vehicles in operable condition. No vehicles waiting to be repaired or serviced or storage of vehicles shall be permitted. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Parking of motor vehicles; 
2.  Any use permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
c.  Conditional uses. None except as provided in the underlying zoning district. 
d.  Lot area. None except as provided in the underlying zoning district. 
e.  Lot width. None except as provided in the underlying zoning district. 
f.  Setback requirements. None except as provided in the underlying zoning district. 
g.  Green area or usable open space. None except as provided in the underlying zoning district. 
h.  Screening. There shall be provided and maintained a permanent screening buffer strip at least five feet in width along any boundary of a Parking Overlay District which adjoins or is opposite from a residence district. Such screening shall be a living hedge, shrubs or trees which at the time of planting shall be of sufficient density to effectively screen the parking use from view of the adjoining, or opposite residence district. Such screening shall be, at the time of planting, a minimum of three feet in height and shall, within a period of four years, attain a height of at least five feet. When such screening is located in the required front or corner side setback the maximum height shall be 30 inches. 
(2)  H Historic Overlay District. 
a.  Intent and purpose. It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of improvements and sites of historic significance constitutes a public necessity and are required in the interest of health, prosperity, safety and general welfare of the people. The purpose of this section is to: 
1.  Identify those improvements, sites or neighborhoods which embody elements of the City's architectural, cultural, economic, social and political history; 
2.  Safeguard, preserve and enhance those improvements, sites, or neighborhoods containing such heritage with an Historic Overlay District designation; 
3.  Stabilize and improve property values and protect and enhance the City's attractiveness and livability to residents, tourists and visitors; 
4.  Promote the use of such historic districts for the education and enjoyment of the residents of the City by fostering civic pride in the aesthetic and noble accomplishments of the past; 
5.  Protect the visual and architectural characteristics of historic structures and sites within the historic districts by reviewing and making recommendations regarding any construction, alteration or demolition of such improvements. 
b.  Scope. The provisions of this section do not apply to the interior of any improvement or to any alteration or demolition of any interior portion of any such improvement which would not affect the safety, structural integrity, or appearance of the exterior of such improvement. The provisions of this section do not apply to the exterior portion of any improvement not subject to public view. 
c.  Janesville Historic Commission. 
1.  Membership. An Historic Commission is established which shall consist of seven members who shall be selected by the Council President and be approved by the City Council. Such membership representing a cross-section of the community shall possess pertinent expertise or interest. Of the initial members so appointed, two shall serve a term of one year, two shall serve a term of two years and three shall serve a term of three years. Thereafter, the term for each member shall be three years. The Council President shall take into consideration the recommendations of the Citizen Advisory Committee on Appointments when making appointments to the Historic Commission. 
2.  Powers, duties and responsibilities of the Historic Commission. The Historic Commission shall: 
(i)  Make recommendations to the City Council that certain areas be designated as historic districts; 
(ii)  Develop an Historic Overlay District plan for each district designated; 
(iii)  Establish guidelines and develop criteria for construction, alteration, or demolition of improvements within an Historic Overlay District; 
(iv)  Determine an appropriate system of markers for designated historic districts; 
(v)  Advise and assist owners, occupants or persons in charge of improvements in an historic district regarding physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse; 
(vi)  Review any applications for a certificate of appropriateness and to require the presentation of such plans, drawings, elevations and other information as may be reasonably necessary for such review; 
(vii)  Grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness to any applicant; 
(viii)  Issue a statement of waiver when required by this section; 
(ix)  Obtain certification of this article with the State Preservation Officer and with the Secretary of the United States Department of the Interior, in order to permit historic structures to qualify under this chapter for applicable benefits under the Tax Reform Act of 1976; 
(x)  Develop and implement rules of procedure for hearings and meetings convened by the Historic Commission; 
(xi)  Promote community education, interest and support for the preservation and enhancement of such historic districts. 
d.  Designation of Historic Overlay Districts. 
1.  The City Council may designate by ordinance individual parcels of land or entire neighborhoods as an Historic Overlay District. 
2.  The Historic Commission may select and recommend to the City Council geographically defined areas within the City to be designated as Historic Overlay Districts. 
e.  Development of Historic Overlay District plan. 
1.  The Historic Commission may, with the assistance of the City planning department, prepare an Historic District plan in ordinance form for each area recommended to be designated as an Historic Overlay District. 
2.  The Historic Commission may establish guidelines and develop criteria for the Historic Overlay District plan, including, but not limited to, the following items: 
(i)  The height, gross volume, roof design and architectural details of any new or altered structure; 
(ii)  The proportion between a building's width, height, and fenestration; 
(iii)  The building masses and the spaces between them; 
(iv)  Materials, texture, colors and patterns used in improvement; 
(v)  The landscaping; 
(vi)  Visual compatibility with related elements of the improvement and with other improvements within the Historic Overlay District. 
3.  The City Plan Commission shall review an Historic District Plan, hold a public hearing, and make a recommendation to the City Council. 
4.  The City Council may adopt such Historic Overlay District plan for a designated Historic Overlay District. 
f.  Regulation of construction, alteration, and demolition of an improvement. 
1.  Application. Any application for a permit for any proposed construction, alteration, or demolition of an improvement within an Historic District shall be filed with the Building Division Director. The Building Division Director shall, within three working days of receipt of the application, forward a copy of the application and plans, if any, to the Secretary of the Historic Commission. 
2.  Certificate of appropriateness or statement of waiver required. No construction, alteration, or demolition of an improvement shall be allowed within an Historic District unless a certificate of appropriateness or statement of waiver has been issued by the Historic Commission for such construction, alteration, or demolition of an improvement. 
3.  Permit. No permit shall be issued by the City for any proposed construction, alteration, or demolition of an improvement within an Historic District unless there has been a certificate of appropriateness or statement of waiver issued by the Historic Commission for such proposed construction, alteration, or demolition of an improvement. 
g.  Certificate of appropriateness. 
1.  Granting of certificate. The Historic Commission shall grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness within 30 days of the filing of an application. If the Historic Commission grants such certificate, then within three business days of such decision, a certificate of appropriateness shall be issued in writing and shall be mailed, by regular mail, to the applicant. If the construction, alteration or demolition has not commenced within one year after the date of issuance of the certificate of appropriateness, the certificate shall expire. 
2.  Denial of certificate. If the Historic Commission reviews application and finds it inconsistent with the criteria set forth in Subsection (b)(2)g.3 of this section, the Commission may deny the application and refuse to issue a certificate of appropriateness. If the Commission denies the application, then within three business days of such decision, written notice of the denial shall be sent, by regular mail, to the applicant. 
When the applicant for a permit for a proposed construction, alteration, or demolition of an improvement within an Historic District is denied a certificate of appropriateness, the Historic Commission shall, at the request of the applicant, assist the applicant in preparing an application for a certificate of appropriateness which shall meet the standards and criteria of the Historic Commission, which shall comply with the provisions of this section. If the applicant chooses to work with the Historic Commission and no mutually agreeable method is determined and both parties appear to be deadlocked on the issue, the applicant may appeal the Historic Commission's decision to the Plan Commission or City Council, as provided for in Section 42-445(b)(2)i. 
3.  Criteria for granting or denying certificate of appropriateness. 
(i)  In reviewing an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Historic Commission shall consider the following items: 
A.  The appropriateness to the Historic District of the proposed construction, alteration or demolition of an improvement; 
B.  Whether such proposed construction, alteration, or demolition of an improvement will further the purposes of this section; 
C.  The historical significance of the improvement; 
D.  The architectural value; 
E.  The unique design, arrangement, texture, material, or color of the building, place or area in question; 
F.  The relation of such improvement to other improvements in the immediate area; 
G.  The position of such improvement in relation to the street or public way; 
H.  The appearance of the proposed construction, alteration, or demolition from the public view; 
I.  Such specific design standards as the Historic Commission may recommend and the City Council adopt as an Historic Overlay District plan; 
J.  Visual compatibility with related elements of the improvement and with other improvements within the Historic Overlay District. 
(ii)  The Historic Commission shall decide upon the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by reference to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, as published in 1979, in Section 36, Code of Federal Regulations, part 67, and as amended. The Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation are hereby adopted by reference. 
(iii)  The Historic Commission shall not deny the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness whenever the applicant demonstrates that the proposed construction, alteration or demolition of an improvement will enhance or is not inconsistent with the inherent historic value of the historic district. 
h.  Statement of waiver. 
1.  If the Historic Commission fails to act upon an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 30 days of filing of the application, unless such time limit is extended by mutual agreement in writing, such failure to act shall constitute a waiver by the Historic Commission of any requirements for a certificate of appropriateness. 
2.  If the Historic Commission fails to mail to the applicant notice of the granting or denial of a certificate of appropriateness within three business days of that decision, such failure shall constitute a waiver by the Historic Commission of any requirement for a certificate of appropriateness. 
3.  In the event of any such waiver by the Historic Commission, it shall issue a statement of waiver to the applicant within 30 days after such waiver is brought to the attention of the Historic Commission. 
4.  If the construction, alteration, or demolition has not commenced within one year after the date of issuance of the statement of waiver, the statement shall expire. 
i.  Appeals. 
1.  If the Historic Commission denies a certificate of appropriateness, the applicant may appeal such denial to the Plan Commission or to the City Council as provided in this section. 
2.  An appeal of a denial of the Historic Commission shall be filed in writing with the Secretary of the Plan Commission within 30 days of the mailing of the notice of denial to the applicant. 
3.  The Plan Commission who, following a public hearing, may affirm, overrule or modify an Historic Commission decision within 30 days of the receipt of the applicant's written appeal. If the Plan Commission overrules the Historic Commission, its decision is final. If the Plan Commission overrules or modifies an Historic Commission decision, such Plan Commission decision shall have an effective date 15 days from the date of the Plan Commission decision. On such effective date, the Historic Commission shall issue a statement of waiver. 
4.  If the Plan Commission affirms, modifies or fails to act upon an appeal of an Historic Commission's decision any owner whose property is affected by a decision may appeal such decision to the City Council who, following a public hearing, may affirm, overrule, or modify a decision within 30 days of the receipt of the applicant's written appeal. If the City Council overrules or modifies a decision, such City Council decision is final and shall have an effective date 15 days from the date of the City Council decision. On such effective date, the Historic Commission shall issue a statement of waiver. 
(3)  W Well Head Protection Overlay District. 
a.  Intent and purpose. The residents of the City of Janesville depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose of the Well Head Protection Overlay District is to institute land use regulations and restrictions to protect the municipal water supply and wells, and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City. 
b.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Existing facilities means current facilities, practices and activities which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution within that portion of the well head protection district that lies within the corporate limits of the City. 
Groundwater protection overlay district means that area described within the water utility's Well Head Protection Plan. A copy of the well head protection plan can be obtained from the water utility. 
Time of travel means the determined or estimated time required for a contaminant to move in the saturated zone from a specific point to a well. 
c.  Designation of Well Head Protection Districts. 
1.  The area to be protected as a district is that portion of land encompassed by the composite of the delineated five year time of travel to the well and a radius of 1,200 feet surrounding a City of Janesville municipal water supply well head, except at well six, which is used infrequently, and is located immediately adjacent to the Rock River, a potential hydraulic boundary. At well six, the area to be protected is the portion of the land encompassed by the delineated five-year time of travel to the well. These lands are subject to land use and development restrictions because of their close proximity to the wells and the corresponding threat of contamination. These lands are subject to land use and development restrictions because of their close proximity to the wells and the corresponding threat of contamination. The well head protection districts shall be defined by a well head protection plan developed for each well by the City of Janesville Water Utility and as approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
d.  Permitted uses. Subject to the exemptions listed in Subsection (3)(h) of this section, the following are the only permitted uses within the district: 
1.  Parks, open space and public recreational facilities, provided there is no on-site waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities associated with this use. 
2.  Playgrounds. 
3.  Wildlife areas. 
4.  Non-motorized trails, such as biking, skiing, nature and fitness trails. 
5.  Municipally sewered residential development, and other permitted uses in the residence district, free of flammable and combustible liquid underground storage tanks. 
6.  Municipally sewered office, business and industrial development zoned O1, O3, B-1, B-2, B-3, B4, BT, M1, and M2 except for the uses listed below, which are subject to the provisions outlined in Subsection (b)(3)d.7 of this section. 
(i)  Above ground storage tanks. 
(ii)  Asbestos product sales. 
(iii)  Automotive service and repair garages, body shops. 
(iv)  Blue printing and photocopying services. 
(v)  Car washes. 
(vi)  Laundromats and diaper services. 
(vii)  Dry cleaning. 
(viii)  Chemical manufacturing. 
(ix)  Gas stations. 
(x)  Holding ponds or lagoons. 
(xi)  Infiltration ponds. 
(xii)  Nurseries, lawn and garden supply stores. 
(xiii)  Small engine repair services. 
(xiv)  Underground storage tanks. 
(xv)  Wells, private, production, injection or other. 
(xvi)  Any other use determined by the Planning Director to be similar in nature to the above listed items. 
7.  Expansion or establishment of those activities listed above in Subsection (b)(3)d.(vi) of this section shall require the submittal of a site plan for review and approval by the Site Plan Review Coordinator and the Water Utility Director prior to the establishment of said uses. If the Site Plan Review Coordinator and Water Utility Director deny or conditionally approves a site plan and the applicant disagrees with such decision, the applicant may appeal such denial or condition to the Plan Commission. Such an appeal shall be signed and filed in writing with the Planning Department within 30 days following the Site Plan Review Coordinator and Water Utility Director's determination or be forever barred. The Plan Commission may affirm, overrule or modify a decision of the Site Plan Review Coordinator and the Water Utility Director. The Plan Commission may impose conditions on the establishment of such uses, including, but not limited to, an annual monitoring of such uses as may be appropriate and as they deem necessary to preserve the Well Head Protection District. 
8.  Agricultural uses in accordance with the County Soil Conservation Department's best management practices guidelines. 
e.  Conditional uses. None, except as provided in the underlying zoning district. 
f.  Separation distances. The following separation distances as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.12(5)(d), shall be maintained and shall not be exempted as listed in Subsection(b)(3)h of this section. 
1.  Ten feet between a well and an emergency or standby power system that is operated by the same facility which operates the well and has a double-wall above ground storage tank with continuous electronic interstitial leakage monitoring. These facilities shall meet the installation requirements of Wis. Admin. Code Chs. SPS 301-319; General, Part I and receive written approval from the Department of Safety and Professional Services or its designated Local Program Operator under Wis. Admin. Code SPS 310.110. 
2.  Fifty feet between a well and a storm sewer main or a sanitary sewer main where the sanitary sewers shall be successfully air pressure treated in place. The air pressure test shall meet or exceed the requirements of the four psi low pressure air test for plastic gravity sewer lines found in the latest edition of Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in Wisconsin. Force mains shall be successfully pressure tested with water to meet the AWWA C600 pressure and leakage testing requirements for one hour at 125 percent of the pump shut-off head. 
3.  Two hundred feet between a well and any sanitary sewer main not constructed of water main class materials, sanitary sewer manhole, lift station, one- or two-family residential heating fuel oil underground storage tank or above ground storage tank or POWTS treatment tank or holding tank component and associated piping. 
4.  Three hundred feet between a well and any farm underground storage tank system or underground storage tank with double-wall and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means the tank and any piping connected to it. These installations shall meet the most restrictive installation requirements of Wis. Admin. Code Chs. SPS 301-319; General, Part I and receive written approval from the department of safety and professional services or its designated Local Program Operator under Wis. Admin. Code Section SPS 310.110. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor oil, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances. 
5.  Three hundred feet between a well and any farm above ground storage tank with double-wall, or single-wall tank with other secondary containment and under a canopy; other above ground storage tank system with double-wall, or single-wall tank with secondary containment and under a canopy and with electronic interstitial monitoring for a double-wall tank or electronic leakage monitoring for a single-wall tank secondary containment structure. These installations shall meet the most restrictive installation requirements of Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 301-319; General, Part I and receive written approval from the department of safety and professional services or its designated Local Program Operator under Wis. Admin. Code Section SPS 310.110. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor oil, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances. 
6.  Four hundred feet between a well and a POWTS dispersal component with a design capacity of less than 12,000 gallons per day, cemetery or a stormwater retention or detention pond. 
7.  Six hundred feet between a well and any farm underground storage tank system or other underground storage tank with double-wall and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means the tank and any piping connected to it; any farm above ground storage tank with double-wall, or single-wall tank with other secondary containment and under a canopy or other aboveground storage tank system with double-wall, or single-wall tank with secondary containment and under a canopy; and with electronic interstitial monitoring for a double-wall tank or electronic leakage monitoring for a single-wall tank secondary containment structure. These installations shall meet the standard double-wall tank or single-wall tank secondary containment installation requirements of Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 301-319; General, Part I and receive written land approval from the department of safety and professional services or its designated Local Program Operator under Wis. Admin. Code Section SPS 310.110. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor oil, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances. 
8.  One thousand feet between a well and land application of municipal, commercial, or industrial waste; the boundaries of a landspreading facility for spreading of petroleum contaminated soil regulated under Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 718 while that facility is in operation; agricultural, industrial, commercial or municipal waste water treatment units, lagoons, or storage structures; manure stacks or storage structure; or POWTS dispersal component with a design capacity of 12,000 gallons per day or more. 
9.  Twelve hundred feet between a well and any solid waste storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor, processing, wood burning, one-time disposal or small demolition facility; sanitary landfill; any property with residual groundwater contamination that exceeds Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 140 enforcement standards; coal storage area; salt or deicing material storage area; any single-wall farm underground storage tank or single-wall farm above ground storage tank or other single-wall underground storage tank or above ground storage tank that has or has not received written approval from the Department Of Safety And Professional Services or its designated Local Program Operator under Wis. Admin. Code Section SPS 310.110 for a single-wall tank installation. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances; and bulk pesticide or fertilizer handling or storage facilities. 
g.  Requirements for existing facilities. 
1.  Existing facilities and uses that are in compliance with the regulations of the underlying zoning district are considered conforming uses. 
2.  Existing facilities shall provide copies of all federal, state and local facility operation approvals or certificates and ongoing environmental monitoring results to the water utility. 
3.  Existing facilities which are noncompliant with any State, Federal or Local environmental regulations shall provide information as deemed necessary by the Water Utility which may include, but is not limited to, stormwater runoff management and groundwater or site monitoring. 
4.  Existing facilities shall replace equipment or expand in a manner that maintains or improves the existing environmental and safety technologies already in existence. 
5.  Existing facilities shall have the responsibility of devising and filing with the water utility a contingency plan satisfactory to the Water Utility for the immediate notification of the water utility in the event of a chemical or other spill which may pose a threat to groundwater quality. 
h.  Exemptions and waivers. 
1.  Individuals and/or facilities may request the City in writing, to permit additional land uses in the district. 
2.  All requests shall be in writing, whether on or in substantial compliance with forms to be provided by the City and may require an environmental assessment report prepared by a licensed professional engineer. Said report shall be forwarded to the City and/or designee for recommendation and final decision by the Plan Commission. 
3.  The individual/facility shall reimburse the City for all consultant fees associated with this review at the invoiced amount, plus administrative costs. 
4.  Any exemptions granted shall be conditional and may include required environmental and safety monitoring consistent with local, state and federal requirements, and/or bonds and/or securities satisfactory to the City. 
i.  Enforcement. 
1.  In the event that an individual and/or facility causes the release of any contaminants which endanger the well head protection district, the individual and/or facility causing said release shall immediately stop the release and clean up the release to the satisfaction of the City. 
2.  The individual/facility shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup, including all of the following: 
(i)  City consultant fees at the invoice amount, plus administrative costs for oversight, review and documentation. 
(ii)  The cost of City employees' time associated in any way with cleanup based on the hourly rate paid to the employee multiplied by a factor determined by the City representing the City's cost for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, overtime, vacation, and similar benefits. 
(iii)  The cost of City equipment employed. 
(iv)  The cost of mileage reimbursed to City employees attributed to the cleanup. 
(v)  Following any such discharge the City may require additional test monitoring and/or bond/securities. 
j.  Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to penalties provided in Sections 42-332 and 40-32. 
(4)  SJO South Jackson Street Overlay District. 
a.  Intent and purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the redevelopment of the former General Motors Janesville Assembly Plant in a manner consistent with the needs and best interests of the community and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
b.  District boundaries. The South Jackson Street Overlay District includes all property as referenced in Figure 1, generally bounded by W. Delavan Drive, S. Jackson Street, Kellogg Avenue, and the west property boundary of the former General Motors Janesville Assembly Plant. 
c.  Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the M2, General Industrial District, subject to the provisions of Section 42-274, planned unit developments, except for prohibited uses listed in Subsection (b)(4)e of this section prohibited uses. 
d.  Conditional uses. Any use listed as a conditional use in the M2, General Industrial District, subject to the provisions of Section 42-274, except for prohibited uses listed in Subsection (b)(4)e of this section. 
e.  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited and ineligible for a conditional use permit within the South Jackson Street Overlay District: 
1.  Asphalt and concrete batching or ready-mix plants; 
2.  Fertilizer production; 
3.  Foundries; 
4.  Junkyards and salvage yards; 
5.  Animal rendering plants; 
6.  Smelting plants; 
7.  Tanneries. 
(Code 1976, § 18.36.070)  
Secs. 42-446—42-473. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 42-474. - Statutory authorization. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and 62.23, for villages and cities; Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69, 59.692, and 59.694 for counties; and the requirements in Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.010)  
Sec. 42-475. - Finding of fact. 
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.015)  
Sec. 42-476. - Statement of purpose. 
This article is intended to regulate floodplain development to: 
(1)  Protect life, health and property; 
(2)  Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers; 
(4)  Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain; 
(6)  Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain; 
(7)  Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers; 
(8)  Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and 
(9)  Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.020)  
Sec. 42-477. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for Janesville, Wisconsin. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.025)  
Sec. 42-478. - General provisions. 
(a)  Areas to be regulated. This article regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or other maps approved by DNR. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the flood insurance study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1—30, and AH Zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO zones. Regional Flood Elevations (RFE) may be derived from other studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(b)  Official maps and revisions. The boundaries of all Floodplain Districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1—30 on the maps based on the flood insurance study (FIS) listed below. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA through the letter of map change process (see Section 42-487) before it is effective. No changes to RFE's on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the Office of the Planning Division, City of Janesville. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(1)  Official maps. Based on the FIS: flood insurance rate map (FIRM), panel numbers 55105C0090E, 55105C0177E, 55105C0179E, 55105C0181E, 55105C0182E, 55105C0183E, 55105C0184E, 55105C0187E, 55105C0189E, 55105C0191E, 55105C0192E, 55105C0193E, 55105C0194E, 55105C0201E, 55105C0202E, 55105C0203E, 55105C0204E, 55105C0208E, 55105C0211E, 55105C0212E, 55105C0306E, 55105C0307E dated September 16, 2015, with corresponding profiles that are based on the flood insurance study (FIS) dated September 16, 2015 Volume Number 55105CV001B and 55105CV002B. 
(c)  Establishment of floodplain zoning districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows: 
(1)  The Floodway District (FW), is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters and are contained within AE Zones as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion between the regional flood limits and the floodway and displayed as AE zones on the FIRM. 
(3)  The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood and does not have a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A, AH and AO zones on the FIRM. 
(d)  Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in Subsections (d)(1) or (2) of this section. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to Section 42-487. The Zoning Administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section. Disputes between the Zoning Administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to Section 42-486(c) and the criteria in Subsections (d)(1) and (2) of this section. Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to Section 42-486. 
(1)  If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. 
(2)  Where flood profiles do not exist for projects, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale. 
(e)  Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to Section 42-486. 
(f)  Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this chapter shall be in compliance with the terms of this chapter, and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
(g)  Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13), applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.2022, applies. 
(h)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(1)  This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69, 59.692 or 59.694 for counties; Wis. Stats. § 62.23 for cities; Wis. Stats. § 61.35 for villages; or Wis. Stats. § 87.30, which relate to floodplains. A more restrictive ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(2)  This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(i)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this chapter, required by Wis. Adm. Code, ch. NR 116, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this chapter or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this chapter. 
(j)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in this article are based on engineering experience and research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. This article does not create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this article. 
(k)  Severability. Should any portion of this article be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected. 
(l)  Annexed areas for cities and villages. The Rock County Floodplain Zoning Provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code and 44 CFR 59-72, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the floodway location. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.030)  
Sec. 42-479. - General standards applicable to all Floodplain Districts. 
(a)  The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a floodprone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant materials; be constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of flooding. 
(b)  Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this article and all other requirements in Section 42-484(b). Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(1)  Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. 
a.  No floodplain development shall: 
1.  Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, causing any increase in the regional flood height; or 
2.  Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost. 
b.  The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of Section 42-487 are met. 
(2)  Watercourse alterations. No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA Regional Offices, and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The standards of Section 42-479(a) must be met and the flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(3)  As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation and pursuant to Section 42-487, the community shall apply for a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process. 
(4)  Chapter 30, 31, Wis. Stats., development. Development which requires a permit from the Department, under Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to Section 42-487. 
(5)  Public or private campgrounds. Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions: 
a.  The campground is approved by the Department of Health Services; 
b.  A land use permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning Administrator; 
c.  The character of the river system and the campground elevation are such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants; 
d.  There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation; 
e.  This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated, by the officials identified in Subsection (b) of this section, to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the State Department of Health Services and all other applicable regulations; 
f.  Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use are allowed; 
g.  The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours; 
h.  All camping units that remain on-site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section; 
i.  The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to ensure compliance with the terms of this section; 
j.  All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either Sections 42-480, 42-481, 42-482 for the Floodplain District in which the structure is located; 
k.  The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued; and 
l.  All service facilities, including, but not limited to, refuse collection, electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.040)  
Sec. 42-480. - Floodway District (FD). 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to Section 42-482(d). 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following open space uses are allowed in the Floodway District and the floodway areas of the General Floodplain District, if: 
(1)  They are not prohibited by any other ordinance; 
(2)  They meet the standards in Subsections (c) and (d) of this section; and 
(3)  All permits or certificates have been issued according to Section 42-484(a). 
a.  Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting. 
b.  Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips. 
c.  Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of Subsections (c)(4) of this section. 
d.  Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that comply with Subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
e.  Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with Subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
f.  Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31. 
g.  Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with Subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(c)  Standards for developments in the floodway. 
(1)  General. 
a.  Any development in the floodway shall comply with Section 42-479 and have a low flood damage potential. 
b.  Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to Sections 42-479(a) and 42-484(b)(3): 
1.  A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or 
2.  An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height. 
c.  The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will cause any increase in the flood elevations upstream or downstream, based on the data submitted for Subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria: 
a.  Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage; 
b.  Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; 
c.  Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; 
d.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
e.  It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood. 
(3)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if: 
a.  Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and 
b.  Construction meets the development standards of Section 42-479(a). 
(4)  Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if: 
a.  The requirements of Section 42-479(a) are met; 
b.  No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is issued by the Department pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 30, and a permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and all other requirements have been met; 
c.  The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and 
d.  The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in Section 42-481(b) are prohibited, including the following uses: 
(1)  Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with permanent open-space uses; 
(2)  Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life; 
(3)  Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts; 
(4)  Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383; 
(5)  Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812; 
(6)  Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(7)  Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 110.15(3)(b); and 
(8)  Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.050)  
Sec. 42-481. - Floodfringe District (FF). 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to Section 42-482(d). 
(b)  Permitted uses. Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the Floodfringe District if the standards in this section are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in Section 42-484 have been issued. 
(c)  Standards for development in the floodfringe. Section 42-479(a) shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of Section 42-483: 
(1)  Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be newly constructed or moved into the floodfringe, shall meet or exceed the following standards. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of Section 42-483: 
a.  The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill unless the requirements of Subsection (c)(1)b of this section can be met. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure; 
b.  The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation; 
c.  Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in Subsection (c)(1)d of this section; 
d.  In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with Subsection (c) of this section impractical, the municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements where roads are below the regional flood elevation, if: 
1.  The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or 
2.  The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation plan. 
(2)  Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be constructed on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation. 
(3)  Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe shall meet the requirements of Subsection (k)(1) of this section. Subject to the requirements of Subsection (5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(4)  Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in Section 42-487(f). Subject to the requirements of Section (5) of this section, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(5)  Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with Section 42-487(f). Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding. 
(6)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans; and: 
a.  When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall only be permitted if they are designed to comply with Section 42-487(f). 
b.  Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation. 
(7)  Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system, pursuant to Section 42-487(f)(3), to the flood protection elevation and meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(8)  Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system, pursuant to Section 42-487(f)(3), to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(9)  Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas. 
(10)  Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this chapter. 
(11)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities. 
b.  In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and 
2.  Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood. 
c.  Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in Subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(12)  Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in Subsection (c)(11)b and c of this section. A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.060)  
Sec. 42-482. - General Floodplain District (GFP). 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains mapped as A, AO or AH Zones. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Pursuant to Subsection (d) of this section, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within the floodway or floodfringe. Those uses permitted in the floodway Section 42-480(b) and floodfringe Section 42-481(b). Districts are allowed within the General Floodplain District, according to the standards of Subsection (c) of this section, provided that all permits or certificates required under Section 42-484 have been issued. 
(c)  Standards for development in the General Floodplain District. Section 42-481 applies to floodway areas, Section 42-481 applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this article applies to either district. 
(1)  In AO/AH Zones the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the conditions listed below whichever is higher: 
a.  At or above the flood protection elevation; or 
b.  Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or 
c.  The depth as shown on the FIRM 
(2)  In AO/AH zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters around structures. 
(d)  Determining floodway and floodfringe limits. Upon receiving an application for development within the General Floodplain District, the Zoning Administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the General Floodplain District limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries. 
a.  A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in Section 42-484(b)(3); 
b.  Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information; 
c.  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.070)  
Sec. 42-483. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Applicability. If these standards conform with Wis. Stats. § 59.69(10), for counties or Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), for cities and villages, they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of this article or any amendment thereto. 
(2)  The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may continue subject to the following conditions: 
a.  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this article. The terms "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification; this includes painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not considered maintenance. The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure. 
b.  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this article. 
c.  The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent. 
d.  No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with Section 42-481(c)(1). The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50 percent provisions of this subsection. 
e.  No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with Section 42-481(c)(1). 
f.  If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done under Subsection (2)(d) and (e) of this section equals or exceeds 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value the work shall not be permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with Section 42-481(c)(1). 
g.  Except as provided in Subsection (2) of this section, if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current ordinance requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50 percent of the structure's present equalized assessed value. 
h.  For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements below are met and all required permits have been granted prior to the start of construction. 
(3)  Residential structures. 
a.  Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must meet the requirements of Section 42-486(f)(2). 
b.  Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy and shall be constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage. 
c.  Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
d.  In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data available from a federal, state or other source. 
e.  In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in Section 42-483(c)(1). 
f.  In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure. 
(4)  Nonresidential structures. 
a.  Shall meet the requirements of Section 42-484(a)(2)h.1.a through f. 
b.  Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet the standards in Section 42-486(f)(1) or (f)(2). 
c.  In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in Section 42-483(c)(1). 
(5)  A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with Section 42-481(c)(1), flood-resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with Section 42-486(f) are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the development standards of Subsection (a)(1)h.1 of this section if it is determined that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(b)  Floodway District. 
(1)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the Floodway District, unless such modification or addition: 
a.  Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance requirements; 
b.  Meets the requirements of Section 42-484(a); 
c.  Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height; 
d.  Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to Section 42-486(f), by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation; and 
e.  If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade; 
2.  The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials; 
3.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
4.  The use must be limited to parking, building access or limited storage. 
(2)  No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all Municipal Ordinances, Section 42-486(f)(3) and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(3)  No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in the Floodway District shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, Section 42-486(F)(3) and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(c)  Floodfringe District. 
(1)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the municipality, and meets the requirements of Section 42-482(c) except where Section 42-484(c)(2) is applicable. 
(2)  Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection (1) of this section would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the Board of Adjustment/Appeals, using the procedures established in Section 42-486, may grant a variance from those provisions of Subsection (c)(1) of this section for modifications or additions using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if: 
a.  No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures; 
b.  Human lives are not endangered; 
c.  Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed; 
d.  Flood depths shall not exceed two feet; 
e.  Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and 
f.  The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as described in Section 42-482(c)(5). 
(3)  All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances, Section 42-486(f)(3) and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(4)  All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter, Section 42-486(f)(3) and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.080)  
Sec. 42-484. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  Administrative duties and powers. The Building Division Director, with assistance by the City Planner, is authorized to administer this chapter and shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and ensure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications. 
(2)  Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this chapter and issue certificates of occupancy where appropriate. 
(3)  Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred. 
(4)  Keep records of all official actions, such as: 
a.  All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved; 
b.  Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations; 
c.  Floodproofing certificates; 
d.  Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments; 
e.  All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures; 
f.  List of nonconforming structures and uses. 
(5)  Submit copies of the following items to the Department Regional Office: 
a.  Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments; 
b.  Copies of case-by-case analyses and other required information including an annual summary of floodplain zoning actions taken; 
c.  Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments. 
(6)  Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this chapter to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the Department Regional Office. 
(7)  Submit copies of amendments to the FEMA Regional Office. 
(b)  Site plan application and building permit. A site plan application and building permit shall be obtained before any new development; repair, modification or addition to an existing structure; or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the Building Division Director shall include: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor; 
b.  Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification; 
(2)  Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain: 
a.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot; 
b.  Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
c.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street center lines; 
d.  Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
e.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads; 
f.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official floodplain zoning maps; 
g.  The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study, either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD); 
h.  Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of Section 42-481 or 42-482 are met; and 
i.  Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to Section 42-479(a). This may include any of the information noted in Section 42-480(c)(1). 
(3)  Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the state. The study contractor shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and approved by the Department. 
a.  Zone A floodplains. 
1.  Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116.07(3), Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge. 
2.  Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116.07(4), Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following: 
(i)  Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model shall be based on detailed study information for downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL for the study. 
(ii)  Channel sections must be surveyed. 
(iii)  Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used for the development of cross-section overbank and floodplain mapping. 
(iv)  A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross-sections is allowed in developed areas with additional intermediate cross-sections required at transitions in channel bottom slope including a survey of the channel at each location. 
(v)  The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used. 
(vi)  A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of road is required at each structure. 
(vii)  Additional cross-sections are required at the downstream and upstream limits of the proposed development and any necessary intermediate locations based on the length of the reach if greater than 500 feet. 
(viii)  Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used when assigning parameters for the base model such as flow, Manning's N values, expansion and contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high water marks to determine the reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data is available, adequate justification shall be provided for any parameters outside standard accepted engineering practices. 
(ix)  The model must extend past the upstream limit of the difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The height difference between the proposed flood profile and the existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet. 
3.  Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be provided, showing all cross-section locations, floodway/floodplain limits based on best available topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed development and whether the proposed development is located in the floodway. 
(i)  If the proposed development is located outside of the floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on the regional flood elevation. 
(ii)  If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it must be added to the base model to show the difference between existing and proposed conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients remain the same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification based on standard accepted engineering practices is provided. 
(c)  Zone AE Floodplains. 
(1)  Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be based on Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116.07(3), Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge. 
(2)  Hydraulic Model. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116.07(4), Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following: 
a.  Duplicate Effective Model. The effective model shall be reproduced to ensure correct transference of the model data and to allow integration of the revised data to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and downstream of the revised reach. If data from the effective model is available, models shall be generated that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS report to within 0.1 foot. 
b.  Corrected Effective Model. The corrected effective model shall not include any manmade physical changes since the effective model date, but shall import the model into the most current version of HEC-RAS for Department review. 
c.  Existing (pre-project conditions) Model. The existing model shall be required to support conclusions about the actual impacts of the project associated with the Revised (Post-Project) Model or to establish more up-to-date models on which to base the Revised (Post-Project) Model. 
d.  Revised (post-project conditions) Model. The revised (post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the Existing Model and any proposed changes to the topography caused by the proposed development. This model shall reflect proposed conditions. 
e.  All changes to the Duplicate Effective Model and subsequent models must be supported by certified topographic information, bridge plans, construction plans and survey notes. 
f.  Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the stream reach for which the revision is being requested. Cross-sections upstream and downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the effective model and result in water surface elevations and top widths computed by the revised models matching those in the effective models upstream and downstream of the revised reach as required. The Effective Model shall not be truncated. 
(3)  Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted to the Department for review which meet the following conditions: 
a.  Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles, topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary Floodway Maps (FBFMs), construction plans, bridge plans. 
b.  Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval, and a planimetric map showing the applicable items. If a digital version of the map is available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM may be more easily revised. 
c.  Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised one percent and 0.2 percent annual chance floodplains and floodway boundaries. 
d.  If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used then all supporting documentation or metadata must be included with the data submission along with the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and State Plane Coordinate System in accordance with FEMA mapping specifications. 
e.  The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective floodplain boundaries. 
f.  All cross-sections from the Effective Model shall be labeled in accordance with the effective map and a cross-section lookup table shall be included to relate to the model input numbering scheme. 
g.  Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown on the map. 
h.  The stream centerline, or profile baseline used to measure stream distances in the model shall be visible on the map. Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this article shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The permit may be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient cause. 
(d)  Certificate of occupancy and/or site plan approval. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a site plan is approved and a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Building Division Director, except where no permit is required, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The site plan and certificate of occupancy shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit; 
(3)  If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of occupancy shall be issued within ten days after written notification that the permitted work is completed; 
(4)  The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the requirements of Section 42-486(f) are met. 
(e)  Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit the applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including, but not limited to, those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.090)  
Sec. 42-485. - Zoning Agency. 
(a)  The Division of Building and Development Services shall: 
(1)  Oversee the functions of the office of the Building Division Director; 
(2)  Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments to this article, maps and text. 
(b)  The Division of Building and Development Services shall not: 
(1)  Grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action by the Board of Appeals; or 
(2)  Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the governing body. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.095)  
Sec. 42-486. - Appeals/disputes. 
(a)  The Zoning Board of Appeals, created under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this article. The Board shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The Building Division Director shall not be the Secretary of the Board. 
(1)  Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall: 
a.  Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter; 
b.  Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map; and 
c.  Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the ordinance standards. 
(2)  Appeals to the board. 
a.  Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the Building Division Director or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the Board, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the Board all records regarding the matter appealed. 
b.  Notice and hearing for appeals including variances. 
1.  Notice. The Board shall: 
(i)  Fix a reasonable time for the hearing; 
(ii)  Publish Class 2 notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing; and 
(iii)  Ensure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the Department Regional Office at least ten days in advance of the hearing. 
2.  Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The Board shall: 
(i)  Resolve boundary disputes according to Section 42-486(c); 
(ii)  Decide variance applications according to Section 42-486(d); and 
(iii)  Decide appeals of permit denials according to Section 42-486(e). 
c.  Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall: 
1.  Be made within a reasonable time; 
2.  Be sent to the Department Regional Office within ten days of the decision; 
3.  Be a written determination signed by the Chairman or Secretary of the Board; 
4.  State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's decision; 
5.  Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application; and 
6.  Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the Board's proceedings. 
(b)  Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the Board in hearing disputes concerning Floodplain District boundaries: 
(1)  If a Floodplain District boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined; 
(2)  The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the Board; and 
(3)  If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to Section 47-486. 
(c)  Variance. 
(1)  The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this article if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
a.  Literal enforcement of this article will cause unnecessary hardship; 
b.  The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case the ordinance or map must be amended; 
c.  The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and 
d.  The variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter in Section 42-477. 
(2)  In addition to the criteria in Subsection (c)(1) of this section, to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met: 
a.  The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation; 
b.  Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE; and 
c.  Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of this article. 
(3)  A variance shall not: 
a.  Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district; 
b.  Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss; 
c.  Be granted for a hardship which is self-created; 
d.  Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area; 
e.  Allow actions without the amendments to this article or map required in Section 42-486; and 
f.  Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure. 
(4)  When a floodplain variance is granted the Board shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and property and flood insurance premiums. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record. 
(d)  To review appeals of permit denials. 
(1)  The Zoning Agency (Section 42-485) or Board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include: 
a.  Permit application data listed in Section 42-484(b); 
b.  Floodway/floodfringe determination data in Section 42-482(d); 
c.  Data listed in Section 42-480(c)(1)b where the applicant has not submitted this information to the Building Division Director; and 
d.  Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the Board with the appeal. 
(2)  For appeals of all denied permits the Board shall: 
a.  Follow the procedures of Section 42-486; 
b.  Consider Zoning Agency recommendations; and 
c.  Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(3)  For appeals of all denied permits the Board shall: 
a.  Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners as per the requirements of Section 42-487; and 
b.  Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase, provided no other reasons for denial exist. 
(e)  Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures or uses. 
(1)  No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA Floodproofing Certificate. 
(2)  For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either: 
a.  Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or 
b.  Meets or exceeds the following standards: 
1.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(3)  Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to: 
a.  Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other regional flood factors; 
b.  Protect structures to the flood protection elevation; 
c.  Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; 
d.  Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and 
e.  Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters. 
(f)  Public information. 
(1)  Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood. 
(2)  All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed. 
(3)  Real estate transfers should show what Floodplain District any real property is in. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.100)  
Sec. 42-487. - Amendments. 
(a)  Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made to this chapter, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with Section 42-487(a). 
(1)  In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with Section 42-487(a). Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR. 
(2)  In A Zones increases equal to or greater than one foot may only be permitted if the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles, in accordance with Section 42-487(a). 
(b)  General. The governing body shall change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this chapter in the manner outlined in Subsection (b) of this section. Actions which require an amendment to the ordinance and/or submittal of a letter of map change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height; 
(2)  Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations on the FIRM; 
(3)  Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in Subsection (b)(1) of this section; 
(4)  Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain; 
(5)  Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain maps; 
(6)  Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.05, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the municipality; and 
(7)  All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA. 
(c)  Procedures. Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any party according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. The petitions shall include all data required by Sections 42-482(d) and 42-484(b). The building permit or other required permit or approval shall not be issued until a letter of map revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed changes. 
(1)  The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the Department Regional Office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(2)  No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the Department. 
(3)  All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be approved by the governing body. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.110)  
Sec. 42-488. - Violations; penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the Municipal Attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.120)  
Sec. 42-489. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this chapter shall have their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. The term "may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not discretionary. 
A Zones means those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
AH Zone. See Area of shallow flooding. 
AO Zone. See Area of shallow flooding. 
Accessory structure or use means a facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building. 
Alteration means an enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a structure. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM. 
Basement means any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
Building. See Structure. 
Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a Municipal Ordinance and approved by the Department pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11, and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high water mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this chapter. 
Campground means any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area. 
Camping unit means any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including, but not limited to, a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, or tent that is fully-licensed, if required, and ready for highway use. 
Certificate of occupancy means a certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water. 
Crawlways or crawl space means an enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities. 
Deck means an unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation. 
Department means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
Development means any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
Dryland access means a vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles. 
Encroachment means any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in the floodway. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The overflow or rise of inland waters; 
(2)  The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; 
(3)  The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior. 
The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
Flood frequency means the probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average once in a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year. 
Flood hazard boundary map means a map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A-zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance study and a flood insurance rate map. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means a map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood insurance study means a technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A Zones. Flood insurance rate maps, that accompany the flood insurance study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river. 
Flood protection elevation means an elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also see Freeboard.) 
Flood storage means those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge. 
Floodfringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water. 
Floodplain means land which has been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. 
Floodplain island means a natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood. 
Floodplain management means policy and procedures to ensure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
Freeboard means a safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed. 
Habitable structure means any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation. 
Hearing notice means publication or posting meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 985. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums. 
High flood damage potential means damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is either: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Increase in regional flood height means a calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see Development.) 
Lowest adjacent grade means elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any of the exterior walls of a building. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. 
Maintenance means the act or process of restoring to original soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent fixtures, systems or structures. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a "mobile recreational vehicle." 
Mobile recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of the term "mobile recreational vehicle." 
Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision, existing, means a parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Mobile/manufactured home park, expansion to existing, means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring if concrete pads. 
Model, corrected effective, means a hydraulic engineering model that corrects any errors that occur in the Duplicate Effective Model, adds any additional cross sections to the Duplicate Effective Model, or incorporates more detailed topographic information than that used in the Current Effective Model. 
Model, duplicate effective means a copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the effective FIS and referred to as the Effective Model. 
Model, effective means the hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce the current effective flood insurance study. 
Model, existing (pre-project) means a modification of the Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected Effective Model to reflect any manmade modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the Effective Model but prior to the construction of the project for which the revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date of the Effective Model, then this model would be identical to the corrected Effective Model or Duplicate Effective Model. 
Model, revised (post-project), means a modification of the existing or pre-project conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to reflect revised or post-project conditions. 
Municipality or municipal means the county, city or village governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing this zoning chapter. 
NAVD or North American Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment. 
NGVD or National Geodetic Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment. 
New construction means for floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Nonconforming structure means an existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.) 
Nonconforming use means an existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence in the floodway.) 
Obstruction to flow means any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
Official floodplain zoning map means that map, adopted and made part of this chapter, as described in Section 42-478(b), which has been approved by the Department and FEMA. 
Open space use means those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
Ordinary highwater mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
Person means an individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency. 
Private sewage system means a sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the Department of Safety and Professional Services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure. 
Public utilities means those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. 
Reasonably safe from flooding means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE. 
Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts. 
Subdivision means the same meaning as given in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12). 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either any project for the improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the Building Division Director and that are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. 
Unnecessary hardship means where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the ordinance. 
Variance means an authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface profile means a graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
Watershed means the entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water. 
Well means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use. 
(Code 1976, § 18.60.130)  
Secs. 42-490—42-516. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 42-517. - Intent; purpose. 
(a)  Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and pollution of the navigable waters of the municipality would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax base. This shoreland-wetland zoning chapter has been established to: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare; 
(2)  Maintain the stormwater and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands; 
(3)  Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters; 
(4)  Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other aquatic habitat; 
(5)  Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and 
(6)  Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth moving activities. 
(b)  This chapter is adopted pursuant to authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23, 62.231, 87.30 and 144.26. 
(Code 1976, § 18.70.010)  
Sec. 42-518. - General provisions. 
(a)  Exemption for Department of Transportation projects. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt from all provisions of this article when Wis. Stats. § 30.12, applies. 
(b)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article supersedes all the provisions of the zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23 or 87.30, which relate to floodplains and shoreland-wetlands, except that where another section of the zoning ordinance is more restrictive than this article, that section shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(c)  Interpretation. Where a provision of this article is required by a standard in NR 117, Wis. Admin. Code, and where the article provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of NR 117 standards in effect on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this article or administrative code. 
(d)  Annexed areas. The Rock County shoreland zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be administered by the City for all areas annexed by the City after May 7, 1982, unless any of the changes under Wis. Stats. § 59.692. These annexed lands are described on maps available from the City Planning Division. The Rock County Shoreland Zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the City Planning Division. 
(Code 1976, § 18.70.020)  
Sec. 42-519. - Shoreland; Wetland Zoning Maps. 
The following maps are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter, and are on file in the City Planning Division: 
(1)  Wisconsin Wetland Inventory maps stamped "FINAL" on May 23, 1994, and from time to time amended; 
(2)  Federal Emergency Management Agency flood insurance study maps dated January 17, 1985, and from time to time amended; 
(3)  Floodplain zoning maps titled "Official Floodplain Zoning Map" and dated October 29, 1984, and from time to time amended; 
(4)  United States Geological Survey (USGS) quadrangle maps dated 1961, photo revised 1971 and 1976 and from time to time amended; and 
(5)  Zoning maps adopted August 24, 1981, and from time to time amended. 
(Code 1976, § 18.70.030)  
Sec. 42-520. - District boundaries. 
(a)  Extent of district. The Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District includes all wetlands in the City which are shown on the final Wetland Inventory Map adopted and made a part of this chapter and which are: 
(1)  Five acres or more in area. Wetlands which are less than five acres are not subject to the regulations set forth in this article; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high water mark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages shall be presumed to be navigable if they are shown on the USGS maps or zoning maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this article; or 
(3)  Within 300 feet of the ordinary high water mark of navigable rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the USGS maps or zoning maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this article. Floodplain zoning maps shall be used to determine the extent of floodplain areas. 
(b)  Determinations. Determinations of navigability and ordinary high water mark location shall initially be made by the Building Division Director, with assistance from the City Planner and City Engineer. When questions arise, the Building Division Director shall contact the appropriate district office of the Department of Natural Resources for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high water mark. 
(c)  Map discrepancies. When an apparent discrepancy exists between the Shoreland-Wetland District boundary shown on final Wisconsin Wetlands Inventory maps and actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the Building Division Director shall contact the appropriate district office of the Department of Natural Resources to determine if the Shoreland-Wetland District boundary as mapped is in error. If department staff concur with the Building Division Director that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Building Division Director shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a building permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors or acknowledge exempted wetlands designated in Subsections (d) and (e) of this section, the Building Division Director shall be responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period. 
(d)  Filled wetlands. Wetlands filled prior to May 23, 1994, in a manner which affects their wetland characteristics to the extent that the area can no longer be defined as wetland, are not subject to this article. 
(e)  Wetlands landward of a bulkhead line. Wetlands located between the original ordinary high water mark and a bulkhead line established prior to May 7, 1982, under Wis. Stats. § 30.11, are not subject to this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 18.70.040)  
Sec. 42-521. - Uses allowed in district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are uses of land or buildings in conformance with all provisions of this chapter and specifically allowed in the Shoreland-Wetland Overlay District subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, and other applicable local, state and federal laws, as from time to time amended. The following are permitted uses: 
(1)  Hiking, fishing, trapping, swimming, snowmobiling and boating, provided that no wetland alteration occurs; 
(2)  Harvesting wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops, provided that no wetland alteration occurs; 
(3)  The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber, provided that no wetland alteration occurs. Limited temporary water level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected shall be allowed; 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops, provided that no wetland alteration occurs; 
(5)  The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore pre-existing levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible; 
(6)  The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance; 
(7)  The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways, bikeways, observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance; 
(8)  The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District, provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in Section 42-525(c); 
(9)  The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The term "conditional uses" means uses of land or buildings which may be allowed in the Shoreland-Wetland Overlay District subject to the issuance of conditional use permits in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 42-272. The uses listed below may be allowed as conditional uses subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31 and all other applicable state, local, and federal laws, as from time to time amended. In its review of conditional use permits for any of the listed uses, the Plan Commission shall consider specifications for type of shore cover; erosion controls; setbacks; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational control; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking areas and signs; and type of construction. 
(1)  The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services, or for access to uses allowed under Section 42-521, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
b.  The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in Section 42-525(c); 
c.  The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended use; 
d.  Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only; and 
e.  Any wetland alteration is necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road. 
(2)  The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The building is used solely in conjunction with a use allowed in the Shoreland-Wetland District or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals; 
b.  The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
c.  The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and 
d.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the building is allowed. 
(3)  The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas; outdoor education areas; historic, natural and scientific areas; game refuges and closed areas; fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects; and wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Any private development shall be used exclusively for the permitted use; 
b.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed; 
c.  The construction and maintenance of roads necessary to serve the use are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in Section 42-521(b)(1); and 
d.  Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values. 
(4)  The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines, water and gas distribution lines and sewage collection lines and related facilities and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that the following conditions are met: 
a.  The lines/facility cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
b.  Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed; and 
c.  Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in Section 42-525(c). 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not listed in Section 42-521 as a permitted or conditional use is prohibited, unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this chapter in accordance with Section 42-525. 
(d)  Nonconforming structures and uses. The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which Article XV of this chapter was derived, or an applicable amendment to this chapter, which is not in conformance with the provisions of the chapter may be continued subject to the provisions of Section 42-359. 
(Code 1976, § 18.70.050)  
Sec. 42-522. - Administrative provisions. 
(a)  Building Division Director. The Building Division Director, with assistance from the City Planner, shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants as to the provisions of this article and assist them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms; 
(2)  Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with this article; 
(3)  Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official actions; 
(4)  Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, for the purpose of performing these duties; 
(5)  Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits, appeals for a map or text interpretation, and map or text amendments within ten days after they are granted or denied, to the appropriate district office of the Department of Natural Resources; and 
(6)  Investigate and report violations of this article to the City Attorney. 
(b)  Required permits. Building Permits, as provided in Chapter 10 (Building Code), shall be obtained for the construction, reconstruction, structural alteration, or moving of all conditional uses listed in Section 42-521(b). 
(c)  Compliance with permits. The Building Division Director shall conduct regular inspections of projects for which a building permit is required as prescribed by state law. In addition, the Building Division Director shall require a certified report of all inspections from the registered architect or registered engineer supervising the construction of any structure requiring their supervision, as provided in Section 10-15(c). 
(d)  Revocation. When the conditions of a building permit are violated, the Building Division Director may revoke the permit as provided in Section 10-9. 
(Code 1976, § 18.70.060)  
Sec. 42-523. - Appeals of administrative decisions. 
(a)  Procedure. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the Building Division Director or other administrative official as provided in Section 42-270(b). 
(b)  Department notice. A copy of all notices of Zoning Board of Appeals public hearings on appeals involving shoreland-wetland zoning shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the Department of Natural Resources at least ten days prior to all public hearings. A copy of all relevant decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the Department within ten days after the decision is issued. 
(c)  Records. Appropriate records shall be made by the Building Division Director on all appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 18.70.070)  
Sec. 42-524. - Conditional use permit requests. 
(a)  Procedure. A request for approval of a conditional use listed in Section 42-521(b) shall be filed with the City Planner and reviewed by the Plan Commission as provided in Section 42-272. 
(b)  Department notice. A copy of all notices of Plan Commission public hearings on conditional use permits involving shoreland-wetland zoning shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the Department of Natural Resources at least ten days prior to all public hearings. A copy of all relevant decisions shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the Department within ten days after the decision is issued. 
(c)  Records. Appropriate records shall be made by the City Planner on all conditional use permit requests to the Plan Commission, including the land use and structures permitted. 
(d)  Revocation. When the conditions of a conditional use permit are violated, the Plan Commission may revoke the permit. 
(Code 1976, § 18.70.080)  
Sec. 42-525. - Amending Shoreland; Wetland Zoning regulations. 
(a)  Procedure. The City Council may alter, supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this chapter in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117 and the provisions of Section 42-525. All proposed text and map amendments to the Shoreland-Wetland Zoning regulations shall be referred to the Plan Commission, and a public hearing shall be held after Class 2 notice as required by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2. 
(b)  Department notice. The appropriate district office of the Department of Natural Resources shall be provided with: 
(1)  A copy of each proposed text or map amendment within five days of the referral of the proposed amendment to the Plan Commission for its recommendation; 
(2)  Written notice of any public hearing at least ten days prior to such hearing; 
(3)  A copy of the recommendation and report of the Plan Commission on a proposed text or map amendment within five days after the submission of that recommendation to the City Council; and 
(4)  Written notice of City Council action on the proposed text or map amendment within ten days after the action is taken. 
(c)  Standards for map amendments. To ensure that this chapter will remain consistent with the shoreland protection objectives of Wis. Stats. § 281.31, the municipal governing body may not rezone a wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following wetland functions: 
(1)  Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity; 
(2)  Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland; 
(3)  Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters; 
(4)  Shoreline protection against erosion; 
(5)  Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds; 
(6)  Wildlife habitat; or 
(7)  Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species. 
(d)  Determination of adverse impact. Where the district office of the Department of Natural Resources determines that a proposed rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in Section 42-525(c) the Department shall so notify the municipality of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment. If the Department notifies the Plan Commission in writing that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in Section 42-525(c), that proposed amendment, if approved by the City Council, shall not become effective until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the municipal approval was mailed to the Department, as required by Section 42-525(b)(4). If within the 30-day period, the Department notifies the municipality that the Department intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the municipality as provided by Wis. Stats. § 62.231(6) the proposed amendment shall not become effective until the ordinance adoption procedure under Wis. Stats. § 62.231(6), is completed or otherwise terminated. 
(Code 1976, § 18.70.090)  
Sec. 42-526. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any development, building or structure or accessory building or structure constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced or any use or accessory use established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in violation of the provisions of this article, by any person, firm, association, corporation (including building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed a violation. The Building Division Director may refer violations to the City Attorney who may prosecute such violations according to the penalties provided in Section 42-332. 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation, cooperative or other entity of whatsoever kind or nature who violates any provision of this chapter shall pay a forfeiture and shall be otherwise penalized as set forth in Section 42-332. 
(c)  Each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate violation. 
(d)  In addition to and not in lieu of any forfeiture imposed herein, the City may apply for and the court may grant, from time to time, injunctive relief, including, but not limited to, abatement and mandatory performance. 
(Code 1976, § 18.70.100)  
Secs. 42-527—42-545. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 42-546. - Title. 
This article shall hereafter be known, cited, or referred to as the Airport Overlay Zoning District (AOZD) of the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.010)  
Sec. 42-547. - Effective date. 
This article shall be effective January 1, 2010, after adoption by the City Council and publication as provided by law. Amendments to this chapter shall be effective after adoption. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.020)  
Sec. 42-548. - General provisions. 
The City Council of the City of Janesville do ordain the creation of the Airport Overlay Zoning District (AOZD) ordinance (hereafter referenced as the ordinance) of the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.030)  
Sec. 42-549. - Authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §§ 114.135 and 114.136. Further authorization is granted by Wis. Stats. §§ 32.05, 59.52, 59.58, 59.69, 60.61, 62.23, 85.02, 85.15, and Wis. Stats. ch. 114, as well as chapter TRANS 56 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code [Wis. Admin. Code ch. TRANS 56]. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.040)  
Sec. 42-550. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The general purpose and intent of this article is to: 
(1)  Promote public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the community and its residents; and 
(2)  Protect the airport approaches and surrounding airspace from encroachment, as well as limit the exposure of impacts to persons and facilities in proximity to the airport, located within the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Overlay Zoning District. 
(b)  The specific purpose and intent of this article is to: 
(1)  Impose land use controls, which are in addition to those underlying zoning classifications, that will maintain a compatible relationship between airport operations and existing and future land uses within the three-mile jurisdictional boundary; 
(2)  Regulate and restrict the height of structures and objects of natural growth, concentrations of people (density), visual obstructions (smoke, steam, dust, etc.), electrical and navigational interference, noise-sensitive land uses, and wildlife and bird attractants; 
(3)  Implement recommendations developed in the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Master Plan, Airport Land Use Plan, and/or Airport Layout Plans; 
(4)  Promote compatible land uses while respecting the physical characteristics of the County, the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport, and locations and sites; 
(5)  Promote development in an orderly, planned, cost-effective, and environmentally-sound manner; 
(6)  Regulate and restrict building sites, placement of structures, and land uses by separating conflicting land uses and prohibiting certain land uses that are detrimental to airport operations, navigable airspace, and the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport; 
(7)  Provide a uniform basis for the preparation, implementation, and administration of sound airport protection regulations for all areas within the three-mile jurisdictional boundary of the Airport Overlay Zoning District within the area to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the County residents; 
(8)  Provide a quality environment for human habitation and for encouraging the most appropriate use of land within the three-mile jurisdictional boundary within the County; and 
(9)  Control placement of buildings, heights of structures and natural vegetation, and designation of land uses to limit conflicts with airport operations, navigable airspace, and provide for the public health, safety, and welfare of county residents located in the vicinity of the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.050)  
Sec. 42-551. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, wherever this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.060)  
Sec. 42-552. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of City of Janesville, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any powers granted to the City of Janesville by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.070)  
Sec. 42-553. - Ordinance supersedes conflicting ordinances. 
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the City of Janesville inconsistent or conflicting with the provisions set forth in this article, to the extent of the inconsistency only, are hereby superseded by this article and publication. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.090)  
Sec. 42-554. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The jurisdiction of this chapter shall extend over all lands and waters within the three-mile jurisdictional boundary of the AOZD, as those boundaries now exist and as they are amended in the future. 
(b)  The regulations of the AOZD shall apply: 
(1)  To all properties within the three-mile jurisdictional boundary identified by the application of Wis. Stats. § 114.136, measured from the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport property line, regardless of the municipal boundary. 
(2)  To the properties within Rock County, Town of Beloit, City of Janesville, Town of La Prairie, Town of Rock, Town of Turtle, and City of Janesville, all of which lie entirely or partially within the three-mile jurisdictional boundary of the AOZD. 
(3)  To the limits represented by five independent zones which are defined in Section 42-565. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.100)  
Sec. 42-555. - State and local agencies regulated. 
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13), applies. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.110)  
Sec. 42-556. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of protection provided by this article relative to aircraft operation and aircraft overflights is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Advisory Circular (AC) 150/5300-13, Airport Design Standards and Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace. Therefore, this article does not imply that land uses within the vicinity of the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport will be totally free from aircraft noise impacts, aircraft operations, and aircraft overflights. Nor does this article create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport, Rock County, Town of Beloit, Town of Janesville, Town of La Prairie, Town of Rock, Town of Turtle, City of Janesville, or any officer or employee thereof, for incidents that may result from reliance on this article. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.120)  
Sec. 42-557. - Use restrictions. 
Through the use of the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map, heights of structures and features, both manmade and natural growth, shall be limited. The following uses shall also be restricted and regulated as specified within this article: 
(1)  The following specific use restrictions and regulations shall also apply: 
a.  Existing uses. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require the removal of or any change in the construction, alteration, location, or use of any existing use; this includes the construction, alteration, or use of property or structural improvements lawfully in existence at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or which commenced prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and has been completed or is being diligently pursued. This includes vacant platted lots that were established to accommodate proposed development prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. It is further provided that the height limits of this chapter shall in no event be exceeded. 
1.  Expansion of existing uses. Any existing use, as described in this chapter, may be expanded, altered, or otherwise enlarged as long as the following requirements are met: 
(i)  The expansion, alteration, or enlargement meets the requirements of the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map, the land use restrictions as provided in Tables 4 through 10 (requiring a Zoning/Building Site Permit and Affidavit (applicant's recorded affidavit accepting mitigation responsibilities), when specified), and is not otherwise prohibited by the underlying zoning ordinance of the municipality with jurisdictional authority. 
(ii)  Expansion of any existing use listed as a permitted use in Tables 4 through 10 does not require a zoning/building site permit and affidavit. 
2.  Substantial damage. The owner of any existing use, building, or structure which, as a result of fire, explosion, or other casualty is destroyed or substantially damaged, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred, shall be allowed to rebuild, reconstruct, or rehabilitate the same existing use on the same parcel, only if the following requirements are met: 
(i)  The existing use is reviewed and complies with the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map, the land use restrictions as provided in Tables 4 through 10 (requiring a zoning/building site permit and affidavit (applicant's recorded affidavit accepting mitigation responsibilities), when specified), and is not otherwise prohibited by the underlying zoning ordinance of the municipality with jurisdictional authority. 
(ii)  Permitted uses are those land uses generally considered compatible within a particular zone of the AOZD. Compatible land uses do not impact or create hazardous conditions for aircraft, airport operational areas, or aircraft overflight areas, and are considered reasonably safe for area residents. Permitted uses, however, shall conform to all Height Restrictions within the AOZD, and may be required by the Committee Designee to ensure height compliance. A zoning/building site permit and affidavit (applicant's recorded affidavit accepting mitigation responsibilities), is not required for compliance with this chapter. This includes expansion of any existing use listed as a permitted use in Tables 4 through 10. 
(iii)  Permit required uses are those land uses that shall be permissible following the issuance of a City of Janesville Zoning/Building Site Permit. The permit, which may include development and use related conditions, along with a signed affidavit (applicant's recorded affidavit accepting mitigation responsibilities), notifies applicants of their responsibilities and required mitigation for any construction, alteration, location or use of land to minimize potential hazardous impacts to the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport, aircraft, airport operational areas, and aircraft overflight areas, as well as residents of the area. 
(iv)  Not permitted uses are those land uses generally considered not compatible (incompatible) or not permitted within a particular zone of the AOZD. Incompatible land uses endanger the health, safety, and welfare of area residents and aircraft utilizing the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.130)  
Sec. 42-558. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with or violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $500.00 and no more than $5,000.00, plus the costs of prosecution, for each violation. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. The City of Janesville Citation Ordinance (Section 42-332) may also be used to address ordinance violations. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.140)  
Sec. 42-559. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to construct or use any structure, land, or water in violation of any of the provisions of this article. In case of any violation, the Community Development Director, and/or his or her designee may institute appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of this article or cause structure or use to be vacated or removed. The Building Division Director may refer violations to the City Attorney who may prosecute such violations according to the penalties provided in Section 42-332. 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation, cooperative or other entity of whatsoever kind or nature who violates any provision of this article shall pay a forfeiture and shall be otherwise penalized as set forth in Section 42-332. 
(c)  Each day's continuance of any violation constitutes a separate violation. 
(d)  In addition to and not in lieu of any forfeiture imposed herein, the City may apply for and the court may grant, from time to time, injunctive relief including, but not limited to, abatement and mandatory performance. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.150)  
Sec. 42-560. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation. The City Council hereby designates the Community Development Director (hereinafter referred to as Director) and/or his or her designee to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. In the event of any conflict, the determination or interpretation of the Community Development Director shall prevail. 
(b)  Responsibilities. The Director is hereby delegated the responsibility and authority to: 
(1)  Approve or conditionally approve Zoning/Building Site Permits that do not exceed required height restrictions; 
(2)  Advise applicants of the provisions of this chapter and assist them in preparing permit applications and appeals; 
(3)  Issue permits and inspect any building site or improvement or use of land as required by this article; 
(4)  Investigate and issue citations for violations of this article; 
(5)  Maintain records of approvals, denials, conditions of approvals, and inspections made, and maintain a complete public record of all proceedings; 
(6)  Maintain on file a list of all documentation of certified elevations; and 
(7)  Review and make recommendations to the County Board of Supervisors on all zoning map changes and amendments to the text of Land Control Ordinances, including the Airport Overlay Zoning District Ordinance. 
(c)  Powers. The Director shall have all the powers necessary to enforce the provisions of this article without limitation by reason of enumeration, including the following: 
(1)  To require complete and accurate information necessary to make reasonable evaluations of applications; 
(2)  To hear and grant applications for unclassified and unspecified uses, provided that such uses are similar in character to the principal uses permitted in the district; and 
(3)  To hear and grant applications for temporary uses in any district, provided that such uses are of a temporary nature, do not involve the erection of a substantial structure, and are compatible with neighboring uses. The permit shall be temporary, revocable, subject to any conditions required by the Director, and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months. Compliance with all other provisions of this article shall be required. 
(d)  Zoning/building site permit. When required by this article, a zoning/building site permit (valid for one year) shall be obtained from the Director and/or his or her designee before the removal of or any change in the construction, alteration, location, or use of any existing use or proposed use. In all cases, the height limits of this chapter shall not be exceeded. The zoning/building site permit (for permit required uses or for existing uses when specified), which may include development and use related conditions, along with a signed affidavit (applicant's recorded affidavit accepting mitigation responsibilities), notifies applicants of their responsibilities and required mitigation for any construction, alteration, location or use of land to minimize potential hazardous impacts to the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport, aircraft, airport operational areas, and aircraft overflight areas, as well as residents of the area. Failure to obtain a zoning/building site permit when required, shall be a violation of this chapter. Application for a permit shall be made to the Director and/or his or her designee upon furnished application forms and shall include the following data: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, property owner, and contractor-builder; an accurate properly dimensioned map of the property, in duplicate showing; 
(2)  Legal description of the property, the type of proposed use, and an indication as to whether new construction or a modification to an existing structure is involved; 
(3)  A description of the proposed land use and building materials and landscaping materials; 
(4)  When the Director deems necessary, the elevation of the highest point of the structure, object, or natural vegetation using National Geodetic and Vertical Datum when locating within the individual zone of the AOZD, including existing ground elevations reporting in Mean Sea Level (MSL), height of the structure or object above ground measured in feet (AGL), and top elevation measured in MSL; 
(5)  When the Director deems necessary, evidence of submission for a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Form 7460-1, Notification of Proposed Construction or Alteration, commonly known as an airspace review. Receipt of final determination letter from the FAA is required prior to final approval or denial of a Zoning/Building Site Permit (as required for Permit Required Uses or for Existing Uses when specified); 
(6)  Applicant's affidavit accepting mitigation responsibilities to ensure that any use, construction or alteration of such use is compatible with this article; and 
(7)  Other permits. It is the responsibility of the applicant to secure all other necessary permits from all appropriate federal, state, and local agencies. 
(e)  Application information. In order to secure evidence upon which to base its determination, the Director may require, in addition to the information required on Permit Application, the submission of plans of buildings; arrangement of operations; plat of grounds showing location and elevation of buildings, stockpiles, wells, septic systems, equipment storage, fences or screens, parking areas, traffic access, fill areas, floodproofing measures, landscaping; and any other pertinent information that may be necessary to determine if the proposed use meets the requirements of this chapter. Plans drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 200 feet showing the location, dimensions, elevations, and contours of the site; elevations of all pertinent structures, fill, or storage areas; size, location, and spatial arrangements of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; and the relationship of the above to the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport, as well as a particular zone of the AOZD. 
(f)  Standards applicable to all permit required uses within the Airport Overlay Zoning District. Upon reviewing a zoning/building site permit application in the AOZD, the Director shall consider the factors listed below. In addition, the Director is not authorized to allow any use to exceed a height limitation in the AOZD. 
(1)  Potential to create an undue concentration of people (density); 
(2)  Potential to cause visual obstructions (through the creation of smoke, steam, dust, lighting or other unspecified obstruction) that would adversely effect aircraft operational areas and airspace, and specifically the proximity to runway ends, runway surfaces and extended runway centerlines; 
(3)  Potential for noise sensitivity, and when necessary, ensuring building construction that reduces airport related noises for proposed uses; 
(4)  Creation of electrical or navigational interference; 
(5)  Creation of standing water areas or detention/retention ponds which may attract wildlife, thus designing or mitigating standing water areas or detention/retention ponds to avoid attracting wildlife; 
(6)  Creation of wildlife attractants other than water; 
(7)  Potential storage of flammable or hazardous materials limits as defined by the Wisconsin Commercial Building Code; 
(8)  At the owner's expense, the technical expertise of a professional surveyor and/or engineer to determine exact locations and elevations. This may be done to confirm the accuracy of information supplied by the applicant. 
(g)  Conditions of approval. Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the director may deny or approve the issuance of a zoning/building site permit; any approval may require attached conditions the committee designee deems necessary in furthering the purpose of this chapter. Violation of any of these conditions shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(h)  Appealing decisions of the Director. If the Director and/or his or her designee denies or conditionally approves a zoning/building site permit and the applicant disagrees with such decision, the applicant may appeal such denial or condition to the Plan Commission. Such an appeal shall be signed and filed in writing with the Planning Division within 30 days following the Committee Designee's determination or be forever barred. The Plan Commission may affirm, overrule or modify a decision of the Director and/or his or her designee. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.160)  
Sec. 42-561. - Board of Adjustment. 
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7). As prescribed, Article VI of this chapter, are hereby referenced and made part of this article. 
(1)  Any person, office, or department aggrieved by an order, requirement, interpretation, or determination made by the Director and/or his or her designee may appeal such decision to the City of Janesville Board of Appeals for final judgment. 
(2)  Use variances shall not be granted under the ordinance. 
(3)  Height variances shall not be granted under this article. 
(4)  Where the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that unnecessary hardships or practical difficulty will result from strict compliance with these regulations, they may approve variances so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest is secured. Such variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. The Board of Appeals shall not approve variances unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
a.  The proposed variance request is not contrary to the public interest and is consistent with the intent of applicable ordinances and will not compromise public safety and welfare (will not hinder airport operations and/or future growth of the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport); 
b.  The proposed variance will not serve as a special privilege and is justified based on special conditions on the property, which are not shared by other properties in the same locality or district (for example, lot shape, elevation or topography); 
c.  A strict and literal interpretation of the chapter will result in a practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship on the property owner (hardship shall be distinguished from inconvenience); 
d.  The variance is not requested because of a self-imposed hardship; 
e.  Shall not be granted solely on the basis of economic gain or loss; and 
f.  Shall not be granted for actions which require an amendment to this article or the map described in any section of this article. 
(5)  Conditions. In approving variances, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require conditions that will, in its judgment, substantially secure the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. 
(6)  Procedures. An appeal or an application for a variance shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days of the action of the Director and/or his or her designee. 
(7)  Presenting evidence. In all cases, the person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the Board of Appeals. Where it is determined that the district boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should either inform the Director to proceed to petition Rock County or inform the person contesting the location of the boundary to petition Rock County, for a map amendment pursuant to Chapter 29. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.170)  
Sec. 42-562. - Fees. 
At the time of application, the property owner or his or her agent shall pay the fees established pursuant to Section 42-277. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.180)  
Sec. 42-563. - Applicant's recorded affidavit accepting mitigation responsibilities. 
For all permit required uses or for existing uses when specified, the following information shall be noticed to each applicant indicating the responsibilities of the applicant to mitigate any construction, alteration, location or use of land to minimize potential hazardous impacts to the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport, aircraft, airport operational areas, and aircraft overflight areas, as well as area residents. Failure of applicant to mitigate potential hazardous impacts shall be a violation of the terms and requirement of this chapter. A signed and accepted affidavit must be recorded in the Rock County Register of Deeds. Permitted uses under this chapter are not required to secure a zoning/building site permit or affidavit. Those potential impacting issues are listed below: 
(1)  Site design and physical characteristics. 
a.  Existing topography, drainage patterns, and vegetative cover and the suitability of the proposed use in that regard. 
b.  Proximity of runway environs and extended runway centerline areas. 
c.  Location of any linear roadways, relative to the alignment of the runway or the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Noise sensitivity. 
a.  Insulate the structure/land use to reduce noise impacts. 
b.  Use airport compatible landscaping material to mitigate noise exposure. 
c.  Shift the structure or land use to allow for a more compatible location. 
(3)  Tall structures. 
a.  Lower the structure or land use to a compatible height. 
b.  Shift the structure or land use to allow for a more compatible location. 
(4)  Visual obstructions. 
a.  Install down-shielded light fixtures. 
b.  Reduce the number of lighting fixtures, while still illuminating the land use area safely. 
c.  Configure lighting so it does not align with a runway or airport facility, making it easier for a pilot to distinguish the airport from the development. 
d.  Limit reflective building materials, such as mirrored/reflective glass, solar panels, metal roofs, etc., within the vicinity of the airport. 
e.  Locate areas of water away from the airport to minimize reflection. 
f.  Shift the structure or land use within the site so that prevailing wind directions carry smoke, steam, or dust away from the airport. 
g.  Change land use activity to reduce or limit emissions of smoke, steam, or dust. 
(5)  Wildlife and bird attractants. 
a.  Select and space vegetative species to minimize habitats and food sources. 
b.  Maintain appropriate grass lengths to minimize wildlife attractants. 
c.  Prohibit certain agricultural crops near the airport. 
d.  Eliminate or mitigate standing water bodies that provide water and habitat. 
e.  Use repellents to disperse wildlife in a humane manner. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.190)  
Sec. 42-564. - Airport Overlay Zoning Districts. 
(a)  Airport Overlay Zoning District. All Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Overlay Zoning Districts established by this article are shown on the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Overlay Zoning District Map on file with the County Planning and Development Agency and Janesville Planning Division and are adopted as part of this article. 
(b)  Airport Height Zoning District. All height zones established by this article are shown on the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map on file with the County Planning and Development Agency and Janesville Planning Division and are adopted as part of this article. 
Height limitations. No building, structure, object, or vegetation (e.g., trees, shrubs) shall be constructed, erected, altered, allowed to grow, or planted within any AOZD established by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limitations as shown on the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map, which is maintained by the County Planning and Development Agency and also kept on file in the Janesville Planning Division. The permitted height shall not exceed the height limitation elevations shown on the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map within the various zones encompassed by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.200)  
Sec. 42-565. - Establishment of Airport Overlay Zoning Districts 
For the purpose of this article, the area of Rock County under the jurisdiction of this article is hereby divided into the following districts and zones: 
(1)  Airport Overlay Zoning District. 
a.  Zone A: Runway protection zone (RPZ). 
b.  Zone B1: Approach surface. 
c.  Zone B2: Approach surface. 
d.  Zone C: Transitional surface. 
e.  Zone D: Three-mile jurisdictional boundary. 
(2)  Airport height zoning district. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.210)  
Sec. 42-566. - Zoning map and district boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of each district are established as shown on a map entitled "Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Overlay Zoning District Map, Rock County, Wisconsin," dated April 23, 2009 and the Height Restrictions are established on a map entitled "Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map, Rock County, Wisconsin, dated December 11, 2003," as amended and adopted on April 23, 2009 by the Rock County Board of Supervisors. The Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Overlay Zoning District Map and Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map bear the signature of the County Board Chairman attested by the County Clerk and shall be on file in the County Planning and Development Agency and Janesville Planning Division be readily available to the public. 
(b)  The AOZD, as presented in this section, has been created for the purpose of imposing special regulations in designated areas of Rock County to accomplish specific purposes that are set forth within each individual AOZD. The AOZD shall be in addition to, and shall overlap and overlay, all other zoning districts within the three-mile jurisdictional boundary of the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport. 
(1)  The Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map dated December 11, 2003, as amended, accompanies and is made part of this chapter. The elevation numbers indicated within each cell are established as shown on a map entitled "Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map, Rock County Wisconsin," dated December 11, 2003, as amended. Cell elevation numbers indicated on this map provide the maximum permissible height above mean sea level (MSL), which buildings, structures, objects, or vegetation in that cell shall not exceed. The provisions of the AOZD within this chapter shall apply to all cell areas indicated on this map. 
(2)  The Airport Overlay Zoning Districts are established as shown on the Airport Overlay Zoning District Map entitled "Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Overlay Zoning District Map, Rock County, Wisconsin," dated April 23, 2009, as amended. This Airport Overlay Zoning District Map is to be used in conjunction with the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map, and is made part of this article. Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 77 Surfaces and FAA Runway Protection Zones (RPZs) have been utilized to create five individual zones as part of the AOZD associated with compatible land use near the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport. These districts encompass a three-mile radius from the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport property line, as authorized by Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.220)  
Sec. 42-567. - Airport Overlay Zoning District. 
(a)  Purpose of Airport Overlay Zoning District. The purpose of the AOZD is to provide a means of attaining the goals and objectives of the Rock County Comprehensive Plan and the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Master Plan, Airport Land Use Plan, and/or Airport Layout Plans, and to protect a public airport from incompatible uses of land, people, and property from encroaching into areas where historical and practical experience indicates that conflict will result. 
(b)  Airport land use zones. The AOZD is comprised of five individual zones, which include A, B1, B2, C, and D. 
(c)  Zones enforced by this article. 
(1)  Primary surface. The primary surface is the only FAR part 77, surface that is not specifically used as a land use compatibility zone due to its proximity to the runway environs. This surface area must be owned and under the control of the airport. The primary surface must be clear of all obstructions except those fixed by their function, such as runway edge lights, navigational aids, or airport signage. The primary surface is currently controlled by the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport. Even though the primary surface is not included as a land use zone, it functions as an important safety area since it is longitudinally centered on a runway and is intended to provide an Object Free Area (OFA) around the runway surface. When a runway has a prepared hard surface, such as those at the Airport, the primary surface will extend 200 feet beyond each individual runway end. The following primary surface widths are applied to the specific Airport runways: 
a.  Runway 14/32: 1,000 feet. 
b.  Runway 04/22: 1,000 feet. 
c.  Runway 18/36: 250 feet. 
Table 1, Figure 1, and Figure 2 depict various dimensional requirements for the primary surface and other FAR part 77, surfaces. A visual approach runway has relatively small surfaces, with approach and horizontal surfaces extending 5,000 feet from the primary surface at an approach slope of 20 feet horizontally for each one foot vertically (20:1). For a non-precision approach runway, both the approach and horizontal surfaces extend either 5,000 or 10,000 feet from the primary surface, depending on the design category of the runway. The approach surfaces for precision approach runways are similar to those for non-precision approach runways, except that the approach surface extends 50,000 feet from the primary surface and the horizontal surface extends 10,000 feet from the primary surface. 
(2)  Zone A runway protection zone (RPZ). The dimensional standards for Zone A are the same as those described in FAA AC 150/5300-13, Airport Design Standards and are illustrated in Table 2 and Figure 3. 
(3)  Zone B approach surface. Zone B is a critical overlay zoning surface that reflects the approach and departure areas for each runway at the airport. The size of Zone B is the combination of Zone B1 and B2 and is predicated on the approach type (visual, non-precision, or precision) at a specific runway and the type/size of aircraft utilizing the runway, as illustrated in Table 3 and Figure 4. A portion of Zone B1 is superseded by Zone A because the approach surface and RPZ overlap the entire length of the RPZ. Consequently, the length of Zone B1 begins at the inner edge of the RPZ and continues to one-half the length of the approach surface beyond Zone A. Zone B2 is also equal to one-half the length of Zone B, beyond Zone B1, and is located at the outer edge of the zone. 
(4)  Zone C transitional surface. The areas within Zone C are those that extend 1,050 feet outward from the edge of the primary surface, paralleling the runway and extended runway centerline with Zone B1, to a length equal to the outer edge of Zone A and then squared to meet Zone A, as shown in the Table 3 and Figure 4. 
(5)  Zone D three-mile jurisdictional boundary. Zone D encompasses the horizontal (innermost area) and conical surface (outermost area) of the FAR part 77, surfaces, all of which represent the three-mile jurisdictional boundary, as provided for within Wisconsin Statutes (Table 3 and Figure 4). Zone D is calculated by intersecting a series of three three-mile arcs drawn from the outermost property boundaries of the airport. 
Table 1. Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Runway Information 
Runways 	Runway Length (feet) 	Runway Width (feet) 	FAR Part 77
Classifications 
14 	7,300 	150 	B(D) 
32 			PIR 
04 	6,701 	150 	PIR 
22 			B(D) 
18 	5,000 	75 	A(V) 
36 			A(V) 
 
a.  Utility and visual runway. A utility runway is constructed and intended for use by propeller-driven aircraft with maximum gross weight of 12,500 pounds or less. A visual runway is intended for the operation of aircraft using solely visual approach procedures, with no straight-in instrument approach procedure. 
b.  Non-utility and non-precision instrument runway. A non-utility runway is constructed and intended for use by aircraft with a maximum gross weight greater than 12,500 pounds. A non-precision instrument runway has an existing instrument approach procedure that utilizes air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved. 
PIR—Precision instrument runway has an existing instrument approach procedure that utilizes an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). 
Source: FAR Part 77 Object Affecting Navigable Airspace. 
Figure 1. FAR part 77 Surfaces—Plan View 
 
Figure 2. FAR part 77 Surfaces—3D Isometric View of Section A 
 
Table 2. Airport Overlay Zone A Dimensional Requirements 
Runway

Ends	Approach Visibility Minimums1 	Dimensions 
		Length L 
feet (meters) 	Inner Width W 1 
feet (meters) 	Outer Width W 2 
feet (meters) 	RPZ acres 
14 	Not lower than ¾-mile (1,200m), all aircraft 	1,700 (510) 	1,000 (300) 	1,510 (453) 	48.978 
32 	Lower than¾ mile (1,200m), all aircraft 	2,500 (750) 	1,000 (300) 	1,750 (525) 	78.914 
04 	Lower than¾ mile (1,200m), all aircraft 	2,500 (750) 	1,000 (300) 	1,750 (525) 	78.914 
22 	Not lower than¾ mile (1,200m), all aircraft 	1,700 (510) 	1,000 (300) 	1,510 (453) 	48.978 
18 	Visual and not lower than 1-mile (1,600m), small aircraft 	1,000 (300) 	250 (75) 	450 (135) 	8.035 
36 	Visual and not lower than 1-mile (1,600m), small aircraft 	1,000 (300) 	250 (75) 	450 (135) 	8.035 
1 The RPZ dimensional standards are for the runway end with the specified approach visibility minimums. 
2 The departure RPZ dimensional standards are equal to or less than the approach RPZ dimensional standards. 
 
When an RPZ begins other than 200 feet (60m) beyond the runway end, separate approach and departure RPZs should be provided. Refer to FAA AC 150/5300-13, Change 11, Appendix 14 for approach and departure RPZs. 
Source: Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport, Airport Layout Plan, and information from FAA AC 150/5300-13, Change 11, Airport Design Standards. 
Figure 3. Airport Overlay Zone A Runway Protection Zone (RPZ) Diagram 
 
Source: FAA AC 150/5300-13, Change 11, Airport Design Standards. 
Table 3. Airport Overlay Zones B1, B2, C, and D Dimensional Requirements 
Dimensions

in Figure 2 	Item 	Runway Dimensional Standards (Feet) 
		14 	32 	04 	22 	18 	36 
1 	Primary surface width and Zone B1 inner width 	1,000 	1,000 	1,000 	1,000 	250 	250 
2 	Zone B2 end width 	4,000 	16,000 	16,000 	4,000 	1,250 	1,250 
3 	Combination of Zone B1 and B2 length 1 	10,000 	10,000 	10,000 	10,000 	5,000 	5,000 
4 	Zone C width 	1,050 	1,050 	1,050 	1,050 	1,050 	1,050 
5 	Zone D length 2 	15,840 	15,840 	15,840 	15,840 	15,840 	15,840 
1 Length of B1 and B2 begin at the edge of the primary surface. Area of B1 is located under Zone A and is superseded by Zone A requirements. 
2 Zone D is located using a three-mile radius from the outermost property limits of the airport and drawing a smoothed curve to connect these surfaces. 
 
Source: Mead & Hunt. 
Figure 4. Airport Overlay Zones B1, B2, C, and D Diagram 
 
(d)  Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Overlay Zoning District Maps. The boundary of the AOZD shall extend three-miles beyond the airport property line. The AOZD utilizes two maps which bear the signature of the County Board Chairman attested by the County Clerk and shall be on file in the office of the County Planning and Development Agency. 
(1)  Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map dated December 11, 2003 as amended, accompanies this chapter and illustrates the allowable heights for structures, objects, and natural vegetation. No trees shall be allowed, nor shall any structure be constructed, altered, located, or permitted which exceeds the height limitations indicated on the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map. The maximum height elevations, measured above mean sea level (MSL), on said map are shown by topographic lines depicted in relationship to section lines and land subdivision lines on said map. 
(2)  Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Overlay Zoning District Map dated April 23, 2009, accompanies this chapter and illustrates the allowable land uses within a particular zone of the AOZD. No land use should be allowed nor shall any structure be constructed, altered, located, or permitted which encroaches upon the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport creating hazards for aircraft, airport operational area, and aircraft overflight areas, as well as area citizens. The particular zones of the AOZD are illustrated on the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Overlay Zoning District Map. 
a.  Exceptions. The restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to legal fences when located outside the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport property lines. 
b.  Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit may, if such action is deemed advisable by the Community Development Director and the FAA, require the owner of a structure or tree to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers, lights, and navigational aids as may be necessary to indicate to the fliers the presence of an airport hazard, at the owner's expense. 
c.  Prohibited uses in the Airport Overlay Zoning District. 
1.  Any use that would exceed the height restrictions of the AOZD. 
2.  No overhead electric, telephone, telegraph, or cable lines shall be erected within Zone A. 
d.  Land use airport zone charts and restrictions. Tables 4 through 10 shall be utilized for determination of any land use within this AOZD. No construction, alteration, location or use of land shall be inconsistent with the required AOZD as outlined in Tables 4 through 10. 
Table 4. Residential Activities 
Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Land Use Airport Zone Chart 
E = Existing Land Use (Development or land use currently on the ground), 
F = Future Land Use (Proposed future development or land use), 
P = Permitted ** 
R = Permit Required * 
N = Not Permitted, 
* Permit Required use in a location sensitive to the intent of this chapter, requiring the Committee Designee's detailed attention and caution when considering conditions for a Zoning Building/Site Permit 
** Pending height restriction compliance 
Land Uses 	Zone A 	Zone B1 	Zone B2 	Zone C 	Zone D 
	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 
Residential Activities 
Single-Family Uses (1 dwelling per lot) 
Detached Single Family Dwelling (e.g., farm dwelling, detached single family house, or manufactured, modular, mobile home if converted to real property and taxed) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Detached Zero Lot Line Dwelling (e.g., condominium) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Attached Single Family Dwelling (e.g., townhouse) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Two Family Uses (e.g., two principal dwelling units within one building on the same parcel) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Multifamily Uses (Three or more principal dwelling units within a single building on the same parcel) (e.g., apartment, condominium, townhouse-style) 
Low-Rise (2 to 3 Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Mid-Rise (4 to 12 Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
High-Rise (13+ Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	N 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Group Living Uses (e.g., assisted living, group care, independent group living, nursing and convalescent home) 
Residential Group Living Units (1 dwelling per lot) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Commercial Group Living Units (e.g., apartment style dwelling unit 
Low-Rise (2 to 3 Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Mid-Rise (4 to 12 Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
High-Rise (13+ Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	N 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Manufactured Housing Parks 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
 
Table 5. Commercial Activities 
Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Land Use Airport Zone Chart 
E = Existing Land Use (Development or land use currently on the ground), 
F = Future Land Use (Proposed future development or land use), 
P = Permitted ** 
R = Permit required * 
N = Not Permitted, 
*Permit Required use in a location sensitive to the intent of this chapter, requiring the Committee Designee's detailed attention and caution when considering conditions for a Zoning Building/Site Permit 
** Pending height restriction compliance 
Land Uses 	Zone A 	Zone B1 	Zone B2 	Zone C 	Zone D 
	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 
Commercial Activities 
Casino 	R 	N 	R 	N 	R 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Eating and Drinking Establishments (e.g., restaurant, cafe, coffee shop, fast food restaurant, bar, nightclub, tavern, cocktail lounge) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	R 	P 	P 
General Office (e.g., professional, business, financial, governmental) 
Low-Rise) (2 to 3 Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Mid-Rise (4 to 12 Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
High-Rise (13+ Levels) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	R 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Hospitality-Oriented (e.g., hotel, motel, convention center, meeting hall, event facility) 
Low-Rise (2 to 3 Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Mid-Rise (4 to 12 Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	N 	P 	P 
High-Rise (13+ Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	N 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Medical/Dental Office (e.g., medical, dental, chiropractic, physical therapy) 
Low-Rise (2 to 3 Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Mid-Rise (4 to 12 Levels) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
High-Rise (13+ Levels) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	R 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Outdoor Storage and Display-Oriented (e.g., outdoor storage-lumber yard, vehicles sale, landscape material and nursery product sale, or farm supply equipment sale) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Personal Service-Oriented (e.g., retail service, banking facility, laundromat, dry cleaning, quick-printing service, beauty salon, tanning salon, funeral home) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Quick Vehicle Servicing Uses (e.g., full-serve/mini-serve gas station, unattended card key service station) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Repair-Oriented (e.g., consumer goods-electronic, office equipment, appliance) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Retail Uses (e.g., sale, lease, or rent of new or used products) 
Small Sales-Oriented, (e.g., appliance, convenience store, bakery, electronic, furniture, garden supply, grocery, hardware, video) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Large Sales-Oriented (e.g., big box store, mall, strip mall) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Surface passenger services (e.g., passenger terminal for buses, rail service, local taxi, limousine service) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Vehicle repair uses 
(e.g., vehicle repair or service shop, alignment shop, tire sale) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	R 	P 	P 
 
Table 6. Industrial/Manufacturing Activities 
Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Land Use Airport Zone Chart 
E = Existing Land Use (Development or land use currently on the ground) 
F = Future Land Use (Proposed future development or land use) 
P = Permitted ** 
R = Permit Required * 
N = Not Permitted 
* Permit Required use in a location sensitive to the intent of this chapter, requiring the Committee Designee's detailed attention and caution when considering conditions for a Zoning Building/Site Permit 
**Pending height restriction compliance 
Land uses 	Zone A 	Zone B1 	Zone B2 	Zone C 	Zone D 
	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 
Industrial/Manufacturing Activities 
Industrial service uses (e.g., machine shop, tool repair, towing and vehicle storage, building supply yard, heating/plumbing/electrical contractor, exterminator, janitorial service, fuel oil distributor, solid fuel yard) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Manufacturing and Production Uses (e.g., manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging or assembly of goods) 
Technical/Light Manufacturing (e.g., electrical components, engineering, scientific and research office, optical, computer hardware/software, publishing, pharmaceuticals, printing/photo facility,) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 
General Manufacturing (e.g., manufacturing, compounding, assembling or treatment of most articles, materials, or merchandise) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Heavy Manufacturing (e.g., concrete and asphalt plant, meat packing plant, wet corn milling, manufacturing of animal feed, paper or paperboard mill, ethanol plant) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	R 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Mining and Extraction Uses 	R 	N 	R 	N 	R 	N 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Salvage Operations (e.g., collect, store, and dismantle damaged or discarded vehicles, machinery, appliances, building material) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Self-Service Storage Uses (e.g., mini-warehouse, storage facility) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Warehouse and Freight Uses (e.g., major wholesale distribution center, general freight storage, railroad switching yard, bus or rail car storage lot, parcel service, grain terminal) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Waste-Related Uses (e.g., recycling center, sanitary landfill, waste transfer station, composting, energy recovery plant, sanitary or water treatment facility, sanitary collection or pumping facility, hazardous waste collection site) 	R 	N 	P 	N 	P 	N 	R 	N 	P 	R 
Wholesale Sales Uses (e.g., sale, lease, or rental of products to retailers for industrial, institutional, or commercial business users) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 
 
Table 7. Institutional Activities 
Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Land Use Airport Zone Chart 
E = Existing Land Use (Development or land use currently on the ground) 
F = Future Land Use (Proposed future development or land use) 
P = Permitted ** 
R = Permit Required * 
N = Not Permitted 
* Permit Required use in a location sensitive to the intent of this chapter, requiring the Committee Designee's detailed attention and caution when considering conditions for a Zoning Building/Site Permit 
** Pending height restriction compliance 
Land Uses 	Zone A 	Zone B1 	Zone B2 	Zone C 	Zone D 
	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 
Institutional Activities 
College and Universities (e.g., public or private college or university, technical college, seminary) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	R 
Community Service Uses (e.g., public, nonprofit, or charitable nature providing a local service to the people) 
General Community Service (e.g., library, museum, transit center, senior/community/neighborhood center, police/fire/EMS station, park and ride facility) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	P 	R 	R 	R 	P 	R 
Community Service-Shelter (e.g., transient housing) 	R 	N 	R 	R 	P 	R 	R 	R 	P 	R 
Daycare Uses (e.g., childcare center, adult daycare, preschool, after school program) 
Residential day care Uses (e.g., in-home adult/child day care facility) 	R 	N 	R 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Institutional Day care Uses (e.g., childcare center, preschool, after school program, adult day care) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	R 
Detention Facilities (e.g., prison, jail, probation center, halfway house, juvenile detention home) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	R 
Educational Facilities 
General Educational Facilities (e.g., public and private elementary, middle, junior, and senior high school including religious, boarding, military) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	R 
Specialized Education Facilities (e.g., specialized trade, business, or commercial courses, non-degree granting school) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	P 	R 	R 	R 	P 	R 
Hospitals (e.g., hospital and medical center) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	R 
Religious Assembly Uses (e.g., church, temple, mosque, Masonic, synagogue, eagles/moose/elk lodge) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	R 
 
Table 8. Infrastructure Activities 
Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Land Use Airport Zone Chart 
E = Existing Land Use (Development or land use currently on the ground) 
F = Future Land Use (Proposed future development or land use) 
P = Permitted ** 
R = Permit Required * 
N = Not Permitted 
* Permit Required use in a location sensitive to the intent of this chapter, requiring the Committee Designee's detailed attention and caution when considering conditions for a Zoning Building/Site Permit 
** Pending height restriction compliance 
Land Uses 	Zone A 	Zone B1 	Zone B2 	Zone C 	Zone D 
	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 
Infrastructure Activities 
Basic Utility Uses (e.g., utility or electrical substation) 	R 	N 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	P 	R 
Communication Transmission Facility Uses (e.g., broadcast, wireless, point to point, or emergency tower and antennae) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	R 	R 	R 	N 	P 	R 
Parking Uses (e.g., ground lot, parking structure) 	R 	R 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Transportation Uses 
(e.g., local or county road, highway, interstate) 	R 	R 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Utility Uses (e.g., wind generator, wind farm, solar power generation equipment) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	R 	R 	R 	N 	P 	R 
Water Tower 	R 	N 	R 	N 	R 	R 	R 	N 	P 	R 
 
Table 9. Agriculture and Open Space Activities 
Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Land Use Airport Zone Chart 
E = Existing Land Use (Development or land use currently on the ground) 
F = Future Land Use (Proposed future development or land use) 
P = Permitted ** 
R = Permit Required * 
N = Not Permitted 
* Permit Required use in a location sensitive to the intent of this chapter, requiring the Committee Designee's detailed attention and caution when considering conditions for a Zoning Building/Site Permit 
** Pending height restriction compliance 
Land Uses 	Zone A 	Zone B1 	Zone B2 	Zone C 	Zone D 
	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 
Agriculture and Open Space Activities 
Agricultural Uses (e.g., commercial cultivation of plants, livestock production) 
Animal-related (e.g., livestock , dairy , horse farm) 	R 	R 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Facility-related (e.g., fuel bulk storage or pumping facility, grain elevator, or livestock, seed, grain sales) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	R 
Plant-related (e.g., crop farming, vegetable, fruit, tree, wholesale plant nursery) 	R 	R 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Resident-related (e.g., single-family home or mobile home if converted to real property and taxed) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Water Bodies 
Manmade resources (e.g., mining or extraction pond, standalone retention or detention pond, or wetland mitigation site) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	R 
Wildlife Preservation Areas (e.g., petting zoo, wildlife rehabilitation center, zoo) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
 
Table 10. Parks and Recreation Activities 
Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Land Use Airport Zone Chart 
E = Existing Land Use (Development or land use currently on the ground) 
F = Future Land Use (Proposed future development or land use) 
P = Permitted ** 
R = Permit Required * 
N = Not Permitted 
* Permit Required use in a location sensitive to the intent of this chapter, requiring the Committee Designee's detailed attention and caution when considering conditions for a Zoning Building/Site Permit 
** Pending height restriction compliance 
Land Uses 	Zone A 	Zone B1 	Zone B2 	Zone C 	Zone D 
	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 	E 	F 
Parks and Recreation Activities 
Commercial Recreational Uses (e.g., facilities used for physical exercise, recreation, or culture) 
Golf (e.g., 9+ hole course, golf driving range, outdoor miniature golf) 	R 	N 	R 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Indoor (e.g., physical fitness center, health club, bowling alley, skating rink, billiard hall, arcade, indoor theater) 	R 	N 	R 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Outdoor (e.g., campground, tennis/swimming facility, drive-in theater, skating rink, pavilion, amphitheater) 	R 	N 	R 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Parks (e.g., aquatic, mini, private, sports, neighborhood, school, community) 	R 	N 	P 	R 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
Utility uses (e.g., amusement or theme park, fairground, racetrack, sports arena) 	R 	N 	R 	N 	P 	R 	R 	N 	P 	P 
  
Sec. 42-568. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this article. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the term "herein" means "in these regulation," the term "regulations" means "these regulations." 
Accessory structure or use means a detached subordinate structure or a use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principal structure or use to which it is related, and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure or use. 
Air traffic (FAA FAR Sec. 1.1) means aircraft operating in the air or on an airport surface, exclusive of loading ramps and parking areas. 
Airport (FAA FAR Sec. 152.3) means the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport owned by Rock County. Any area of land or water that is used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft. Any appurtenant areas that are used or intended for use for airport buildings, other airport facilities, or rights-of-way; and all airport buildings and facilities located on the areas specified in this definition. 
Airport elevation (FAA AC 150/5190-4A) means the highest point on the usable landing area of an airport that is measured in feet from mean sea level (MSL). 
Airport environs means the land use and people in the areas surrounding an airport which can be directly affected by the operation of the airport. 
Airport hazard (FAA FAR Sec. 152.3) means any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near a public airport that obstructs the airspace required or is otherwise hazardous for the flight of aircraft landing or taking off at the airport. 
Airport layout plan (ALP) (FAA FAR Sec. 152.3) means the plan of an airport that shows the layout of existing and proposed airport facilities. 
Airport master plan means the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Master Plan Report, 2009, as updated. 
Airport overlay zones means a zone intended to place additional land use conditions on land impacted by the airport while retaining the existing underlying zone. The FAR part 77 Surfaces and runway protection zones (RPZs) have been combined to create five airport overlay zones. The five specific zones create a comprehensive area focused on maintaining compatible land use around airports. 
(1)  Zone A—is intended to provide a clear area that is free of above ground obstructions and structures. This zone is closest to the individual runway ends. 
(2)  Zone B1 and B2—Reflects the approach and departure areas for each runway at an airport. The size of Zone B is predicated upon the type of approach (visual, non-precision, or precision) that a specific runway has and the type/size of aircraft that utilize the runway. 
(3)  Zone C—Includes those areas that are parallel to the runway pavement and extend 1,050 feet from the edge of the primary surface. 
(4)  Zone D—Encompasses the horizontal surface (innermost area) and the conical surface (outermost area), which make up the three-mile jurisdictional boundary delineated at the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport. 
Airport reference code (ARC) (FAA Web site www.faa.gov) means the ARC is an FAA coding system used to relate airport design criteria to the operational and physical characteristics of the airplanes intended to operate at the airport. 
Airport reference point (ARP)(FAA AC 150/5300-13) means the latitude and longitude of the approximate center of the airport. 
Airport zoning permit means a zoning/building site permit that allows new development or alteration or expansion of a permit required use. 
Airside (FAA Web site www.faa.gov) means the portion of an airport facility that includes aircraft movements, airline operations, and areas that directly serves the aircraft, such as taxiway, runway, maintenance, and fueling areas. 
Airspace (FAA Web site www.faa.gov) means the space lying above the earth or above a certain area of land or water that is necessary to conduct aviation operations. 
Alteration means any construction which would result in a change in height or lateral dimensions of an existing structure or object. 
Applicant means the owner of the land or his or her representative. 
Approach slopes (FAR Part 77) means the ratios of horizontal to vertical distance that indicate the degree of inclination of the approach surface. The various ratios include: 
(1)  20:1—for all utility and visual runways extended from the primary surface a distance of 5,000 feet. 
(2)  34:1—for all non-precision instrument runways extended from the primary surface for a distance of 10,000 feet. 
(3)  50:1/40:1—for all precision instrument runways extended from the primary surface for a distance of 10,000 feet at an approach slope of 50:1 and an additional 40,000 feet beyond this at a 40:1 approach slope. 
Approach surface (FAA AC 150/5190-4A) means a surface that is longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extends outward and upward from the end of the primary surface at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in this chapter. In plain view, the perimeters of the approach surface and approach zone coincide. 
Aviation easement (FAA Web site www.faa.gov) means a grant of a property interest in land over which a right of unobstructed flight in the airspace is established. 
Building includes a "structure," a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
Building means any structure used, designed, or intended for the protection, shelter, enclosure, or support of persons, animals, or property. 
Building codes (The Practice of Local Government Planning) means codes, either local or state, that control the functional and structural aspects of buildings and/or structures. Local ordinances typically require proposed buildings to comply with zoning requirements before building permits can be issued under the building codes. 
Building height means the vertical distance from the top of the building roof to the top of the basement or to the foundation, whichever is less. 
Commercial uses means land uses or activities that involve the production, processing, manufacturing, or sale of goods or services for financial gain, including uses that provide merchandise to the general public. Accessory uses may include offices, storage, food service, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees and parking. 
Compatibility means the degree to which land uses or types of development can coexist or integrate. 
Construction means the erection or alteration of any structure or object of either a permanent or temporary nature. 
Density means the number of living units per acre. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures, or accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings, structures, or accessory structures; the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes); mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of materials. 
Easement means authorization by a property owner for the use by another and for specified purpose of any designed part of his or her property. 
Existing use means any use of land lawfully in existence at the time of the effective date of this chapter or amendment thereto becomes effective. 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) (FAA web site www.faa.gov) means a federal agency charged to regulate air commerce in order to promote its safety and development; encourage and develop civil aviation, air traffic control, air navigation; and promote the development of a national system of airports. 
Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) (FAA FAR) means regulations established and administered by the FAA that govern civil aviation and aviation-related activities. 
(1)  FAR Part 36. (FAA FAR Sec. 36.1) Establishes noise standards for the civil aviation fleet. 
(2)  FAR Part 91. (FAA FAR Sec. 91.1) Pertains to air traffic and general operating rules, including operating noise limits. 
(3)  FAR Part 150. (FAA FAR Sec. 150.1) Pertains to airport noise compatibility planning. 
(4)  FAR Part 161. (FAA FAR Sec. 161.1) Pertains to notice and approval of airport noise and access restrictions. 
(5)  FAR Part 77. (FAA FAR Sec. 77.1) Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace—Part 77 (a) establishes standards to determine obstructions in navigable airspace; (b) defines the requirements for notice to the FAA Administrator of certain proposed construction or alteration; (c) provides for aeronautical studies of obstructions to air navigation to determine their effect on the safe and efficient use of airspace; (d) provides for public hearings on the hazardous effect of proposed construction or alteration on air navigation; and (e) provides for establishing antenna farm areas. 
General aviation airport means any airport that is not an air carrier airport or a military facility. 
Growth means any object of natural growth that includes trees, shrubs, or foliage. Excludes farm crops, which are cut at least once a year. 
Height means height is utilized for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport Height Zoning Map; height shall be the highest point of a structure, tree, or other object of natural growth and measured from the mean sea level elevation, unless specified otherwise. 
Industrial, wholesale trade, and storage uses means a use category that includes: 
(1)  Industrial development or uses involved in the research, design, manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, manmade, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or customers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, they are a subordinate part of sales (typically ten percent or less of the total gross floor area). Relatively few customers come to the site. 
(2)  Industrial, manufacturing, wholesale trade, and warehouse/storage uses and includes those that produce goods from raw or finished materials, distribute goods in large quantities to primarily wholesale customers, or provide for storage or warehousing of goods, either in enclosed buildings or outdoors. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. Accessory activities may include sales, offices, parking, and storage. 
Imaginary surfaces (FAA FAR Part 77.25) means those areas established in relation to the airport and to each runway consistent with FAR Part 77, in which any object extending above these imaginary surfaces, by definition, is an obstruction. 
(1)  Approach surface—Longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extends outward and upward from the end of the runway primary surface. The approach slope of a runway is a ratio of 20:1, 34:1, or 50:1, depending on the approach type. The length of the approach surface depends on the approach type and varies from 5,000 to 50,000 feet. 
(2)  Conical surface—Extends upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet horizontally for every one foot vertically (20:1) for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
(3)  Horizontal surface—Horizontal plane located 150 feet above the established airport elevation and encompasses an area from the transitional surface to the conical surface. The perimeter is constructed by generating arcs from the center of each end of the primary surface and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
(4)  Transitional surface—Extends outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each one foot vertically (7:1) from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces. The transitional surfaces extend to the point at which they intercept the horizontal surface at a height of 150 feet above the established airport elevation. 
Incompatible land use (FAA FAR Sec. 150.7) means land use that is typically unable to coexist with aircraft and airport operations. 
Instrument approach procedure (FAA Pilot/Controller Glossary) means a series of predetermined maneuvers for the orderly transfer of an aircraft under instrument flight conditions from the beginning of the initial approach to a landing or to a point from which a landing may be made visually. It is prescribed and approved for a specific airport by competent authority. 
Instrument landing system (ILS) (FAA Pilot/Controller Glossary) means a precision instrument approach system which normally consists of the following electronic components and visuals aids: localizer, glideslope, outer marker, middle marker, and approach lights. 
Itinerant operation (FAA AC 150/5325-4B) means aircraft takeoff or landing operations that occur from one airport to another and involves a trip of at least 20 miles. Local operations are excluded. 
Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see Development.) 
Land use compatibility (FAA Web site www.faa.gov) means land uses that can coexist with an airport and airport related activities. 
Lighting and marking of hazards to air navigation means installation of appropriate lighting fixtures, painted markings, or other devices to objects or structures that constitute hazards to air navigation. 
Lot means a parcel of land described in a recorded plat or deed. 
Mitigation (FAA Web site www.faa.gov) means the avoidance, minimization, reduction, elimination, or compensation for adverse effects of a proposed action. 
Navigation aids (NAVAID) (FAA Web site www.faa.gov) means any facility used by an aircraft for guiding or controlling flight in the air or the landing or take-off of an aircraft. 
Navigable airspace means the airspace above minimum altitude for safe flight that includes the airspace needed to ensure safety in landing or take-off of aircraft. 
Noise exposure contours (FAA Web site www.faa.gov) means lines drawn around a noise source that indicates a constant energy level of noise exposure. Day-night sound level (DNL) is the measurement used to describe community exposure to noise. 
Noise impact means a condition that exists when the noise levels that occur in an area exceed a level identified as appropriate for the activities in that area. 
Noise sensitive area (FAA AC 91-36D) means an area where noise interferes with normal activities associated with the use of the area. 
Object (FAA AC 150/5300-13) includes, but is not limited to, above ground structures, NAVAIDSs, people, equipment, vehicles, natural growth, terrain, and parked aircraft. 
Obstacle free zone (OFZ) (FAA 150/5300-13) means the three dimensional area of airspace that provides clearance protection for aircraft during landing or take-off operations and for missed approaches. The area encompasses 150 feet above the established airport elevation and along the runway and extended runway centerline. The OFZ is required to be clear of all objects, except for the frangible visual NAVAIDs, the location of which is fixed by function. 
Obstruction (FAA AC 150/5190-4A) means any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height that is specific to its geographic location relative to the runway/airport. 
Off-airport property (FAA Web site www.faa.gov) means property that is beyond the boundary of land owned by the airport sponsor (Rock County). 
On-airport property (FAA Web site www.faa.gov) means property that is within the boundary of land owned by the airport sponsor (Rock County). 
Ordinance means any legislative action, however nominated, of a local government which has the force of law, including any amendment or repeal of any ordinance. 
Overlay zone (FAA Web site www.faa.gov) means a mapped zone that imposes a set of requirements, in addition to those of the underlying zoning district. 
Owner means any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land. 
Permit required use means those land uses that shall be permissible following the issuance of a City of Janesville Zoning/Building Site Permit. The permit, which may include development and use related conditions, along with a signed Affidavit (Applicant's Recorded Affidavit Accepting Mitigation Responsibilities), notifies applicants of their responsibilities and required mitigation for any construction, alteration, location or use of land to minimize potential hazardous impacts to the Southern Wisconsin Regional Airport, aircraft, airport operational areas, and aircraft overflight areas, as well as residents. 
Permitted use means those land uses generally considered compatible within a particular zone of the AOZD. Compatible land uses do not impact or create hazardous conditions for aircraft, airport operational areas, or aircraft overflight areas, and are considered reasonably safe for area residents. 
Person includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated association of persons such as a club. 
Primary surface (FAA AC 150/5190-4A) means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in FAR Part 77. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
Primary runway (FAA AC 150/5325-4B General Definition) means the runway used for the majority of airport operations. Large, high-activity airports may operate two or more parallel primary runways. 
Principal use means the use of primary importance or permitted use on a parcel of land, in contrast to those which are accessory or of secondary importance. 
Public assembly use means a structure or outdoor facility where concentrations of people gather for purposes such as deliberation, education, shopping, business, entertainment, amusement, sporting events, or similar activities, but excluding air shows. Public assembly use does not include places where people congregate for relatively short periods of time, such as parking lots and bus stops, or uses approved by the FAA in an adopted airport master plan. 
Public use airport (FAA AC 150/5190-6) means a public- or private-owned airport that is open for public use. 
Residential and accommodation uses means a use category that includes the following: 
(1)  Residential—Provide living accommodations, including sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitary facilities, to one or more persons. Tenancy typically last longer than 30 days. 
(2)  Accommodation—Characterized by visitor-serving facilities that provide temporary lodging in guest rooms or guest units, for compensation. The average length of stay of less than 30 days. Accessory uses may include pools and other recreational facilities for the exclusive use of guests, limited storage, restaurants, bars, meeting facilities, and offices. 
Runway means a portion of the airport having a surface specifically developed and maintained for the landing and taking off of airplanes. 
Runway protection zone (RPZ) (FAA AC 150/5300-13) means an area off the runway end designed to enhance the protection of people and property on the ground. 
Runway safety area (FAA AC 150/5300-13) means a defined surface surrounding the runway that is prepared or suitable to reduce the risk of damage to airplanes in the event of an overshoot or excursion from the runway. 
Shall is always mandatory. 
Structure means any manmade object with form, shape, and utility that is permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon, or set into the ground, stream bed, or lake bed. Examples include, but are not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, or television dishes. 
Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof structure or in the exterior or interior walls. 
Substantial improvement means any structural repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term "substantial improvement" does not include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the Wisconsin State Historical Society or listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications or additions. Such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, and the replacement of doors, windows, and other nonstructural components. (For purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.) 
Tree means any object of natural growth that shall not exceed the zoning height restrictions. 
Use means that which is customarily or habitually done, may include seasonal uses, and need not extend to the entire tract of land at the time of the adoption of this chapter. (See also Land use.) 
Used or occupied, as applied to any land or building, includes the term "intended," "arranged," or "designed to be used or occupied." 
Utility runway means a runway constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds gross weight or less. 
Variance means authority granted to the owner to use his or her property in a manner that is prohibited by the Zoning Code. A departure from the terms of the zoning ordinance where it is shown that unique physical circumstances that are applied to a land parcel can, has, or will cause a hardship to the owner, and that the condition permitted by the departure will be in fundamental harmony with surrounding uses. 
(1)  Area variance—One which does not involve a use that is prohibited by the Zoning Code. Area variances involve matters such as setback lines, frontage requirements, lot-size restrictions, density, density regulations, and yard requirements. Height limitation variances shall not be granted under this chapter. 
(2)  Use variance—One which permits a use of land other than what is prescribed by the Zoning Code. It is primarily a grant to erect, alter, or use a structure for a permitted use in a manner other than that prescribed by this chapter. Use variances shall not be granted under this chapter. 
Wetland means those areas where water is at, near, or above the land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydroponic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions. 
Wildlife attractants means any manmade structure, land use practice, or manmade or natural geographic feature that can attract or sustain hazardous wildlife within the landing or departure airspace or the air operations area of an airport. Attractants include, but are not limited to, architectural features, landscaping, waste disposal sites, wastewater treatment facilities, agricultural or aquaculture activities, surface mining, or wetlands. 
Wildlife hazards means feral or domesticated animals that are associated with aircraft strikes, are capable of causing structural damage to airport facilities, or act as attractants to other wildlife that pose a strike hazard. 
(Code 1976, § 18.80.230)  
Appendix A - FEE SCHEDULE 
Code Section 	Description 	Amount 
Chapter 4 Adult Entertainment 
4-4 	Original license application 	$800.00 
4-4 	Annual renewal license 	$200.00 
Chapter 6 Alcoholic Beverages 
6-6 	Class A retail license, Fermented Malt Beverages, per year 	$240.00 
6-6 	Class A retail license, Intoxicating Liquors, per year 	$500.00 
6-6 	Class B retail license, Fermented Malt Beverages, per year 	$100.00 
6-6 	Class B retail license, Intoxicating Liquors, per year 	$500.00 
6-6 	Reserve Class B license, one time fee 	$10,000.00 
6-6 	License Issuance Extension 	
	 1st request 	$65.00 
	 2nd request 	$130.00 
	 3rd request 	$500.00 
6-6 	Late Fee for renewal received by the City Clerk-Treasurer after April 15th 	$30.00 + 10% of all license fees 
6-10 	Regular operator's license, original and renewal 	$72.00 
6-10 	Provisional operator's license 	$15.00 
6-10 	Temporary operator's license 	$20.00 
6-12 	Transfer of license location 	$10.00 
6-20 	Temporary extension of premises 	$175.00 
6-21 	Permit to possess and consume alcohol in public 	$150.00 
6-62 	Temporary special event Class B license 	$10.00 
6-102 	Class C license, per year 	$100.00 
6-103 	Pharmacist's License 	$10.00 
Chapter 8 Animals 
8-2 	Altered dog or cat* 	$15.00 
8-2 	Unaltered dog or cat* 	$25.00 
	*One half of amounts if dog or cat became 5 months of age after July 1st 	
8-2 	Late fee if paid after March 31st 	$30.00 
8-8 	Impoundment fee 	
	 First impoundment 	$4.00 
	 Second impoundment 	$6.00 
	 Third and subsequent impoundment in any one calendar year 	$8.00 
8-70 	Residential chicken permit 	
	 Initial permit 	$61.00 
	 Renewal permit, annual 	$26.00 
8-70 	Reinspection fee for inspection violations not corrected 	$100.00 
8-80 	Residential bee keeping permit 	
	 Initial permit 	$50.00 
	 Renewal permit, annual 	$25.00 
8-80 	Reinspection fee for inspection violations not corrected 	$100.00 
Chapter 10 Buildings and Construction 
10-12 	Residential building permit fees 	
	New Construction, additions and alterations, per square foot 	$0.16 
	 Residential state permit seal 	$41.00 
	 Garages, 121—750 square feet 	$112.00 
	 Foundation only 	$138.00 
	 Accessory buildings, 81—120 square feet, swimming pools, hot tubs/spas and fences, chicken coop (initial permit) 	$100.00 
	Chicken coop renewal permit 	$26.00 
10-12 	Commercial building permit fees 	
	New Construction, additions and alterations, per square foot 	$0.13 
	 Tents/canopies, per square foot 	$0.07 
	 Foundation only 	$138.00 
	 Fences 	$61.00 
10-12 	Residential plan approval 	
	 One- and two-family dwellings, per unit 	$87.00 
	 Erosion control 	$102.00 
10-12 	Commercial and industrial building plan approval 	
	 0—2,500 square feet, per square foot 	$0.24 
	 2,501—5,000 square feet 	$363.00 
	 5,001—10,000 square feet 	$605.00 
	 10,001—20,000 square feet 	$847.00 
	 20,001—30,000 square feet 	$1,330.00 
	 30,001—40,000 square feet 	$1,693.00 
	 40,001—50,000 square feet 	$2,298.00 
	 50,001—75,000 square feet 	$3,145.00 
	 75,001—100,000 square feet 	$3,992.00 
	 100,001—200,000 square feet 	$6,532.00 
	 200,001—300,000 square feet 	$11,492.00 
	 300,001—400,000 square feet 	$16,936.00 
	 400,001—500,000 square feet 	$20,202.00 
	 >500,000 square feet 	$21,775.00 
	 Tents/canopies, per square foot 	$0.07 
	 Erosion control, under 1 acre 	$102.00 
	 Erosion control, 1—5 acres 	$338.00 
	 Erosion control, over 5 acres 	$775.00 
10-12 	Moving buildings 	
	 Principal building 	$600.00 
	 Garage under 750 square feet 	$123.00 
10-12 	Demolition 	
	 Residential structure, per building 	$122.00 
	 Minor interior, per project 	$61.00 
	 Commercial structure, up to 20,000 square feet 	$153.00 
	 Commercial structure, greater than 20,000 square feet 	$306.00 
	 Garage/shed, per building 	$61.00 
10-12 	Certificate of occupancy 	
	 Dwelling unit, per unit 	$31.00 
	 Commercial/industrial 	$72.00 
	 Tents/canopies 	$31.00 
10-12 	HVAC Permit Fees 	
	 New residential one- and two-family dwellings, per unit 	$100.00 
	 Residential replacement or added furnaces, or add on cooling units, all sizes, per unit 	$100.00 
	 Commercial new or addition heating and cooling units, all sizes, with or without an added heating or cooling unit 	
	 Group 1, as defined in section 10-12(a), per square foot 	$0.10 
	 Group 2, as defined in section 10-12(a), per square foot 	$0.08 
	 Three or more dwelling units, per unit 	$82.00 
	 Commercial replacement or added heating or cooling units, all sizes 	$82.00 
	 Commercial kitchen exhaust hood, per hood 	$153.00 
10-12 	Commercial HVAC plan approval 	
	 0—2,500 square feet 	$184.00 
	 2,500—5,000 square feet 	$242.00 
	 5,001—10,000 square feet 	$363.00 
	 10,001—20,000 square feet 	$483.00 
	 20,001—30,000 square feet 	$605.00 
	 30,001—40,000 square feet 	$968.00 
	 40,001—50,000 square feet 	$1,331.00 
	 50,001—75,000 square feet 	$1,693.00 
	 75,001—100,000 square feet 	$2,419.00 
	 100,001—200,000 square feet 	$3,146.00 
	 200,001—300,000 square feet 	$7,379.00 
	 300,001—400,000 square feet 	$10,645.00 
	 400,001—500,000 square feet 	$13,064.00 
	 Over 500,000 square feet 	$14,637.00 
10-12 	Residential Electrical Permit Fees 	
	One- and two-family dwelling units, including attached garages 	
	0—4,500 square feet, per unit 	$163.00 
	Over 4,500 square feet, per unit 	$194.00 
	Residential additions, alterations, or upgrades 	
	Service entrance and generators 	$51.00 
	Temporary service 	$51.00 
	Outlets, switches, and lighting fixtures, each 	$1.17 
	Heating and ventilation 	
	Electric baseboard heaters, per section 	$1.17 
	Oil heating systems 	$16.00 
	Gas fired heating systems 	$16.00 
	Exhaust and ventilation fans 	$2.45 
	Central air conditioning, per unit 	$16.00 
	Emergency lighting 	$122.00 
	Feeder or subfeeder changes 	$16.00 
	Audible or visual electric signal communication 	$1.22 
	Fire alarm systems, per device 	$2.45 
10-12 	Commercial Electrical Permit Fees 	
	New commercial buildings and additions 	
	Group 1, as defined in section 10-12(a), per square foot 	$0.12 
	Group 2, as defined in section 10-12(a), per square foot 	$0.08 
	Alterations and upgrades 	
	Service entrance and generators 	$56.00 
	Temporary service 	$56.00 
	Outlets, switches, and incandescent fixtures, each 	$1.22 
	Light fixtures; fluorescent, metal halide, and mercury vapor, each 	$2.45 
	Trole-duct, bus duct, and similar systems 	$14.00 
	Electric baseboard heaters, per section 	$4.45 
	Exhaust and ventilation fans 	$7.20 
	Machines with electric motors less than 5 horsepower 	$14.00 
	Machines with electric motors 5 horsepower and larger 	$14.00 
	Motor heating and cooling units, per unit 	$56.00 
	Transformers, reactors, rectifiers, capacitors, heaters, converters and similar devices 	$14.00 
	Feeder/subfeeder changes 	$14.00 
	Audible or visual electric signal communication, each 	$1.22 
	Emergency lighting 	$122.00 
	Three or more dwelling units, per unit 	$72.00 
	Fire/smoke alarm/supression systems 	
	Plan review, per square foot, maximum $5,000.00 	$0.01 
	Plan review, three or more dwelling units, per unit 	$12.25 
	Testing fee, per device 	$2.45 
10-12 	Residential plumbing permit fees 	
	Per fixture, including new water heaters, storm inlets, roof drains, and hose bibs 	$9.25 
	Sanitary sewer/water service/ storm sewer excavation 	$72.00 
	Air admittance valve, per valve 	$41.00 
10-12 	Commercial plumbing permit fees 	
	Per fixture, including new water heaters, storm inlets, roof drains, and hose bibs 	$9.25 
	Per replacement fixture, six or more 	$4.50 
	Sanitary sewer/water service/ storm sewer excavation 	$72.00 
	Air admittance valve, per valve 	$41.00 
10-12 	Plumbing plan approval fees 	
	Sanitary drain and vent system, per inch diameter of each sewer 	$60.00 
	Sanitary building sewer only, per inch diameter of each sewer 	$37.00 
	Building water distribution system, per in diameter of each sewer 	$60.00 
	Building water service only, per in diameter of each sewer 	$37.00 
	Building storm and clear water drain system, per inch diameter of each storm sewer 	$19.00 
	Carwash interceptor 	$102.00 
	Garage catch basin 	$102.00 
	Grease interceptor 	$102.00 
	Oil interceptor 	$102.00 
	Sanitary dump station 	$102.00 
10-12 	Plan Examination Fees for Building Water Distribution System 	
	 1—6, Gallons Per Minute 	$26.00 
	 13—21, Gallons Per Minute 	$52.00 
	 22—31, Gallons Per Minute 	$62.00 
	 32—46, Gallons Per Minute 	$78.00 
	 47—77, Gallons Per Minute 	$105.00 
	 78—119, Gallons Per Minute 	$130.00 
	 120—170, Gallons Per Minute 	$155.00 
	 171—298, Gallons Per Minute 	$180.00 
10-12 	Reinspection fee and after-hours inspection fee, per inspection, per hour, minimum 1 hour charge 	$100.00 
10-12 	After-hours inspections fee, minimum 	$72.00 
10-207 	Salvage Permit 	$150.00 
Chapter 12 Business Licenses and Regulations 
12-42 	Accident Research Fee, based on staff time required to fulfil the request, minimum $150.00 	Actual staff time cost 
12-67 	Amusement center license 	$215.00 
12-102 	Amusement device, per device, maximum of $660.00 	$33.00 
12-134 	Youth Entertainment Centers, per year 	$105.00 
12-166 	Mobile food vending vehicle, initial license per vehicle 	$500.00 
12-166 	Mobile food vending vehicle, renewal license per vehicle 	$250.00 
12-166 	Non-motorized food vending cart, annual 	$165.00 
12-166 	Site Plan Review for special or civic event 	$70.00 
12-167 	Motorized vendor truck, initial license per truck 	$530.00 
12-167 	Motorized vendor truck, renewal license per truck 	$270.00 
12-192 	Cigarettes—Sale, manufacture or disposition of cigarettes, per year 	$100.00 
12-220 	Theaters, annually 	$80.00 
12-220 	Skating Rinks, roller and ice, annually 	$77.00 
12-220 	Each circus, menagerie, dog and pony show, carnival or other outdoor amusement of similar character: 	
	If not more than 25 cars are used in transportation, per day 	$80.00 
	If more than 25, but less than 50, cars are used in transportation, per day 	$100.00 
	If more than 50 cars are used in transportation, per day 	$140.00 
12-220 	Each concert, vaudeville, minstrel, theatrical or musical entertainment given under a covering of canvas, per day 	$20.00 
12-220 	Merry-go-rounds and all other exhibitions, entertainment performances and amusements, such as miniature golf courses, driving ranges, pony rides, and trampolines open to the public, per day 	$3.00 
12-244 	Food License 	$28.00 
12-272 	Pawnbroker, per year with $1,000.00 bond 	$210.00 
12-272 	Secondhand article dealer, annually with $1,000.00 bond 	$27.50 
12-272 	Secondhand jewelry dealer, annually with $1,000.00 bond 	$30.00 
12-272 	Secondhand article dealer mall, annually with required bond 	$165.00 
12-272 	Flea market, annually with required bond 	$165.00 
12-311 	Massage Technician, annually 	$87.00 
12-312 	Massage establishment, annually 	$215.00 
12-353 	Mobile Home Park license, per space, annually, minimum $100.00 	$2.00 
12-353 	Preliminary plan review, mobile home park 	$100.00 
12-353 	Final plan review, mobile home park 	$100.00 
12-389 	Motor Vehicle Salvage Dealer, annually 	$100.00 
12-430 	Direct sellers and solicitors 	$130.00 
12-462 	Bowling centers, per lane, annually 	$25.00 
12-495 	New Service (Gas) Station plan review fee 	$100.00 
12-496 	Abandoned, vacant, or inoperative service station plan review fee 	$50.00 
12-538 	Taxicab company license, per vehicle, annually 	$40.00 
12-542 	Taxicab driver, annually 	$35.00 
12-548 	Vehicles operated on special occasion 	
	Vehicles carrying 7 or less passengers, per vehicle per day with public liability insurance 	$5.00 
	Vehicles carrying more than 7 passengers, per vehicle per day with public liability insurance 	$10.00 
Chapter 14 Finance and Revenue 
14-119 	Motor vehicle registration fee (wheel tax) 	$20.00 
Chapter 16 Fire and Fire Prevention 
16-96 	Motor Vehicle Accidents, non-resident 	$500.00 
16-96 	Motor vehicle fires, non-resident 	$600.00 
16-97 	Lift assist response fee 	$200.00 
16-127 	Fire Reinspection Fee 	$100.00 
16-195 	Storage Tank Removal Plan Review 	$25.00 
16-195 	Storage Tank Removal Site Inspection, 1st tank 	$50.00 
16-195 	Storage Tank Removal Site Inspection, each additional tank 	$30.00 
16-219 	Fireworks display permit 	$1110.00 
16-220 	Fireworks stand permit 	$330.00 
Chapter 18 Housing 
18-69 	Housing Reinspection fee 	$100.00 
18-188 	Rooming house license, annual 	$150.00 
18-254 	Reinspection Fee 	$100.00 
Chapter 20 Mobile Homes, Mobile Home Parks and Travel Trailer Camps 
20-21 	Trailer and mobile home camp license, annually, per 50 spaces or fraction thereof 	$100.00 
20-69 	License transfer fee, mobile home park 	$10.00 
20-64 	Preliminary plan review, mobile home park 	$50.00 
20-65 	General development plan review, mobile home park 	$100.00 
Chapter 22 Nuisances 
22-231 	Vacant building registration fee, residential building 	$200.00 
22-231 	Vacant building registration fee, commercial building 	$350.00 
22-231 	Vacant building registration 1st renewal fee, residential 	$250.00 
22-231 	Vacant building registration 1st renewal fee, commercial 	$400.00 
22-231 	Vacant building registration 2nd renewal fee, residential 	$300.00 
22-231 	Vacant building registration 2nd renewal fee, commercial 	$450.00 
22-231 	Vacant building registration 3rd renewal fee, residential 	$350.00 
22-231 	Vacant building registration 3rd and subsequent renewal fee, commercial 	$500.00 
22-231 	Vacant building registration 4th renewal fee, residential 	$400.00 
22-231 	Vacant building registration 5th renewal fee, residential 	$450.00 
22-231 	Vacant building registration 6th and subsequent renewal fee, residential 	$500.00 
Chapter 24 Offenses 
24-388 	False Alarm Responses 	
	 First response in a calendar year 	$40.00 
	 Second response in a calendar year 	$60.00 
	 Third response in a calendar year 	$90.00 
	 Fourth and each subsequent response in a calendar year 	$115.00 
	 Every response during probationary period 	$215.00 
24-389 	Fire Response Fees 	
	 First response in a calendar year 	$50.00 
	 Second response in a calendar year 	$100.00 
	 Third response in a calendar year 	$150.00 
	 Fourth and each subsequent response in a calendar year 	$250.00 
Chapter 26 Parks and Public Property 
26-13 	Permit to possess FMB and Wine in certain parks 	$50.00 
Chapter 28 Signs 
28-80 	Sign Permit fee, per square foot, minimum fee of $60.00 	$0.75 
28-107 	Sign erector license 	$90.00 
28-180 	Attention-getting device permit fee 	$60.00 
28-188 	Temporary mobile sign permit 	$60.00 
28-188 	Promotional mobile sign permit 	$60.00 
28-194 	Sandwich board sign, annual 	$60.00 
Chapter 30 Solid Waste 
30-40 	Per ton of weight deposited 	$36.00 
30-40 	Minimum Fees, regardless of actual weight deposited 	
	Passenger cars 	$4.00 
	Station wagons or sports utility vehicles 	$5.25 
	Vans, mid-size pickup trucks, mini-vans and trailers with a capacity of 2 cubic yards or less 	$8.50 
	Full size pickup trucks, mini-vans and trailers with a capacity between 2 and 4 cubic yards 	$12.00 
	All other vehicles and trailers 	$20.00 
30-40 	Demolition Landfill fees 	
	Debris originating in the City, per cubic yard 	$5.50 
	Debris originating outside the City, per cubic yard 	$7.00 
30-40 	Disposal of tires 	
	Up to 16 inches in diameter, per tire 	$3.00 
	16 to 24 inches in diameter, per tire 	$8.00 
	Greater than 24 inches in diameter, per tire 	$20.00 
	Vehicles containing more than 10 tires, per ton 	$200.00 
30-40 	Appliances 	
	Microwave ovens 	$10.00 
	Appliances containing refrigerants 	$10.00 
	Major appliances with no refrigerants 	No Charge 
30-42 	Commercial Waste Hauling Permit 	
	First vehicle, annually 	$110.00 
	Each additional vehicle, annually 	$60.00 
Chapter 34 Street and Sidewalks 
34-88 	Curb opening permit 	$50.00 
34-126 	Excavation permit, fixed fee 	$50.00 
34-126 	Excavation permit, per linear foot or per square foot of excavation, whichever is greater 	$0.50 
Chapter 36 Subdivisions 
36-123 	Filing fee, preliminary certified survey 	$150.00 
36-123 	Filing fee, final certified survey map 	$150.00 
36-123 	Filing fee, preliminary plat 	The greater of $500.00 or $15.00 per lot 
36-123 	Filing fee, final plat 	The greater of $250 or $10 per acre 
36-123 	Application for release of a utility easement 	$150.00 
36-123 	Application for vacation of street, alley, or other right-of-way 	$250.00 
36-123 	Application for land sale and transfer of land between adjoining owners 	$150.00 
36-124 	Special assessment split fee, minimum 	$300.00 
36-316 	Storm sewer assessments, per acre 	$6,410.00 
36-316 	Storm sewer assessments northeast drainage basin, per acre 	$8,925.00 
Chapter 38 Traffic and Vehicles 
38-420 	Reinspection fee, abandoned, unlicensed or non-operable vehicles 	$100.00 
38-664 	Regular cash fare, per ride 	$1.50 
38-664 	Discounted fare per ride , disabled and seniors 	$0.75 
38-664 	Ten ride prepaid package 	$12.00 
38-664 	Ten ride prepaid package, discounted for disable and seniors 	$7.50 
38-664 	Pass for unlimited rides in basic service areas from 8:45 am—6:15 pm 	$4.00 
38-664 	Pass for unlimited rides in basic service areas from 8:45 am—6:15 pm, disabled and seniors 	$2.00 
38-664 	Unlimited rides in basic service area for dates shown on pass 	$52.00 
38-664 	Beloit-Janesville Express route to Beloit , per ride 	$3.50 
38-664 	Beloit-Janesville Express route to Beloit , 10 ride package 	$30.00 
38-664 	Beloit-Janesville Express route to Beloit, per ride, discounted for disabled and senior citizens 	$1.75 
38-664 	Beloit-Janesville Express route to Beloit , 10 ride package, discounted for disabled and senior citizens 	$17.50 
38-664 	Beloit-Janesville Express route to Blackhawk Technical College, per ride 	$2.25 
38-664 	Beloit-Janesville Express route to Blackhawk Technical College, 10 ride package 	$20.00 
38-664 	Beloit-Janesville Express route to Blackhawk Technical College, per ride, discounted for disabled and senior citizens 	$1.25 
38-664 	Beloit-Janesville Express route to Blackhawk Technical College, 10 ride package, discounted for disabled and senior citizens 	$15.00 
38-664 	Paratransit Service, per ride 	$3.00 
38-664 	Bulk token purchases of 100 by non-profit agencies for distribution to clients 	$75.00 
38-664 	Bulk token purchases by the School District of Janesville for distribution or sale to students 	$75.00 
38-664 	Semester Pass for consignment by the School District of Janesville for sale to students 	$120.00 
38-664 	Summer Pass for consignment by the School District of Janesville for sale to students 	$75.00 
38-664 	Replacement fee for Paratransit Identification Car; Diabled Citizen Identification Card; Senior Citizen Identification Card; Bikeon Bus Program Identification Card; Semester Pass; and Summer Pass 	$3.00 
38-664 	Additional transit fees for transfers outside in-city route 	
38-664 	Agency fare per paratransit charged to human service organizations purchasing paratransit services on behalf of their paratransit-eligible clients 	15.45 
38-664 	Janesville fare Zone to Blackhawk Tech fare Zone 	$0.75 
38-664 	Janesville fare Zone to Blackhawk Tech fare Zone, discounted for disabled and senior citizens 	$0.35 
38-664 	Janesville fare Zone to Beloit fare Zone 	$2.00 
38-664 	Janesville fare Zone to Beloit fare Zone, discounted for disabled and senior citizens 	$1.00 
Chapter 40 Water and Sewers 
40-534 	Sewer Service Charges 	
	Fixed Charges 	
	Meter Type 	Size (inches) 	
	Water 	? 	$43.10 
	Water 	¾ 	$46.90 
	Water 	1 	$54.40 
	Water 	1½ 	$73.60 
	Water 	2 	$96.20 
	Water 	3 	$149.50 
	Water 	4 	$225.40 
	Water 	6 	$415.40 
	Water 	8 	$643.40 
	Water 	10 	$947.50 
	Parshall Flume 	3 	$354.70 
	Parshall Flume 	6 	$704.30 
	Parshall Flume 	9 	$1,555.50 
	Parshall Flume 	12 	$1,555.50 
	Flow Charges 	
	For all flow—per 100 cubic foot increment 	$2.01 
40-535 	Industrial and commercial surcharge 	
	Biochemical oxygen demand, per pound 	$0.27 
	Suspended solids, per pound 	$0.23 
40-536 	Application fees for bulk haulers 	
	Initial application fee 	$75.00 
	Renewal application fee, annually 	$50.00 
	Septage fee, per 1,000 gallons or portion thereof 	$50.00 
	Phosphorous surcharge, per pound 	$2.29 
	Holding tank waste, per 1,000 gallons or portion thereof 	$9.50 
Chapter 42 Zoning 
42-277 	Conditional use permit, planned unit development 	$500.00 
42-277 	Conditional use permit, variable 	
	Zero to 10,000 square feet, or less than one acre 	$500.00 
	10,000 to 25,000 square feet, or one to five acres 	$1,000.00 
	Greater than 25,000 square feet, or more than five acres 	$1,500.00 
42-277 	Conditional use amendments 	$350.00 
42-277 	Application for rezoning 	
	R1, R2, Conservancy or agriculture 	$300.00 
	Multifamily, Office, Commercial, or Industrial 	$500.00 
	For Multifamily, office, commercial or industrial sites ten acres or large receive a per acre surcharge up to $1,000 maximum. 	$50.00 
42-277 	Zoning ordinance amendment 	$500.00 
42-277 	Comprehensive plan amendment 	$1,500.00 
42-277 	Application for change of nonconforming use 	$250.00 
42-277 	Filing of appeal to Zoning Board of Appeals 	
	Appeal of administrative decision 	$200.00 
	Variation of ordinance standard 	$200.00 
42-277 	Site Plan Review 	
	Addition 	$250.00 
	New building 	$250.00 
42-277 	Airport overlay district zoning/building permit 	$50.00 
42-277 	Request for zoning verification letter 	$45.00 
42-277 	Reinspection fee, each reinspection 	$100.00 
 
( Ord. No. 2019-770 , 11-25-2019, eff. 1-1-2020; Ord. No. 2019-776 , §§ I—XI, 11-25-2019, eff. 1-20-2020; Ord. No. 2019-777 , § I, 11-25-2019, eff. 1-1-2020) 
