MUNICIPAL CODE VILLAGE OF KEWASKUM, WISCONSIN 
____________ 
Published in 1997 by Order of the Village Board 
____________ 
Adopted: December 8, 1997 
Effective: December 19, 1997 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
KEWASKUM, WISCONSIN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robert H. Wagner 
Village President 
____________ 
Warren Dums 
Gary Gavin 
John Kenworthy 
Andrew Pesch 
Harry Roecker 
Robert Stoltzmann 
Village Board 
____________ 
Daniel S. Schmidt 
Village Administrator 
Clerk/Treasurer 
____________ 
Gerald A. Kiefer 
Village Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1983 Code, as supplemented through Ord. No. 95-1, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the village board. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1983 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER ORDINANCES CHT:1 CHARTER ORDINANCES COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER ORDINANCES INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of David Poucher, Supervising Editor, and John Welch, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Daniel Schmidt, Village Administrator, and Mr. Gerald Kiefer, Village Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the village's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin. 1997. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 97-5 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin: Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
The Village Board of the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin, Do Ordain as Follows: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Municipal Code of the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 94, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before Ord. No. 96-12, adopted November 25, 1996, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of the Village Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less that [than] $5.00 nor more than $500.00, together with costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(2)  Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance or part of anordinance [an ordinance] of the Village Code who has previously been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such offense, together with costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding six months. 
Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the village may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments of the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the village board to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 12, 1996, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. Effective date: This ordinance shall become effective upon passage and publication as provided by law; and upon compliance with the filing requirements of Wis. Stats. 66-025. 
    Passed, Adopted and Approved this 8th day of December, 1997, by the Kewaskum Village Board. 
      Robert H. Wagner 
      Village President   ATTEST: 
      Daniel S. Schmidt 
      Village Administrator/Clerk   Introduced by Trustee Harry Roecker 
Motion for adoption by Trustee Andy Pesch 
Motion for adoption seconded by Trustee Robert Stoltzmann 
Roll call vote was 7 "Aye" 0 "Nay" 0 "Absent" 
ORDINANCE NO. 99-2 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE GENERAL ORDINANCES 
OF THE VILLAGE OF KEWASKUM, WISCONSIN 
    WHEREAS, it is deemed expedient and necessary that the Municipal Code of the City of Kewaskum be brought up-to-date; and 
    WHEREAS, ordinances adopted through Ordinance #98-5, dated August 17, 1998, and changes necessitated by changes in State law have now been incorporated into the Municipal Code; and 
    WHEREAS, a copy of such amended Code has been on file and open for public inspection in the office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer for not less than 2 weeks, as required by Wis. Statutes 66.035, and notice thereof was given by publication on March 4 and March 18, 1999, in the Kewaskum Statesman; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, the Village Board of the Village of Kewaskum ordain as follows: 
    Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances in book form entitled, "Municipal Code of the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin," as amended, shall be and hereby is adopted as the general ordinances in and for the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin. 
    Section 2. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by law. 
    Passed, adopted and approved this 5th day of April, 1999, by the Kewaskum Village Board. 
      Robert H. Wagner 
      Village President   ATTEST: 
      Daniel S. Schmidt 
      Village Administrator/Clerk   Motion for adoption by Trustee Andy Pesch 
Motion for adoption seconded by Trustee Harry Roecker 
Roll call vote was 7 "Aye" 0 "Nay" 0 "Absent" 
ORDINANCE NO. 2001-03 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE GENERAL ORDINANCES 
OF THE VILLAGE OF KEWASKUM, WISCONSIN 
    WHEREAS, it is deemed expedient and necessary that the Municipal Code of the City of Kewaskum be brought up-to-date; and 
    WHEREAS, ordinances adopted through Ordinance #2000-04, dated May 15, 2000, and changes necessitated by changes in State law have now been incorporated into the Municipal Code; and 
    WHEREAS, a copy of such amended Code has been on file and open for public inspection in the office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer for not less than 2 weeks, as required by Wis. Statutes 66.035, and notice thereof was given by publication on March 15 and March 22, 2001, in the Kewaskum Statesman; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, the Village Board of the Village of Kewaskum ordain as follows: 
    Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances in book form entitled, "Municipal Code of the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin," as amended, shall be and hereby is adopted as the general ordinances in and for the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin. 
    Section 2. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by law. 
    Passed, adopted and approved this 2nd day of April, 2001, by the Kewaskum Village Board. 
      John D. Kenworthy 
      Village President   ATTEST: 
      Daniel S. Schmidt 
      Village Administrator/Clerk   Motion for adoption by Trustee Andy Pesch 
Motion for adoption seconded by Trustee Robert Stoltzmann 
Roll call vote was 6 "Aye" 0 "Nay" 0 "Absent" 
ORDINANCE NO. 2005-04 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE GENERAL ORDINANCES 
OF THE VILLAGE OF KEWASKUM, WISCONSIN 
    WHEREAS, it is deemed expedient and necessary that the Municipal Code of the Village of Kewaskum be brought up to date; and 
    WHEREAS, ordinances adopted through Ordinance #2004-08, dated August 16, 2004, and changes necessitated by changes in State law have now been incorporated into the Municipal Code; and 
    WHEREAS, a copy of such amended Code has been on file and open for public inspection in the office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer for not less than 2 weeks, as required by Wis. Statutes 66.0103, and notice thereof was given by publication on February 24 and March 3, 2005, in the Kewaskum Statesman; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, the Village Board of the Village of Kewaskum ordain as follows: 
    Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances in book form entitled, "Municipal Code of the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin," as amended, shall be and hereby is adopted as the general ordinances in and for the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin. 
    Section 2. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by law. 
    PASSED, ADOPTED AND APPROVED this 14th day of March, 2005, by the Kewaskum Village Board. 
/s/ ____________ 
  Andy Pesch 
Village President Pro Tem 
ATTEST: 
/s/ ____________ 
  Daniel S. Schmidt 
Village Administrator/Clerk 
Motion for Adoption by Trustee Kevin Scheunemann 
Motion for Adoption seconded by Trustee Thomas Piwoni 
Roll Call Vote was 5 "Aye" 0 "Nay" 1 "Absent" 
President Mathew Heiser was absent 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 5 08-01  3-17-08 Include 08-02  9- 8-08 Include 08-04 10-20-08 Include 08-05 10- 6-08 Include 09-01  1-19-09 Include 09-02  2-16-09 Include 09-03  6- 1-09 Include 09-04  7-20-09 Include 09-05 10- 5-09 Include 09-07 10- 5-09 Include 09-09 11-16-09 Include 10-01  2- 1-10 Include 10-02  2-15-10 Include 10-05  6-21-10 Include 10-06  6-21-10 Include 10-07  7-12-10 Include 10-08  8- 2-10 Include 10-09  8- 2-10 Include 10-10 10- 4-10 Include 10-11 10- 4-10 Include 10-12 11- 1-10 Include 10-13 11-15-10 Include Supp. No. 6 11-01  4- 4-11 Include 11-03  9-12-11 Include 12-01  1- 9-12 Include 12-02  1-23-12 Include 12-03  2-20-12 Include 12-04  2-20-12 Include 12-05  5-21-12 Include 12-06  5-21-12 Include 13-01  3-18-13 Include 13-03  6-17-13 Include 13-05 10- 7-13 Include 14-01  1- 6-14 Include 14-02  1-20-14 Include 14-04  7-21-14 Include 14-05  7-21-14 Include 14-06  8- 4-14 Include 14-07  8- 4-14 Include 14-09 12- 1-14 Include 15-01  2- 2-15 Include 15-05  7-20-15 Include 15-06 11- 2-15 Include 15-07 10-12-15 Include 15-08 10-12-15 Include 16-03  4- 4-16 Include 16-05  7-18-16 Include 16-07  8- 1-16 Include 16-08  8- 1-16 Include 16-10  9-19-16 Include 16-11 12-12-16 Include  
PART I - CHARTER ORDINANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Compiled herein is Charter Ord. No. 64, as approved by the village on September 5, 1950, as amended by Charter Ord. No. 82-4, adopted by the village on December 6, 1982. Both ordinances were promulgated pursuant to § 66.01, Wis. Stats. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section I. - [Selection and tenure of Village Clerk.] 
    Pursuant to §§ 61.195, 61.197 and 66.01, Wis. Stats., for 1949, the Village of Kewaskum hereby elects not to be governed by those portions of §§ 61.19, 61.23 and 61.25(2), Wis. Stats., which relate to the selection and tenure of the Village Clerk and treasurer, and which are in conflict with the provisions of this charter ordinance. 
(Ch. Ord. No. 64, § I, 9-5-50) 
Section II. - [Office of Village Administrator created.] 
    There is hereby created the office of Village Administrator. The person filling this office shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Village Board of the Village of Kewaskum. The Village Administrator shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject to removal as provided by law for officers appointed by the Village Board. 
(Ch. Ord. No. 64, § II, 9-5-50; Ch. Ord. No. 82-4, § 1, 12-6-82) 
Section III. - [Duties of Village Administrator.] 
    The Village Administrator shall ex officio be Village Clerk and Village Treasurer and shall, unless otherwise directed by the Village Board, supervise all public work activities in the Village and shall perform such other duties as shall be required by the Village Board. 
(Ch. Ord. No. 64, § III, 9-5-50; Ch. Ord. No. 82-4, § 1, 12-6-82) 
Section IV. - [Status of office of Village Administrator.] 
    The office of Village Administrator is hereby designated to be a full-time position. The compensation therefore [therefor] shall be set by the Village Board. 
(Ch. Ord. No. 64, § IV, 9-5-50; Ch. Ord. No. 82-4, § 1, 12-6-82) 
Section V. - [Effective date.] 
    This is a charter ordinance and shall take effect sixty days after its passage and publication; unless, within sixty days from passage and publication, a referendum petition shall be filed as provided by § 66.01, Wis. Stats., in which event this ordinance shall not take effect until submitted to a referendum and approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. 
(Ch. Ord. No. 64, § V, 9-5-50) 
CHARTER ORDINANCES COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Charter 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Charter 64  9- 5-50 I-V I-V 82-4 12- 6-82 1 II-IV  
PART II - MUNICIPAL CODE 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code, effective date. 
    These ordinances shall be known as the "Municipal Code of the Village of Kewaskum" and shall take effect from and after passage and publication as provided in § 66.035, Wis. Stats. All references thereto shall be cited by section number. 
(Code 1983, § 25.07) 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, § 66.035, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and construction of terms. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done that may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
    And/or. The word "and" may be read as "or," and the word "or" may be read "and" where the sense requires it. 
    Charter ordinances. The term "Charter ordinances" shall mean the Charter Ordinances of the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin, printed as part I of this Code. 
    Code. Whenever the term "Code" is used without further qualification, it shall mean the "Municipal Code of the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin," as designated in section 1-1. 
    County. The word "county" shall mean Washington County, Wisconsin. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other village officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    Gender, singular and plural. Every word in this Code and in any ordinance imparting the masculine gender may extend and be applied to females as well as males, and every word imparting the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; provided these rules of construction shall not be applied to any provision that contains any express language excluding such construction or when the subject matter or context of such provision may be repugnant thereto. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 990.001(2), Wis. Stats. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 990.001(8), Wis. Stats. 
    May. The word "may" shall be construed as being permissive and discretionary. 
    Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Oath. The word "oath" includes affirmation in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. If any oath or affirmation is required to be taken, such oath or affirmation shall be taken before and administered by some officer authorized by the laws of this state to administer oaths, at the place where the same is required to be taken or administered, unless otherwise expressly directed, and, when necessary, duly certified by such officer. If an oath is administered, it shall end with the words "so help me God." In actions and proceedings in the courts, a person may take an oath or affirmation in communication with the administering officer by telephone or audiovisual means. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 990.01(24), Wis. Stats. 
    Officers and employees generally. Whenever any officer or employee is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin." 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" extends and applies to natural persons, firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic and to all entities capable of being sued, unless plainly inapplicable. 
    Personal property. The words "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The word "shall" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
    State. The word "state" shall mean the State of Wisconsin. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Village. The word "village" means the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin. 
    Village board, board. The term "village board," or "board" means the village board of Kewaskum, Wisconsin, being the governing body of the village. 
    Wis. Stats., statute, state statute. The term "Wis. Stats.," "statute," or "state statute" means Wisconsin Statutes, as amended. Any statute adopted by reference includes amendments to such statute. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1983, § 25.01) 
State Law reference- Similar rules of statutory construction, § 990.001, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
(a)  Generally. All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(b)  Inclusion of penalty. Reference to any section of this Code shall be understood to refer to and include the penalty section relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
Sec. 1-5. - References and editor's notes. 
    The references and editor's notes appearing after sections throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the 1983 Municipal Code of the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the village or authorizing the issuance of any bonds and notes of the village or any evidence of the village's indebtedness or regarding special funds; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the village, including CATV; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the village, including CATV; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the village; 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets, curb lines and widths of sidewalks in the village; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the village; 
(8)  Any zoning ordinance or ordinance establishing or amending the zoning map or rezoning property; 
(9)  Any ordinance calling elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law; 
(10)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  The vacation, extension and discontinuance of public streets and alleys; 
(13)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of public officials and employees; 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing positions or classifying positions of village officers and employees or any personnel regulations; 
(15)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the village; 
(16)  Any ordinance regarding the naming and changing of names of public grounds and parks; 
(17)  Any ordinance regarding the purchase of land; 
(18)  Any ordinance regarding the letting of contracts without bids; 
(19)  Any ordinance regarding the release and discharge of claims against the United States government; 
(20)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(21)  Construction diagrams; 
(22)  Building permit fees; 
(23)  Lighting of streets and alleys; 
(24)  Any ordinance which is temporary although general in effect; 
(25)  Any ordinance which is special although permanent in effect; and 
(26)  Any ordinance containing any administrative provisions. 
All such ordinances shall remain in full force and effect and are on file in the village clerk's office. 
(Code 1983, § 25.05) 
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeals. 
    The repeal or amendment of any section or provision of this Code or of any other ordinance or resolution of the village board shall not: 
(1)  By implication be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or existing at the time such repeal or amendment takes effect. 
(2)  Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed or amended, unless the privilege of repealing such obligation or privilege has been reserved by the village. 
(3)  Affect any offense committed, or penalty or forfeiture incurred, previous to the time when any ordinance is repealed or amended; except when any forfeiture or penalty has been mitigated by the provisions of any ordinance, such provisions shall apply to and control any judgment to be pronounced after such ordinance takes effect for any offense committed before that time. 
(4)  Affect any prosecution for any offense, or the levy of any penalty or forfeiture pending at the time when any ordinance aforesaid is repealed or amended; but the right of action shall continue and the offender shall be subject to the penalty as provided in such ordinance, and such prosecution shall proceed, in all respects, as if such ordinance had not been repealed; except all such proceedings had after the time this Code takes effect shall be conducted according to the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 25.06) 
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses, acts, penalties or rights. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Penalty provisions. 
(a)  General penalty. Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, or any provision of any code adopted by reference in this Code, shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(2)  Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code who has previously been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such offense, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding six months. 
(b)  Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the village from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code. 
(c)  Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of any court for violation of any ordinance of the village, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture and costs. 
(d)  Citation method of enforcement. 
(1)  Statutory authorization. Pursuant to § 66.119, Wis. Stats., the village elects to use the citation method of enforcement of ordinances, including those for which a statutory counterpart exists. 
(2)  Contents of citation. The citation shall contain the following: 
a.  Name and address of the alleged violator. 
b.  Factual allegations describing the alleged violation. 
c.  Time and place of the offense. 
d.  Number and section of the ordinance violated. 
e.  A designation of the offense in such a manner as can readily be understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so. 
f.  Time and date in which the violator may appear in court. 
g.  A statement that in essence informs the violator: 
1.  That a cash deposit based on an established schedule set from time to time by the village board on file in the clerk's office may be delivered or mailed to the clerk of municipal court prior to the time of the scheduled court appearance. 
2.  That if a deposit is made no appearance in court is necessary unless he is subsequently summoned. 
3.  If the alleged violator makes a cash deposit and fails to appear in court, the citation may serve as the initial pleading and the violator shall be considered to have tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture, the penalty assessment imposed by § 165.87, Wis. Stats., the jail assessment imposed by § 302.46(1), Wis. Stats., and any applicable domestic abuse assessment imposed by § 973.055(1), Wis. Stats., not exceeding the amount of the deposit. The court may either accept the plea of no contest and enter judgment accordingly or reject the plea. If the court finds the violation meets the conditions in § 800.093(1), Wis. Stats., the court may summon the alleged violator into court to determine if restitution shall be ordered under § 800.093, Wis. Stats. If the court accepts the plea of no contest, the defendant may move within ten days after the date set for the appearance to withdraw the plea of no contest, open the judgment and enter a plea of not guilty if the defendant shows to the satisfaction of the court that the failure to appear was due to mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect. If the plea of no contest is accepted and not subsequently changed to a plea of not guilty, no costs or fees may be taxed against the violator, but a penalty assessment, a jail assessment and, if applicable, a domestic abuse assessment shall be assessed. If the court rejects the plea of no contest, an action for collection of the forfeiture, penalty assessment, jail assessment and any applicable domestic abuse assessment may be commenced. The village may commence action under § 66.12(1), Wis. Stats. The citation may be used as the complaint in the action for the collection of the forfeiture, penalty assessment, jail assessment and any applicable domestic abuse assessment. 
4.  If the alleged violator does not make a cash deposit and fails to appear in court at the time specified in the citation, the court may issue a summons or warrant for the defendant's arrest or consider the nonappearance to be a plea of no contest and enter judgment accordingly if service was completed as provided under subsection 5., or the village may commence an action for collection of the forfeiture, penalty assessment and jail assessment and any applicable domestic abuse assessment. The village may commence action under § 66.12(1), Wis. Stats. The citation may be used as the complaint in the action for the collection of the forfeiture, penalty assessment and jail assessment and any applicable domestic abuse assessment. If the court considers the nonappearance to be a plea of no contest and enters judgment accordingly, the court shall promptly mail a copy or notice of the judgment to the defendant. The judgment shall allow the defendant not less than 20 days from the date of the judgment to pay any forfeiture, penalty assessment and jail assessment and any applicable domestic abuse assessment imposed. If the defendant moves to open the judgment within six months after the court appearance date fixed in the citation, and shows to the satisfaction of the court that the failure to appear was due to mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect, the court shall reopen the judgment, accept a not guilty plea and set a trial date. 
5.  A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit, the statement that accompanies the citation shall be signed to indicate that the required statement has been read. Such statement shall be sent or brought with the cash deposit. 
h.  Deposits shall be made in cash, money order or certified check to the clerk of municipal court, who shall provide a receipt therefor. 
(3)  Issuance of citations. Any village law enforcement officer is authorized to issue citations for violations of those ordinances they are empowered to enforce. 
(4)  Procedure. § 66.119(3), Wis. Stats., relating to a violator's options and procedures on default, is adopted and incorporated by reference in this section. 
(5)  Nonexclusivity. 
a.  Other ordinance. Adoption of this subsection does not preclude the village board from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or other matter. 
b.  Other remedies. The issuance of a citation under this section shall not preclude the village board or any authorized officer from proceeding under any other ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance, regulation or order. 
(e)  Forfeiture bonds for municipal citations. The chief of police is authorized to establish bond amounts for violations of this Code, for which municipal citations are written. The forfeitures shall be not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00, plus costs and assessments. The establishment of these bond amounts shall be done administratively by the chief of police and shall not require any further action by the village board. 
(f)  Juveniles. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Juvenile means a person who is 12 years of age or older, but less than 17 years of age. 
(2)  Penalty. Any juvenile who violates any provision of this Code or any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant hereto or any provision of any code adopted herein by reference, upon conviction of such violation, shall be subject to imposition of any of the dispositions set forth in §§ 938.343 and 938.344, Wis. Stats., in accordance with the provisions of those sections. Any juvenile who violates a condition of a dispositional order under §§ 938.343 or 938.344, Wis. Stats., upon adjudication of such violation, shall be subject to imposition of any of the sanctions set forth in § 938.355(6)(d), Wis. Stats., in accordance with the provisions of that section. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, 11-25-96) 
Cross reference- Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Bail, § 66.114, Wis. Stats.; penalties for violation of municipal ordinances, § 66.115, Wis. Stats.; outstanding unpaid forfeitures, § 66.117, Wis. Stats.; action for violations of ordinances, § 66.12, Wis. Stats.; fines and costs in municipal courts, § 814.65, Wis. Stats.; collection of forfeitures generally, § 778.10, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 1-12. - Applicability of penalties. 
    The penalties provided by section 1-11 shall apply to any section of this Code or any code adopted in this Code by reference to which the penalty relates, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinances, unless otherwise provided in the amendment. 
Sec. 1-13. - Keeping Code current; revisor's amendments. 
    As each ordinance or resolution affecting this Code becomes effective, the village clerk shall forward such ordinance or resolution to the revisor, who shall incorporate them into this Code. The revisor shall make no substantive changes to such ordinances and resolutions but may renumber, rearrange and edit them without first submitting them to the village board; and such rearranging, renumbering and editing shall not affect the validity of such ordinances and resolutions or the provisions of this Code affected thereby. 
(Code 1983, § 25.08) 
Sec. 1-14. - Conflict and separability. 
(a)  Conflict of provisions. If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter. 
(b)  Separability of provisions. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof. The village board hereby declares that it would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Code 1983, § 25.02) 
Sec. 1-15. - Failure of officers to perform duties. 
    The failure of any officer or employee of the village to perform any official duty imposed by this Code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of this Code, unless a penalty is specifically provided for such act or omission. 
Sec. 1-16. - Responsibility for acts; aiding and abetting. 
    Every person concerned in the commission of any act prohibited by this Code, whether he directly commits the act or prosecutes, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted and, upon conviction, is punishable as if he had directly committed such act. 
State Law reference- Collection of forfeitures generally, § 778.10, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 1-17. - Mandating of employee benefits for private businesses. 
    No ordinance of the Village of Kewaskum nor any other municipal ordinance, rule, or regulation shall mandate that any business entity, other than the village itself, shall provide certain wages or benefits to its employees or set forth the amount or type of any employee wages or benefits provided by an employer located within the village limits. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 2-16-09) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Elections, ch. 30; emergency government, ch. 34. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Publication and effect of ordinances. 
(a)  All general ordinances of the village and all regulations imposing any forfeiture shall be published in the official paper of the village once and shall be immediately recorded, with the affidavit of publication, by the village clerk in a book kept for that purpose. A printed copy of such ordinance or resolution in any book, pamphlet or newspaper and published or purporting to be published therein by direction of the village board shall be prima facie proof of due passage, publication and recording thereof. 
(b)  All ordinances shall take effect and be in force from and after passage and publication unless otherwise provided, and published copies thereof shall have appended the date of first publication. 
(Code 1983, § 2.11) 
State Law reference- Village records generally, § 891.10, Wis. Stats. 
Secs. 2-2-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VILLAGE BOARD[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Elections, ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Powers of village board generally, § 66.34, Wis. Stats. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Elected officials. 
(a)  Enumerated. The elected officials of the village shall be the village president and six trustees. 
(b)  Terms of office. The village president shall be elected in odd-numbered years for a two-year term, and three trustees shall be elected each year for two-year terms. 
(Code 1983, §§ 1.01, 2.01) 
Sec. 2-32. - Appointed officials. 
    The following officials shall be appointed by the village board: 
Official How Appointed Term of Office Administrator Village board Indefinite Assessor Village board 3 years Attorney Village board Indefinite (at will) Building/electrical/plumbing inspector Village board Indefinite Clerk/deputy treasurer Village board Indefinite DPW working foreman* Village board Indefinite Emergency government Village board Indefinite Fire chief Subject to confirmation of police and fire commission and village board Indefinite Health officer Village board 1 year Police chief Subject to confirmation of police and fire commission and village board Indefinite Risk manager (insurance) Village board Indefinite Treasurer/deputy clerk Village board Indefinite Wastewater utility Village board Indefinite Water utility Village board Indefinite Weed commissioner Village board Indefinite Zoning administrator Village board Indefinite  
* All references in this Municipal Code to "director of public works" shall be changed to "DPW working foreman." 
(Code 1983, § 1.02; Ord. No. 2003-06, 4-21-03; Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 6-1-09; Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 2-2-15) 
State Law reference- Selection of officers generally, § 66.197, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-33. - Oaths and bonds. 
    Elected and appointed officials shall take and file the official oath within five days after notice of their election or appointment as provided in § 61.21, Wis. Stats., and shall execute and file the official bond as required by statute and this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 1.03) 
Sec. 2-34. - Removals. 
(a)  Elected officials. Elected officials may be removed by the village board as provided in § 17.13(2), Wis. Stats., or by the judge of the circuit court for cause pursuant to § 17.13(3), Wis. Stats., or as provided by § 17.16, Wis. Stats. 
(b)  Appointed officials. Appointed officials may be removed as provided in §§ 17.13(1), (3) and 17.16, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 1.04) 
Sec. 2-35. - Vacancies. 
(a)  How occurring. Vacancies in elective and appointive positions are caused as provided in §§ 17.03 and 17.035, Wis. Stats. 
(b)  How filled. Vacancies in elective and appointive offices shall be filled as provided in § 17.24, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 1.05) 
Sec. 2-36. - Salaries. 
    The salaries of all elected and appointed officials, including members of boards and commissions, shall be as determined by the village board from time to time, provided the salary of the president and members of the board shall not be increased or decreased during their terms of office. 
(Code 1983, § 1.06) 
State Law reference- Compensation of village board generally, § 66.196, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-37. - Retirement fund. 
(a)  Pursuant to ch. 40, Wis. Stats., the village elects to include eligible village personnel under the provisions of the state retirement fund in accordance with the terms thereof. 
(b)  The effective date of participation shall be January 1, 1949. 
(Code 1983, § 1.07) 
Secs. 2-38-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Meetings, salaries of village board generally, § 61.32, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 2-61. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the village board shall be held on the first and third Monday evenings of each calendar month, at 8:00 p.m. Any regular meeting falling upon a legal holiday shall be held on the following Monday, at the same hour and place. All meetings of the board shall be held in the municipal building, including special and adjourned meetings, unless otherwise determined by the village board and notice given as provided in subsection (d) below. 
(b)  Special meetings. Special meetings of the village board may be called by the village president or any two trustees in writing, filed with the village administrator at least 24 hours prior to the time specified for such meeting. The village administrator shall immediately notify each trustee of the time and purpose of such meeting by causing a written notice thereof to be delivered to each trustee personally if he can be found, or if he cannot be found, by leaving a copy of such notice at the home of such trustee. The village administrator shall cause an affidavit showing service of such notice as herein provided to be filed in his office prior to the time fixed for such special meeting. Special meetings may be held without such notice when all members of the village board are present in person, or consent in writing to the holding of such meeting, such written consent to be filed with the village administrator prior to the beginning of the meeting. Any special meeting attended by all the trustees shall be a regular meeting for the transaction of any business that may come before such meeting. 
(c)  Adjournments. The village board may by a majority vote of those present, but not less than three affirmative votes, adjourn from time to time to a specific date and hour. 
(d)  Open Meeting Law. All meetings of the village board and subunits thereof shall be open to the public as provided in §§ 19.81-19.89, Wis. Stats. Public notice of all such meetings shall be given as provided in § 19.84, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 2.02) 
Sec. 2-62. - Presiding officer. 
(a)  Generally. The village president shall preside at meetings of the village board. In case of absence of the president, the village administrator shall call the meeting to order and the trustees present shall elect one of their number president pro tem. 
(b)  Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order, and conduct the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, unless otherwise provided by statute or by these rules. Any member shall have the right to appeal from a decision of the presiding officer. An appeal shall be sustained by a two-thirds vote of the members excluding the president. 
(c)  Presiding officer may vacate chair. Whenever the presiding officer shall desire to speak upon any question or to make any motion, he shall vacate the chair and designate a trustee to preside temporarily. 
(Code 1983, § 2.03) 
Sec. 2-63. - Roll call; quorum. 
(a)  Roll call; procedure when quorum not in attendance. As soon as the village board shall be called to order, the village administrator shall proceed to call the names of the members, noting who are present and who are absent, and record the same in the proceedings of the board. If it shall appear that there is not a quorum present, the fact shall be entered on the journal and the board may adjourn or the presiding officer or, in case of his absence, the village administrator, may issue a process to any police officer commanding him forthwith to summon the absentees. 
(b)  Quorum. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. The president shall be counted in computing a quorum. 
(Code 1983, § 2.04) 
Sec. 2-64. - Order of business. 
    The business of the board shall be conducted in the following order: 
(1)  Call to order and roll call; moment of silence and pledge of allegiance. 
(2)  Approval of minutes of prior meeting. 
(3)  Appearances by citizens. 
(4)  Public hearings. 
(5)  Opening of sealed bids. 
(6)  Report of department heads (village officers). 
(7)  Report of standing committees; presentation of claims. 
(8)  Unfinished business. 
(9)  New business. 
(10)  Public comment. 
(11)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1983, § 2.05; Ord. No. 2004-07, § 2, 8-2-04; Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 7-12-10) 
Sec. 2-65. - Referral of materials introduced. 
    The president without motion may refer to the appropriate committee or officer any ordinance or other written materials introduced into the village board proceedings. 
(Code 1983, § 2.06) 
Sec. 2-66. - Conduct of deliberations. 
    The deliberations of the village board shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(1)  When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak first. 
(2)  The presiding officer may limit each board member or audience participant to speak no more than twice on the same question except by leave of the board. 
(3)  No motion shall be discussed or acted upon unless it has been seconded, unless the rules permit one trustee to initiate action. No motion shall be withdrawn without the consent of the person making the same and the person seconding it. 
(4)  When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in order except in the order of precedence listed: 
a.  To adjourn. 
b.  To lay on the table. 
c.  To call the question. 
d.  To postpone to a certain day. 
e.  To refer to a committee. 
f.  To amend. 
(5)  Any member desiring to terminate debate may move the previous question, in which event the president shall announce the question as "Shall the main question now be put?" If a majority of the members present vote in the affirmative, the main question shall be taken without further debate, its effect being to put an end to all debate and bring the board to a direct vote, first upon any pending amendments, and then upon the main question. 
(6)  Any trustee may demand an aye and nay vote on any matter, and such vote shall be entered in the proceedings. Every member shall vote when a question is put unless the board by a majority vote of those present shall excuse him for special cause. A majority vote of members of the board present and voting in favor of any proposed ordinance, resolution or appointment shall be necessary for passage or approval unless a larger number is required by statute. 
(7)  A motion to adjourn shall always be in order; and a motion to adjourn, to lay on the table and a call of the previous question shall be decided without debate. 
(Code 1983, § 2.07; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 1-20-14) 
Sec. 2-67. - Reconsideration of question. 
    It shall be in order for any member voting in the majority to move for a reconsideration of the vote on any question at that meeting or at the succeeding regular meeting. A motion to reconsider being put and lost shall not be renewed. A trustee may not change his vote on any question after the result has been announced. 
(Code 1983, § 2.08) 
Sec. 2-68. - Call of the board. 
    A call of the board shall be ordered at any time by the request of two or more members and absent members shall be sent for, but a call cannot be made after voting has commenced. When a call of the board has been requested and ordered, the door shall be closed until the report of the police officer has been received and acted upon, or until further proceedings under the call are dispensed with by a majority of the entire board. 
(Code 1983, § 2.09) 
Sec. 2-69. - Amendment of rules. 
    The rules included in this division shall not be rescinded or amended unless the proposed amendment or motion to rescind has laid over from a regular meeting, and then it shall require a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the board. 
(Code 1983, § 2.12) 
Sec. 2-70. - Suspension of rules. 
    The rules included in this division or any part thereof may be temporarily suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1983, § 2.13) 
Secs. 2-71-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-91. - Standing committees. 
(a)  Appointment. The following committees shall be appointed by the village president, subject to the approval of a majority of the members of the village board, at the first regular meeting in May of each year: 
(1)  Administrative. Functions include finance, personnel, building permits, ordinances, insurance, bonds, licenses, permits, concessions, land purchases, easements and rights-of-way. 
(2)  Protection and public safety. Functions include police department, fire department, health, weeds, welfare, recreation and nuisance control. 
(3)  Public works and services. Functions include garbage collection, recycling collection, signs, streetlights, streets, bridges, equipment, snow removal, sewer, water, storm sewer, sidewalks, building maintenance, new construction, parks and management of village property and special services to local groups. 
(4)  Parks and recreation. Functions include maintenance, management and recreation programs for River Hill Park and Kewaskum Kiwanis Community Park. 
(b)  Composition of committees. Each committee shall consist of three members. The chairmen of the committees shall be designated by the village president. Each member shall serve as appointed unless excused by a majority of the members of the board. 
(Code 1983, § 2.10; Ord. No. 2007-02, 6-11-07) 
Secs. 2-92-2-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 38-36 et seq.; health officer, § 42-86 et seq.; police department, § 46-61 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-126. - Payment of regular wages or salaries. 
    Regular wages or salaries of village officers and employees shall be paid by payroll, verified by the proper village official, and filed with the village treasurer in time for payment on the regular payday. 
(Code 1983, § 3.06(5)) 
Secs. 2-127-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Charter ordinances, § 2-411 et seq. 

Sec. 2-151. - Bond required. 
    The village administrator shall be covered by a fidelity bond of not less than $5,000.00 pursuant to § 66.044(4), Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 3.06(4)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 66.044(4), Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-152. - Compensation. 
    The position of village administrator shall be a full-time position. Compensation therefor shall be set by the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 1.16(2)) 
Sec. 2-153. - Duties. 
    The village administrator shall: 
(1)  Be ex officio village clerk/treasurer and act as an administrative assistant to the village president and carry out such additional projects designated by the village president or the village board from time to time. 
(2)  Be responsible for the administrative direction and supervision of all professional employees of the village to coordinate the administrative activities of village departments. 
(3)  Be responsible for the employment, training, direction and supervision of all clerical and custodial personnel assigned to the village, and for making recommendations to the village board on appointments and promotions of key personnel. 
(4)  Effectuate all actions of the village board that require administrative action. 
(5)  Prepare, in cooperation with department heads, the annual village budget for submission to the village board. 
(6)  Review and report to the village president and the village board any variations in the operation of the village budget. 
(7)  Make such reports as the village board may, from time to time, require as to the current fiscal status of the village and the current fiscal status of budgeted items under the village budget. 
(8)  Serve as the personnel officer for the village. 
(9)  Inquire into and settle any dispute concerning activities of any department or office in connection with interdepartmental relations or with persons having business with the village. 
(10)  Supervise the complete accounting systems of all village departments and ensure that such systems employ the most modern methods possible within financial limitations. 
(11)  Direct the collection of all village, school, county and state taxes. 
(12)  Serve as purchasing agent for the village. 
(13)  Maintain a current personnel file for all departments except the fire department. 
(14)  Submit to the village board, from time to time, recommendations or suggestions for improving the health, safety and welfare of the village. 
(15)  File with the village board such reports at such times as the village board may require concerning the activities of his office. 
(16)  Administer the operation and maintenance of all village-owned property. 
(17)  Represent the village in intergovernmental matters and affairs. 
(18)  In coordination with the village president, prepare the agenda for all meetings of the village board, together with such supporting data as may be required. 
(19)  Attend all meetings of the village board, assisting the president as required in the performance of his duties, keep detailed minutes of all such meetings, and assure that proper records of all board meetings are maintained. 
(20)  Keep informed concerning current state and federal legislation affecting the village and submit recommendations to the board. 
(21)  Keep informed concerning the availability of state and federal funds for local programs and apply for funds under the direction of the board. 
(22)  Keep informed concerning current developments in the field of municipal administration and submit recommendations or suggestions to improve the municipal government. 
(23)  Establish procedures to facilitate communications between citizens and the municipal government to assure that complaints, grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt attention by a responsible official and to assure that all such matters are expeditiously resolved. 
(24)  Serve as press officer for the village. 
(25)  Ensure that all village ordinances are efficiently and equally enforced. 
(26)  Serve as village risk manager and insurance officer. 
(Code 1983, § 1.16(3)) 
Sec. 2-154. - Clerk to file documents incorporated by reference. 
    Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth herein; and the clerk shall file, deposit and keep in his office a copy of the code, standard, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept shall be public records open for examination with proper care by any person during the clerk's office hours, subject to such orders or regulations that the clerk may prescribe for their preservation. 
(Code 1983, § 25.03) 
Secs. 2-155-2-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CLERK/TREASURER 

Sec. 2-176. - Duplicate treasurer's bond eliminated. 
(a)  The village elects not to give the bond on the village treasurer provided for by § 70.67(1), Wis. Stats. 
(b)  Pursuant to § 70.67(2), Wis. Stats., the village shall be obligated to pay, in case the village treasurer fails to do so, all state and county taxes required by law to be paid by such treasurer to the county treasurer. 
(Code 1983, § 3.09) 
Sec. 2-177. - Deputy clerk/treasurer. 
    The deputy clerk/treasurer shall be responsible for the clerk/treasurer's duties described in sections 2-153 and 2-154 in the absence of the administrator or as assigned by the administrator. 
(Code 1983, § 1.17(2)) 
Secs. 2-178-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADA COORDINATOR 

Sec. 2-201. - Duties. 
    The American's with Disabilities Act (ADA) coordinator shall be responsible for the monitoring and implementation of the program as described in the ADA. 
(Code 1983, § 1.18(2)) 
Secs. 2-202-2-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Board of health, § 42-61 et seq.; police and fire commission, § 46-31. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-236. - Economic development/advisory committee. 
(1)  Purpose of chapter/section. The economic development/advisory committee, referred to in this chapter as ED/AC, shall be a citizens advisory committee whose purpose shall be to advise the village board on matters of economic development, promoting economic development activities that will assist in improving economic conditions in the Kewaskum area, developing and promoting the village industrial, commercial and residential base and to assist on specific matters assigned to it by the village board. 
(a)  Mission statement. 
"Promoting the economic development of the Kewaskum area." 
(2)  Composition. The ED/AC shall consist of seven members and one ex-officio member as follows: 
(a)  The village president; 
(b)  A member of the village plan commission; 
(c)  Three citizens whose principle occupation shall be business owners or managers of business in the Village of Kewaskum with known interest in local economic development, of which two may be nonresidents; 
(d)  Two citizens having general knowledge of the affairs of the village and interest in local economic development; 
(e)  An ex-officio member who shall be the village administrator (or alternate deputy clerk) and shall serve as secretary; 
(f)  The chairperson shall be elected from the members and shall serve for a period of one year. 
(3)  Appointments; terms; vacancies. 
(a)  All appointments shall be made by the village president and confirmed by the village board. 
(b)  Appointments of the five citizen members shall be for staggered three-year periods, except that those first appointed: one shall be for one year; two shall be for two years, and two shall be for three years. 
(c)  The plan commission member shall serve a two-year term and will be appointed in May of odd-numbered election years. 
(d)  Vacancies will be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term of office thereof. 
(4)  Powers and duties. The economic development/advisory committee shall "promote the economic development of the Kewaskum area." 
(a)  Guide and coordinate the efforts of local individuals and organizations concerned with the economic development of the village when applicable. 
(b)  Assist if requested with the possible retention of existing employment opportunities and encourage the expansion of existing business and industry in the village by helping to meet the needs of existing employers. 
(c)  Assist if requested in the creation of new employment opportunities. 
(d)  Support and promote economic development in the village through the improvement of the provision of the communities facilities and services that will assist in the expansion of employment opportunities. 
(e)  To assist the village in marketing coordinating and facilitating the development of any proposed and future Kewaskum business parks. 
(f)  The committee may act as liaison between the village board, plan commission and private development groups, such as the chamber of commerce and shall recommend to the village board such action of the committee as determined as necessary. 
(g)  When necessary, solicit community input to establish a vision of the Kewaskum area. Hold informational workshops for local businesses, officials and residents to broaden the base of viewpoints when and if necessary. 
(h)  When necessary, the committee may utilize the services of the village's engineers, the village attorney and other village officials and employees, upon such basis as shall be mutually agreed to or as may be determined by the village board. 
(i)  The committee may suggest, develop and recommend feasible methods of financing and other measures of public input into the economic development process. 
(j)  The committee shall have the authority to make all necessary rules governing its own proceedings, but generally follow Roberts Rules of Order. 
(k)  The committee shall annually report to the village board or report on any type of achievements regarding the fulfillment of any of such programs. 
(l)  The committee shall work with the county and state as well as any other agency or governmental body that would best benefit the goals of said committee, in the promotion of economic development for the Village of Kewaskum and area. 
(5)  Meetings. One regular/annual meeting of the economic development/advisory commission shall be held in May of each year. Special meetings of the committee may be called by the chairperson or any two members upon reasonable notice to all other members. The village board may request the committee to also meet to address an issue of community importance. 
(Code 1983, § 1.36; Ord. No. 97-2, § 1.36, 3-17-97; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 1.36, 4-7-03) 
State Law reference- § 66.52, Wis. Stats. 
Note- This chapter is adopted in order to facilitate village action in the promotion of industry and it is intended that the carrying out the intent of § 66.52, Wis. Stats., shall be the purpose of this section and only the authority contained in this section, in § 66.52, Wis. Stats., and such authority as is granted by the village board shall be carried out by the economic development/advisory committee. 
Secs. 2-237-2-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF REVIEW 

Sec. 2-261. - Board of review. 
(a)  Composition. The board of review shall consist of five members, the village president, clerk, one village board member and such other officers/members, other than the assessor, as the village board may determine. The village president to serve for term of office, the village clerk to serve indefinitely, and two at large seats to serve staggered five-year terms. 
(b)  Alternate members of the board of review. Pursuant to §§ 70.47(6m)(c) and 70.46(1), Wis. Stats., the village board hereby provides for the appointment of alternates to serve on the village board of review in the event a standing board member of the board of review is removed or unable to serve for any reason. Alternate appointments will serve staggered five-year terms. 
(c)  Powers and duties. As currently noted under subsection (b) [§§ 70.46 and 70.47, Wis. Stats.]. 
(Code 1983, § 1.30; Ord. No. 2004-05, 5-17-04) 
Sec. 2-262. - Assessor confidentiality. 
    Whenever the assessor, in the performance of the assessor's duties, requests or obtains income and expense information pursuant to § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., or any successor statute thereto, then, such income and expense information that is provided to the assessor shall be held by the assessor on a confidential basis, except, however, that said information may be revealed to and used by persons: in the discharging of duties imposed by law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office (including, but not limited to, use by the assessor in performance of official duties of the assessor's office and use by the board of review in performance of its official duties); or pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense information provided to the assessor under § 70.47(7)(af), unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is, per § 70.47(7)(af), not subject to the right of inspection and copying under § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 1, 4-17-00) 
Secs. 2-263-2-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POLICE AND FIRE COMMISSION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Board of police and fire commissioners generally, §§ 61.65, 62.13, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 2-281. - Membership. 
    The police and fire commission shall consist of five citizens of the village appointed by the president, subject to confirmation by the village board. Three commissioners shall constitute a quorum and no more than three shall belong to the same political party. The commission shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(Code 1983, §§ 1.31(1), 4.02) 
Sec. 2-282. - Term of office. 
    Each member of the commission shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall serve without salary. The president shall annually, between the last Monday of April and the first Monday of May, appoint in writing to be filed with the secretary of the commission, one member for a term of five years, except the initial commission, which shall be appointed in its entirety, but with varying terms. 
(Code 1983, §§ 1.31(2), 4.02) 
Sec. 2-283. - Organization. 
    The police and fire commission shall designate a president and secretary from among its members and assign duties to each of them as are common to such offices. The commission shall establish regular meeting dates and reasonable rules of procedure. Special meetings may be held upon proper notice when occasion demands. 
(Code 1983, § 1.31(3)) 
Sec. 2-284. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the police and fire commission shall be those prescribed in § 61.65, Wis. Stats., and elsewhere in the statutes. 
(Code 1983, § 1.31(4)) 
Sec. 2-285. - Meetings. 
    One regular/annual meeting of the commission shall be held in April of each year. Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chair or any two members upon reasonable notice to all other members. 
(Code 1983, § 1.31(5); Ord. No. 96-6, 7-15-96) 
Secs. 2-286-2-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLAN COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; mobile homes, ch. 54; shoreland-wetland zoning, ch. 74; subdivision and platting, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Village planning generally, §§ 62.23, 561.35 et seq., Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 2-306. - Plan commission. 
    The plan commission shall consist of the village president, who shall be its presiding officer, five citizen members of recognized experience and qualifications, and a member of the village board, who shall be elected by the village board by a two-thirds vote. The five citizen members shall be appointed by the president, one annually during April for a term of three years. 
(Code 1983, § 1.34) 
Secs. 2-307-2-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Shoreland-wetland zoning, ch. 74; board of appeals, § 74-46; subdivision and platting, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Board of appeals generally, § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 2-331. - Membership. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall consist of five citizens of the village appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board, for terms of three years beginning on May 1 succeeding appointment. The village president may appoint for staggered terms of three years, two alternate members, who shall act with full power only when a member of the board refuses to vote because of interest or where a member is absent. 
(Code 1983, § 1.35) 
Secs. 2-332-2-365. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverage licenses, § 6-61 et seq.; suspension, revocation of certain licenses, § 18-82. 
State Law reference- Municipal administrative procedure generally, § 68.001 et seq., Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 2-366. - Review of administrative determinations. 
    Any person aggrieved by an administrative determination of the village board or a board, commission, committee, agency, official or employee of the village or an agent acting on its behalf may have such determination reviewed as provided in this article. The remedies under this article shall not be exclusive, but an election to proceed hereunder shall be an election of remedies. 
(Code 1983, § 24.01) 
Sec. 2-367. - Municipal authority defined. 
    The term "municipal authority" includes the village board, commission, committee, agency, official, employee or agent of the village making a determination under section 2-366, and every person, committee or agency of the village authorized to make an independent review under section 2-369. 
(Code 1983, § 24.04) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 68.05, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-368. - Persons aggrieved. 
    A person aggrieved includes any individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association, public or private organization, and any official, department, board, commission or agency of the village, whose rights, duties or privileges are adversely affected by a determination of a municipal authority. No department, board, commission, agency, official or employee of the village who is aggrieved may initiate review under this article of a determination of any other department, board, commission, agency, official or employee of the village, but may respond or intervene in a review proceeding under this article initiated by another. 
(Code 1983, § 24.05) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 68.06, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-369. - Determinations reviewable. 
    The following determinations are reviewable under this article: 
(1)  The grant or denial in whole or in part, after application, of an initial permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except an alcohol beverage license. 
(2)  The suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an existing permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except as provided in section 2-370. 
(3)  The denial of a grant of money or other thing of substantive value under a statute or ordinance prescribing conditions of eligibility for such grant. 
(4)  The imposition of a penalty or sanction upon any person except a municipal employee or officer, other than by a court. 
(5)  The suspension or removal of a village official or employee except as provided in section 2-370(2), (7). 
(Code 1983, § 24.02) 
Sec. 2-370. - Determinations not subject to review. 
    The following determinations are not reviewable under this article: 
(1)  A legislative enactment. A legislative enactment is an ordinance, resolution or adopted motion of the village board. 
(2)  Any action subject to administrative or judicial review procedures under statute or other provisions of this Code. 
(3)  The denial of a tort or contract claim for money required to be filed with the village under § 62.25, Wis. Stats. 
(4)  The suspension, removal or disciplining or nonrenewal of a contract of a municipal employee or officer. 
(5)  The grant, denial, suspension or revocation of an alcohol beverage license under ch. 125, Wis. Stats. 
(6)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any action or determination of a municipal authority which does not involve the constitutionally protected right of a specific person to due process in connection with the action or determination. 
(7)  Judgments and orders of a court. 
(8)  Determinations made during municipal labor negotiations. 
(9)  Determinations subject to grievance, arbitration or other procedures provided in collective bargaining agreements or discipline, termination or workplace safety issues that are subject to the grievance procedure required by § 66.0509, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 24.03; Ord. No. 11-03, § 1, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 2-371. - Reducing determination to writing. 
    If a determination subject to this article is made orally or, if in writing, does not state the reasons therefor, the municipal authority making such determination shall, upon written request of any person aggrieved by such determination made within ten days of notice of such determination, reduce the determination and the reasons therefor to writing and mail or deliver such determination and reasons to the person making the request. The determination shall be dated and shall advise such person of his right to have such determination reviewed, shall advise that such review may be taken within 30 days, and shall name the office or person to whom a request for review shall be addressed. 
(Code 1983, § 24.06) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 68.07, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-372. - Request for review of determination. 
    Any person aggrieved may have a written or oral determination reviewed by written request mailed or delivered to the municipal authority that made such determination within 30 days of notice to such person of such determination. The request for review shall state the grounds upon which the person aggrieved contends that the determination should be modified or reversed. A request for review shall be made to the official, employee, agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body who made the determination; but failure to make such request to the proper party shall not preclude the person aggrieved from review unless such failure has caused prejudice to the municipal authority. 
(Code 1983, § 24.07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 68.08, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-373. - Review of determination. 
(a)  Initial determination. If a request for review is made under section 2-372, the determination to be reviewed shall be termed an initial determination. 
(b)  Who shall make review. A review under this section may be made by the official, employee, agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body who made the initial determination. However, an independent review of such determination by another person, committee or agency of the village, appointed by the village president, without confirmation, shall be provided if practicable. 
(c)  When to make review. The municipal authority shall review the initial determination within 15 days of receipt of a request for review. The time for review may be extended by agreement with the person aggrieved. 
(d)  Right to present evidence and argument. The person aggrieved may file with his request for review or within the time agreed with the municipal authority written evidence and argument in support of his position with respect to the initial determination. 
(e)  Decision on review. The municipal authority may affirm, reverse or modify the initial determination and shall mail or deliver to the person aggrieved a copy of the municipal authority's decision on review, which shall state the reasons for such decision. The decision shall advise the person aggrieved of his right to appeal the decision, shall advise that the appeal may be taken within 30 days and shall name the office or person with whom notice of appeal shall be filed. 
(Code 1983, § 24.08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 68.09, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-374. - Administrative appeal. 
(a)  From initial determination or decision on review. 
(1)  If the person aggrieved had a hearing substantially in compliance with sections 2-375 and 2-376 when the initial determination was made, he may elect to follow sections 2-371 through 2-373 but is not entitled to a further hearing under sections 2-375 and 2-376 unless granted by the municipal authority. He may, however, seek judicial review under section 2-378. 
(2)  If the person aggrieved did not have a hearing substantially in compliance with sections 2-375 and 2-376 when the initial determination was made, he shall follow sections 2-371 through 2-373 and may appeal under this section from the decision made under section 2-373. 
(b)  Time within which appeal may be taken under this section. Appeal from a decision on review under section 2-373 may be taken within 30 days of notice of such decision. 
(c)  How appeal may be taken. An appeal under this section may be taken by filing with or mailing to the office or person designated in the municipal authority's decision on review written notice of appeal. 
(Code 1983, § 24.09) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 68.10, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-375. - Hearing on administrative appeal. 
(a)  Time of hearing. The village shall provide the appellant a hearing on an appeal under section 2-374 within 15 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and shall serve the appellant with notice of such hearing by mail or personal service at least ten days before such hearing. The office or person with whom a notice of appeal is filed shall immediately notify the village attorney, who shall forthwith advise the village president of such appeal. 
(b)  Conduct of hearing. At the hearing, the appellant and the municipal authority may be represented by counsel and may present evidence and call and examine witnesses and cross examine witnesses of the other party. Such witnesses shall be sworn by the person conducting the hearing. The village president shall appoint, without confirmation, an impartial decision maker who may be an official or a committee, board or commission of the village or the village board who did not participate in making or reviewing the initial determination, who shall make the decision on administrative appeal and who may issue subpoenas. The hearing may, however, be conducted by an impartial person, committee, board or commission designated by the village president to conduct the hearing and report to the decision maker. 
(c)  Record of hearing. The person conducting the hearing or a person employed for the purpose of making a record of the hearing shall take notes of the testimony and shall mark and preserve all exhibits. The person conducting the hearing may, and upon request of the appellant shall, cause the proceedings to be taken by a stenographer or by a recording device, the expense thereof to be paid by the village. 
(Code 1983, § 24.10(1)-(3)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 68.11, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-376. - Hearing on initial determination. 
    Where substantial existing rights are affected by an initial determination, the municipal authority making such determination shall, when practicable, give any person directly affected an opportunity to be heard in accordance with this section before making such determination. 
(Code 1983, § 24.10(4)) 
Sec. 2-377. - Final determination. 
(a)  Within 20 days of completion of the hearing conducted under sections 2-375 and 2-376 and the filing of briefs, if any, the decision maker shall mail or deliver to the appellant its written determination, stating the reasons therefor. Such determination shall be a final determination. 
(b)  A determination following a hearing substantially meeting the requirements of sections 2-375 and 2-376, or a decision on review under section 2-373 following such hearing, shall be a final determination, judicial review of which may be obtained under section 2-378. 
(Code 1983, § 24.11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 68.12, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-378. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final determination may seek review thereof by writ of certiorari within 30 days of receipt of the final determination. 
(b)  The record of the proceedings shall be transcribed at the expense of the person seeking review. A transcript shall be supplied to anyone requesting the same at his expense. If the person seeking review establishes impecuniousness to the satisfaction of the reviewing court, the court may order the proceedings transcribed at the expense of the village; and the person seeking review shall be furnished a free copy of the transcript. By stipulation, the court may order a synopsis of the proceedings in lieu of a transcript. The court may otherwise limit the requirement for a transcript. 
(Code 1983, § 24.12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 68.13, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-379. - Legislative review. 
(a)  Seeking review pursuant to this article does not preclude a person aggrieved from seeking relief from the village board or any of its boards, commissions, committees or agencies which may have jurisdiction. 
(b)  If in the course of legislative review under this section a determination is modified, such modification and any evidence adduced before the village board, board, commission, committee or agency shall be made part of the record on review under section 2-378. 
(c)  The village board, board, commission, committee or agency conducting a legislative review under this section need not conduct the type of hearing required under sections 2-375 and 2-376. 
(Code 1983, § 24.13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 68.14, Wis. Stats. 
Secs. 2-380-2-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC RECORDS 

Sec. 2-411. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authority means any of the following village entities having custody of a village record: an office, elected official, agency, board, commission, committee, council, department or public body corporate and politic created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted subunit of the foregoing. 
    Custodian means that officer, department head, division head or employee of the village designated under section 2-413 or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any village records or file, deposit or keep such records in his office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such public records and who is required by this article to respond to requests for access to such records. 
    Record means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an authority. "Record" includes but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), and computer printouts. "Record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working; materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have no relation to his office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at a public library. 
(Code 1983, § 1.10(1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-412. - Duty to maintain records. 
(a)  Except as provided under section 2-414, each officer and employee of the village shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his office or which are in the lawful possession or control of which he may be lawfully entitled as such officers or employees. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of each such officer's term of office, or whenever the office becomes vacant, the officer, or on the officer's death the officer's legal representative, shall on demand deliver to the officer's successor all such property and things then in the officer's custody, and the officer's successor shall receipt therefor to the officer, who shall file said receipt, as the case may be, in the office of the village clerk or other secretarial officer of the municipality or district, respectively; but if a vacancy occurs before such successor is qualified, such property and things shall be delivered to and be receipted for by such secretary or clerk, respectively, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt. 
(Code 1983, § 1.10(2)) 
Sec. 2-413. - Legal custodian. 
(a)  Each elected official is the legal custodian of his records and the records of his office, but the official may designate an employee of his staff to act as the legal custodian. 
(b)  Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the village administrator or his designee shall act as the legal custodian for all records of the village board and for any committees, commissions, boards or other authorities created by ordinance or resolution of the village board. 
(c)  For every authority not specified in subsection (a) or (b), the authority's chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority; but the officer may designate an employee of his staff to act as the legal custodian. 
(d)  Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his absence or the absence of his designee. 
(e)  The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and to carry out the duties of an authority under subch. II of ch. 19, Wis. Stats., and this section. The designation of a legal custodian does not affect the powers and duties of an authority under this section. 
(Code 1983, § 1.10(3)) 
Sec. 2-414. - Public access to records. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 2-416, any person has a right to inspect a record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats. 
(b)  Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office hours and/or during those designated specific department hours. 
(c)  If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon at least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy. 
(d)  A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to village employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record. 
(e)  The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged. 
(f)  A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and copying records as follows: 
(1)  The cost of photocopying shall be set from time to time by the village board. Such cost has been calculated not to exceed the actual, necessary and direct cost of reproduction. 
(2)  If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing shall be charged. 
(3)  The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and audiotapes or videotapes, shall be charged. 
(4)  If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also be charged. 
(5)  There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost therefor exceeds $50.00, in which case the actual cost shall be determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester. 
(6)  The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and may require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment if such estimated fee exceeds $5.00. 
(7)  Elected and appointed officials of the village shall not be required to pay for public records they may reasonably require for the proper performance of their official duties. 
(8)  The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge or at a reduced charge where he determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest. Note: Specific costs for certain material is included on the official notice proclaiming the custodians and hours of operation for specific departments. 
(g)  Pursuant to § 19.34, Wis. Stats., and the guidelines therein listed, each authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization and the established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof. Each authority shall also prominently display at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a copy of §§ 19.31-19.39, Wis. Stats. This section does not apply to members of the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 1.10(4)) 
Sec. 2-415. - Access procedures. 
(a)  A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or the information requested. However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under § 19.37, Wis. Stats. Except as provided below, no request may be refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may be refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a fee is required under section 2-414(f)(6). A requester may be required to show acceptable identification whenever the requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or regulations so require. 
(b)  Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after conferring with the village attorney, determines that a written request is so general as to be unduly time-consuming, the party making the request may first be required to itemize his request in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance. 
(c)  A request for a record may be denied as provided in section 2-416. If a request is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written denial of a request shall inform the requester that if the request for the record was made in writing, the determination is subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under § 19.37(1), Wis. Stats., or upon application to the attorney general or a district attorney. 
(d)  If an authority receives a request under § 19.35(1)(a), (am), Wis. Stats., from an individual or person authorized by the individual who identifies himself and states that the purpose of the request is to inspect or copy a record containing personally identifiable information pertaining to the individual that is maintained by the authority, the authority shall deny or grant the request in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The authority shall first determine if the requester has a right to inspect or copy the record under § 19.35(1)(a), Wis. Stats. 
(2)  If the authority determines that the requester has a right to inspect or copy the record under § 19.35(1)(a), Wis. Stats., the authority shall grant the request. 
(3)  If the authority determines that the requester does not have a right to inspect or copy the record under § 19.35(1)(a), Wis. Stats., the authority shall then determine if the requester has a right to inspect or copy the record under § 19.35(1)(am), Wis. Stats., and grant or deny the request accordingly. 
(Code 1983, § 1.10(5)) 
Sec. 2-416. - Limitations on right to access. 
(a)  As provided by § 19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt from inspection under this article: 
(1)  Records specifically exempted by law. Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law. 
(2)  Law enforcement records. Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids by the state. 
(3)  Contractor's records. Each authority shall make available for inspection and copying under § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats., any record produced or collected under a contract entered into by the authority with a person other than an authority to the same extent as if the record were maintained by the authority. This subsection does not apply to the inspection or copying of a record under § 19.35(1)(am), Wis. Stats. 
(4)  Computer programs and data. A computer program, as defined in § 16.971(4)(c), Wis. Stats., is not subject to examination or copying under § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats., but the material used as input for a computer program or the material produced as a product of the computer program is subject to the right of examination and copying, except as otherwise provided in § 19.35, Wis. Stats., or this section. 
(5)  Trade secrets. An authority may withhold access to any record or portion of a record containing information qualifying as a trade secret as defined in § 134.90(1)(c), Wis. Stats. 
(6)  Separation of information. If a record contains information that is subject to disclosure under § 19.35(1)(a) or (am), Wis. Stats., and information that is not subject to such disclosure, the authority having custody of the record shall provide the information that is subject to disclosure and delete the information that is not subject to disclosure from the record before release. 
(7)  Library circulation records. As provided by § 43.30, Wis. Stats., public library circulation records are exempt from inspection under this section. 
(b)  In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record that is not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the village attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in part, only if he determines that the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which disclosure may be refused include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality that were necessary and given in order to obtain the information contained in them. 
(2)  Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing. 
(3)  Records of current deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensation, performance or discipline of any village officer or employee, or the investigation of charges against a village officer or employee, unless such officer or employee consents to such disclosure. 
(4)  Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or prevention. 
(5)  Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of village property, investing of village funds or other village business whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure. 
(6)  Financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data of specific persons that, if disclosed, would be likely to have substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person referred to in such history or data. 
(7)  Communications between legal counsel for the village and any officer, agent or employee of the village, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in which the village or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is likely to become involved, or communications which are privileged under § 905.03, Wis. Stats. 
(8)  Police records would be subject to state law and Kewaskum Police Department policy and procedure. 
(9)  If a record contains information that may be made public and information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the information that may not be made public from the record before release. The custodian shall confer with the village attorney prior to releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the village attorney when separating out the exempt material. If in the judgment of the custodian and the village attorney there is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material, the entire record shall be withheld from disclosure. 
(Code 1983, § 1.10(6)) 
Sec. 2-417. - Preservation through microfilm. 
    Any village officer or the director of any department or division of village government may, subject to the approval of the village president and village board, keep and preserve public records in his possession by means of microfilm or other photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the standards for photographic reproduction set forth in § 16.61(7)(a) and (b), Wis. Stats., and shall be considered original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with other files of the department or division and shall be open to public inspection and copying according to the provisions of state law and of sections 2-414 through 2-416. 
(Code 1983, § 1.10(8)) 
Sec. 2-418. - Destruction of obsolete public records. 
(a)  Record destruction. No authority may destroy any record at any time after the receipt of a request for inspection or copying of the record under section 2-415 until after the request is granted or until at least 60 days after the date that the request is denied. If an action is commenced under § 19.37, Wis. Stats., the requested record may not be destroyed until after the order of the court in relation to such record is issued and the deadline for appealing that order has passed, or, if appealed, until after the order of the court hearing the appeal is issued. If the court orders the production of any record and the order is not appealed, the requested record may not be destroyed until after the request for inspection or copying is granted. 
(b)  Financial records. The village clerk/treasurer may destroy the following nonutility records of which he is the legal custodian and that are considered obsolete after completion of an audit by state auditors or an auditor licensed under ch. 442, Wis. Stats., but not less than seven years after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular transaction unless a shorter period has been fixed or will in the future be fixed by the public records board pursuant to § 16.61(3)(e), Wis. Stats., and then after such shorter period: 
(1)  Bank statements, deposit books, slips and stubs. 
(2)  Bonds and coupons after maturity. 
(3)  Cancelled checks, duplicates and check stubs. 
(4)  License and permit applications, stubs and duplicates. 
(5)  Official bonds. 
(6)  Payrolls and other time and employment records of personnel included under the state retirement plan. 
(7)  Receipt forms. 
(8)  Special assessment records. 
(9)  Vouchers, requisitions, purchase orders and all other supporting documents pertaining thereto. 
(10)  Vouchers and supporting documents pertaining to charges not included in plant accounts of municipal utilities and the sewer department. 
(11)  Other municipal utility and sewer department records with the written approval of the state public service commission. 
(c)  Utility records. The village clerk/treasurer may destroy the following records of any municipal utility subject to the regulations by the state public service commission, and of the sewer department of the village, of which he is the legal custodian and which are considered obsolete, after completion of an audit by the state auditors or by an auditor licensed under ch. 442, Wis. Stats., but not less than two years after payment or receipt of the sum involved in the applicable transaction: 
(1)  Water stubs. 
(2)  Sewer rental charge stubs. 
(3)  Receipts of current billings. 
(4)  Customer's ledgers. 
(d)  Other records. The village clerk/treasurer may destroy the following records of which he is the legal custodian and which are considered obsolete, but not less than seven years after the record was effective: 
(1)  Assessment rolls and related records, including board of review minutes. 
(2)  Contracts and papers relating thereto. 
(3)  Correspondence and communications. 
(4)  Financial reports other than annual financial reports. 
(5)  Insurance policies. 
(6)  Oaths of office. 
(7)  Reports of boards, commissions, committees and officials duplicated in the village board minutes. 
(8)  Resolutions and petitions. 
(9)  Voter cards. 
(e)  Authorization. This section shall not be construed to authorize the destruction of any public record after a period of time less than prescribed by statute or state administrative regulation. 
(f)  Notification. Prior to destroying any record under this section, the village clerk/treasurer shall notify the village board of the records proposed to be destroyed. 
(Code 1983, § 3.07) 
Secs. 2-419-2-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE AND TAX[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; secondhand goods, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Appropriations generally, § 66.04, Wis. Stats; disbursement of village funds generally, § 66.042, Wis. Stats.; municipal finance generally, § 73.10, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 2-451. - Fiscal year. 
    The calendar year shall be the fiscal year of the village. 
(Code 1983, § 3.02) 
Sec. 2-452. - Preparation of tax roll and tax receipts. 
    Pursuant to § 70.65(2), Wis. Stats., the village clerk/treasurer shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate amount of state, county, school and local taxes in a single column in the roll opposite the parcel or tract of land against which the tax is levied, or, in the case of personal property, in a single column opposite the name of the person against whom the tax is levied. 
(Code 1983, § 3.01) 
Sec. 2-453. - Budget. 
(a)  Departmental estimates. Each year, each officer, department and committee shall file with the village administrator an itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out the powers and duties of such officer, department or committee during the preceding fiscal year, and a detailed statement of the receipts and disbursements on account of any special fund under the supervision of such officer, department or committee during such year, and of the conditions and management of such fund; also detailed estimates of the same matters for the current fiscal year and for the ensuing fiscal year. Such statements shall be presented in the form prescribed by the village administrator and shall be designated as "departmental estimates," and shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main division of all departments. 
(b)  Contents. Each year the village board shall prepare and submit a proposed budget presenting a financial plan for conducting the affairs of the village for the ensuing calendar year. The budget shall include the following information: 
(1)  The expenses of conducting each department and activity of the village for the ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items for the current year and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for any increase and decrease recommended as compared with appropriations for the current fiscal year. 
(2)  An itemization of all anticipated income of the village from sources other than general property taxes and bond issues, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the village from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year. 
(3)  An itemization of the amount of money to be raised from general property taxes that, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
(4)  Such other information as may be required by the village board and by state law. 
(c)  Copies. The village shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens. 
(d)  Hearing. The village board shall hold a public hearing on the budget as required by law. Following the public hearing the proposed budget may be changed or amended and shall take the same course in the board as ordinances. 
(Code 1983, § 3.03) 
Sec. 2-454. - Changes in budget. 
    The amount of the tax to be levied or certified, the amounts of the various appropriations, and the purposes thereof shall not be changed after approval of the budget except by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the village board. Notice of such transfer shall be given by publication within 15 days thereafter in the official village newspaper. 
(Code 1983, § 3.04) 
Sec. 2-455. - Village funds to be spent in accordance with appropriation. 
    No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the village, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as authorized by section 2-454. At the close of each fiscal year any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be made by the board, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works that will not be completed within such year; and any such appropriations shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned. 
(Code 1983, § 3.05) 
Sec. 2-456. - Claims procedure. 
(a)  Generally. Payments may be made from the village treasury after the administrative committee or village administrator audits and approves each claim as a proper charge against the treasury, and endorses its or his approval on the claim. The administrative committee shall review those claims approved by the village administrator and shall report its recommendations to the village board after having determined that the following conditions have been complied with: 
(1)  That funds are available therefor pursuant to the budget approved by the village board. 
(2)  That the item or service covered by such claim has been duly authorized by the proper official, department head, board or commission. 
(3)  That the item or service has been actually supplied or rendered in conformity with such authorization. 
(4)  That the claim is just and valid pursuant to law. The administrator may require the submission of such proof and evidence to support the foregoing as in his discretion he may deem necessary. 
(b)  Monthly report. The village administrator shall file with the village board not less than monthly a report of the claims approved, showing the date paid, name of claimant and amount. 
(c)  Annual audit. The village board shall authorize an annual detailed audit of its financial transactions and accounts by the department of revenue pursuant to § 73.10, Wis. Stats., or by a public accountant licensed under ch. 442, Wis. Stats., the designation to be made by the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 3.06) 
State Law reference- Financial claims generally, § 66.044, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 2-457. - Letting of contracts. 
(a)  As a complete alternative to the requirements established by §§ 61.54 and 61.55, Wis. Stats., § 62.15, Wis. Stats., shall be applicable to village contracts. The authority vested in the board of public works by § 62.15, Wis. Stats. shall be exercised or delegated by the village board. 
(b)  Any class of public construction or any part thereof may be done directly by the village without submitting the same for bids. 
(Code 1983, § 3.08) 
State Law reference- Authority, § 61.56, Wis. Stats. 
Secs. 2-458-2-510. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ETHICS CODE 

Sec. 2-511. - Declaration of policy. 
    The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a code of ethics for all of the Village of Kewaskum officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of boards, committees and commissions of the village. The purpose of this Code is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the Village of Kewaskum and by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the Village. The provisions and purpose of this Code and such rules and regulations as may be established are hereby declared to be in the best interests of the Village of Kewaskum 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 3-1-99) 
Sec. 2-512. - Responsibility of public office. 
    Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of this state and carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and village and to observe in their official acts the highest standards of integrity and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their prime concern. Their conduct in both their official and private affairs should be above reproach so as to foster respect for all government. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 3-1-99) 
Sec. 2-213. - Dedicated service. 
(a)  All officials and employees of the Village of Kewaskum should be loyal to the objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain these objectives. Appointive officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work performance established as the standard for their position by the appropriate authority. 
(b)  Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or officially recognized confidentiality of their work. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 3-1-99) 
Sec. 2-514. - Fair and equal treatment. 
(a)  Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or permit the use of village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit without previously receiving authorization from the village board. 
(b)  Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 3-1-99) 
Sec. 2-515. - Conflicts of interests. 
(a)  Interest prohibited. No official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall act in regard to financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of their official duties in the public interest contrary to the provisions of this chapter or would tend to impair their independence of judgement or action in the performance of their official duties. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Financial interest. Any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee or to any person employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee. 
(2)  Personal interest. Any interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or from close business or political associations, whether or not any financial interest is involved. 
(3)  Person. Any person, corporation, partnership, joint venture, association, company, firm, enterprise trust or other legal entity. 
(c)  Specific conflicts enumerated. 
(1)  Incompatible employment. No official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render service for private interest, when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of their official duties or would tend to impair their independence of judgement or action in the performance of their official duties, unless otherwise permitted by law and unless disclosure is made as hereinafter provided. 
(2)  Disclosure of confidential information. No official or employee shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the Village, nor shall they use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of themselves or others. 
(3)  Gifts and favors of more than $25.00. No official or employee shall accept any one gift with a value of more than $25.00, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise from any if such person: 
a.  Has or is seeking to obtain a contractual or other business or financial relationship with the village or the board; or 
b.  Conducts operations or activities which are regulated by the village or the board; or 
c.  Has interests which may be substantially affected by the village or the board. 
(4)  Gifts and favors of more than $100.00. No official or employee shall accept such gifts having an aggregate value of more than $100.00 in any calendar year from any person if such person: 
a.  Has or is seeking to obtain a contractual or other business or financial relationship with the village or the board; or 
b.  Conducts operations or activities which are regulated by the village of the board; or 
c.  Has interests which may be substantially affected by the village or the board. 
(5)  Influential gifts and favors. No official or employee shall accept any gift, favor or thing of value that may tend to influence them in the discharge of their duties, or grant in the discharge of their duties any improper favor, service or thing of value. 
Specific exemptions. Modest ceremonial events, i.e. ground breaking, grand openings as well as business lunches, outings and conferences shall be exempt, provided that the value does not exceed the value in (4). Mementos such as coffee, coffee cups, candy provided the value is less than the value in (3) and that distribution is of a general nature. 
(6)  Referring gifts received to ethics board. Gifts received under unusual circumstances should be referred to the ethics board within ten days for recommended disposition. 
(7)  Representing private interests before village agencies or courts. No officer or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person, other than himself, his spouse or minor children, before any village agency or municipal court. However, a member of the village board may appear before village agencies on behalf of their constituents in the course of their duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 3-1-99) 
Sec. 2-516. - Contracts with the village. 
    No village official or employee who, in their capacity as such officer or employee participates in making of a contract in which they have a private pecuniary interest, direct or indirect, or performs in regard to that contract some function requiting exercise of discretion on his part, shall enter into any contract with the village unless, within the confines of § 946.13, Wis Stats.: 
(a)  The contract is awarded through a process of public notice and competitive biding; or 
(b)  The ethics board hereinafter created waives the requirement of this section after determining that it is in the best interest of the village to do so. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 3-1-99) 
Sec. 2-517. - Disclosure of interest in legislation. 
(a)  Any member of the village board who has a financial interest or personal interest in any proposed legislation before the village board shall disclose on the records of the village board, the nature and extent of such interest. 
(b)  Any other official or employee who has a financial interest in any proposed legislative action of the village board and who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion or recommendation to the village board shall disclose on the records of the village board the nature and extent of such interest. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 3-1-99) 
Sec. 2-518. - Campaign contributions. 
    Campaign contributions shall be reported by all candidates for village office in strict conformity with the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. Any campaign contribution tendered to or accepted by a candidate subsequent to the final statutory report shall be reported to the ethics board. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 3-1-99) 
Sec. 2-519. - Ethics board. 
    There is hereby created an ethics board consisting of three members and one alternate who shall serve without compensation unless the village board otherwise provides. The members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the village and shall not be elected officials, full-time appointed officials, village employees, nor shall they be currently serving on any other village board or commission. (Exclusion: An election poll worker would not be disqualified from serving.) Each member shall be appointed by the village president and subject to confirmation by the village board. The village attorney shall furnish the board of ethics whatever legal assistance necessary in carrying out its function. Terms of office shall be three years, except that when the initial appointments are made one member shall be appointed for one year, one for two years and one for three years. The alternate shall serve on the board when one of the members of the board is unavailable. The term of the alternate shall be for three years. The ethics board shah elect its own chairman and vice chairman. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 3-1-99) 
Sec. 2-520. - Duties of ethics board. 
(a)  The ethics board may adopt and develop written rules which shall be submitted to the village board for approval. A copy of such rules shall be on file with the village clerk. 
(b)  Any person to whom this ordinance applies, may apply to the ethics board for an advisory opinion and shall be guided by the opinion rendered. Such person shall have the opportunity to present their interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicability of provisions of the code before the advisory decision is rendered. The board's deliberations and action upon such applications shall be in meetings not open to the public. Records of the board's opinions, opinion requests and investigations of violations shall be dosed to public inspection. The board, however, may make such records public with the consent of the individual requesting the advisory opinion. In the event the board deems it necessary or appropriate, it may request an advisory opinion from the village attorney. (Note: See § 19.59(5), [Wis. Stats.]) 
(c)  The board shall investigate any complaint properly filed with it. 
(d)  The board shall accept from any person, or make upon its own motion, a verified complaint in writing which shall state the name of the official or employee alleged to have committed a violation of this chapter and which shall set forth the particulars thereof. The board shall forward within ten days a copy of the complaint to the official or employee who is accused. If no action on the verified complaint is taken by the board within 60 days of filing with the board, the complaint shall be void. 
(e)  Following the receipt or motion of verified complaint, the board may make preliminary investigations with respect to alleged violation of this chapter. No preliminary investigation of the activities of any official or employee may be initiated unless such official or employee is notified in writing prior to such investigation. The notice shall state the exact nature and purpose of the investigation, the individual's specific actions or activities to be investigated and a statement of such person's due process rights. 
(f)  If, after such investigation, the board finds that probable cause exists for believing the allegations of the complaint, it shall conduct a hearing on the matter which shall be held not more than 30 days after such finding. The board shall give the accused at least 20 days' notice of the hearing date. Such hearings shall be at open session unless the accused petitions for a hearing closed to the public. The rules of criminal evidence, including certified copies of records and documents which the board considers, shall be fully offered and made part of the record in the case. Every party shall be afforded adequate opportunity to rebut or offer countervailing evidence. 
(g)  During all stages of any investigation or proceeding conducted under this section, the accused or any persons whose activities are under investigation shall be entitled to be represented by counsel of his own choosing. 
(h)  The accused or their representative shall have an adequate opportunity to examine all documents and records to be used at the hearing under subsection (d) at a reasonable time before the date of the hearing as well as during the hearing, to bring witnesses, to establish all pertinent facts and circumstances, and to question or refute any testimony or evidence, including opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses. 
(i)  The board shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and to issue subpoenas granted other boards and commissions under § 885.01(3), Wis. Stats. 
(j)  Determination. Upon conclusion of the hearing the board shall file its decision within five days, in writing, signed by all participating board members, with findings of fact, conclusions of law concerning the propriety of the conduct of the official or employee, and if appropriate, refer the matter to the village board or other proper authority with a recommendation for suspension, removal from office or employment, or other disciplinary action. 
(k)  The affirmative vote of the board shall be required for any action taken by the board, with the exception that action taken by the board pursuant to a hearing conducted under subsection (f) shall require a two-thirds vote. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 3-1-99) 
Sec. 2-521. - Applicability of code. 
    This code shall be operative in all instances covered by provisions except when superseded by an applicable statutory provision and statutory action is mandatory or when the application of statutory action is mandatory or when the application of a statutory provision is discretionary but determined by the ethics board to more appropriate or desirable. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 3-1-99) 
Sec. 2-522. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article is invalid or unconstitutional, or if the application of this article to any person or circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions of application of this article which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 3-1-99) 
Chapters 3-5 - RESERVED 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOL BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; law enforcement, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - State statutes adopted. 
    The provisions of ch. 125, Wis. Stats., relating to the sale of alcohol beverages, exclusive of any provisions relating to the penalty to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are adopted and made a part of this section by reference. A violation of any of such provisions shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 11.03) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    School administrator means the person designated by the governing body of a school as ultimately responsible for the ordinary operations of a school. 
    School premises means premises owned, rented or under the control of a school. 
(Code 1983, § 11.29) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who commits a violation of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  Any person under 18 years of age who commits a violation of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $50.00, except that disposition in proceedings against a person under 18 years of age on the date of disposition shall be as provided by § 938.343(2), Wis. Stats. 
(c)  Any license or permit issued to a person who commits a violation of this chapter may be revoked by the court. 
(d)  A violation of this chapter by an authorized agent or employee of a licensee shall constitute a violation by the licensee. 
(Code 1983, § 11.40) 
Sec. 6-4. - Possession or drinking of malt beverages or intoxicating liquors on public ways. 
    No person shall purchase intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage by glass or in open containers except for consumption on the licensed premises, and no person shall be in possession of any glass or open container containing intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage or drink from the same on any public way, street, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, safety zone, alley or parking lot, or on and/or in any motor vehicle parked on a public way, street, alley or parking lot. 
(Code 1983, § 9.16) 
Sec. 6-5. - Possession on school grounds. 
(a)  Prohibited. Except as provided by subsection (b), no person shall possess or consume alcohol beverages: 
(1)  On school premises. 
(2)  In a motor vehicle, if a pupil attending the school is in the motor vehicle. 
(3)  While participating in school sponsored activities. 
(b)  Exceptions. Alcohol beverages may be possessed or consumed on school premises, in motor vehicles or by participants in school sponsored activities if specifically permitted in writing by the school administrator consistent with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1983, § 11.29) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 125.09(2)(b), (c), Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 6-6. - Providing to intoxicated persons. 
    No person shall procure alcohol beverages for, dispense or give away alcohol beverages to a person who is intoxicated. 
(Code 1983, § 11.35) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 125.07(2)(a), Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 6-7. - Providing to minors. 
    No person shall procure any fermented malt beverages for, dispense or give away any fermented malt beverages to any person under the legal drinking age not accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age, or procure any intoxicating liquor for, dispense or give away any intoxicating liquor to any person under the legal drinking age. 
(Code 1983, § 11.25) 
Sec. 6-8. - Free alcohol beverages in restaurants. 
    No person holding a permit to operate a restaurant may give away or permit to be given away any alcohol beverages on the restaurant premises. 
(Code 1983, § 11.36) 
Sec. 6-9. - Public place. 
    No owner, lessee or person in charge of a public place shall permit the consumption of alcohol beverages on the premises of the public place unless the person has an appropriate retail license or permit. This section does not apply to municipalities, buildings and parks owned by counties, regularly established athletic fields and stadiums, school buildings, churches, premises in a state fair park, or clubs. 
(Code 1983, § 11.37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 125.09(1), Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 6-10. - Place-to-place deliveries. 
    No person shall peddle any alcohol beverage from house to house where the sale and delivery are made concurrently. 
(Code 1983, § 11.38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 125.09(3), Wis. Stats. 
Secs. 6-11-6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administrative review, § 2-366 et seq. 

Sec. 6-61. - Required. 
    No person, except as provided by § 125.06, Wis. Stats., shall distribute, vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or wholesale, deal or traffic in or, for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any alcohol beverages, or cause the same to be done, without having procured a license as provided in this chapter, nor without complying with all the provisions of this chapter and all statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state and village applicable thereto. 
(Code 1983, § 11.04(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, § 125.04(1), Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 6-62. - Classes. 
    A license is an authorization to sell alcohol beverages issued by the village board under this article. Licenses issued under this article are described as follows: 
(1)  Class "A" fermented malt beverage license. Authorizes retail sales of fermented malt beverages in original packages, containers and bottles for consumption off the premises where sold. 
(2)  Class "B" fermented malt beverage license. Authorizes retail sales of fermented malt beverages to be consumed, whether on the premises where sold or off the premises. 
(3)  Part-time fermented malt beverage license. A license may be issued at any time for six months in any calendar year for which three-fourths of the annual license fee shall be paid, but such temporary license shall not be renewable during the calendar year in which issued. 
(4)  Temporary licenses. 
a.  Temporary class "B" licenses may be issued to bona fide clubs, to county or local fair associations or agricultural societies, to churches, lodges or societies that have been in existence for at least six months before the date of application and to posts of veterans' organizations authorizing the sale of fermented malt beverages at a particular picnic or similar gathering, at a meeting of the post, or during a fair conducted by the fair association or agricultural society. The amount of the fee for the license shall be determined by the village board but may not exceed $10.00. An official or body authorized by the village board to issue temporary class "B" licenses may, upon issuance of any temporary class "B" license, authorize the licensee to permit underage persons to be on the premises for which the license is issued. A license issued to a county or district fair licenses the entire fairgrounds where the fair is being conducted and all persons engaging in retail sales of fermented malt beverages from leased stands on the fairgrounds. The county or district fair to which the license is issued may lease stands on the fairgrounds to persons who may engage in retail sales of fermented malt beverages from the stands while the fair is being held. 
b.  Temporary "class B" retailer's licenses allow for the temporary sale of wine not more than six percent alcohol by volume at picnics, meetings or gatherings. This temporary wine license is to be applied for under a separate application and will cost an additional fee as provided in section 6-72 for the license. 
(5)  Wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license. Authorizes sales of fermented malt beverages only in original packages or containers to retailers or wholesalers, not to be consumed in or about the premises where sold. 
(6)  Retail "class A" intoxicating liquor license. Authorizes the retail sale of intoxicating liquor in original packages, containers and bottles for consumption off the premises where sold. 
(7)  Retail regular "class B" intoxicating liquor license. Authorizes retail sales of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises where sold by the glass and not in the original package or container. This definition does not apply in municipalities electing to authorize the sale of intoxicating liquor to be consumed by the glass only on the premises where sold and also authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package or container in multiples not to exceed four liters at any one time and to be consumed off the premises where sold. In either case, however, wine may be sold for consumption off the premises in the original package or otherwise in any quantity. 
(8)  Retail reserve "class B" intoxicating liquor license. A retail reserve "class B" intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the village clerk under the authority of the village board, shall permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic in intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass only on the premises so licensed and in the original package or container in multiples not to exceed four liters at any time, to be consumed off the premises except that wine may be sold in the original package or otherwise in any other quantity to be consumed off-premises. 
a.  A retail reserve "class B" license means a license that is not granted or issued on December 1, 1997 (Wisconsin Act 27) and is counted under § 125.51(4)(br), Wis. Stats., which authorizes the retail sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises as noted above. 
(9)  Manager's license. A license valid only in the village, issued at the direction of the village board to a person who has the responsibility or authority for: 
a.  Personnel management of all employees, whether or not the person is authorized to sign employment contracts; 
b.  The terms of contracts for the purchase or sale of goods or services, whether or not the person is authorized to sign the contracts; or 
c.  The daily operations of the "class B" premises. 
(10)  Operator's license. A license that authorizes a person 18 years of age or older, who is neither the licensee nor the agent of the licensee, to serve or sell alcohol beverages in any place operated under a "class A" or "class B" license or permit without the immediate supervision of the licensee or agent or a person holding an operator's license on the premises at the time. 
(11)  Class C wine license. A class C license authorizes the retail sale of wine by the glass or in the opened original container for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(Code 1983, § 11.02(8); Ord. No. 2005-05, 6-20-05) 
Sec. 6-63. - Separate license required for each place of sale. 
    A license shall be required for each stand, place, room or enclosure or for each suite of rooms or enclosures that are in direct connection or communication to each other where alcohol beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale. 
(Code 1983, § 11.04(2)) 
Sec. 6-64. - Licensee disqualifications. 
(a)  Statutory requirements. Class A and B licenses shall be issued only to persons eligible therefor under § 125.04(5) and (6), Wis. Stats. 
(b)  License quota. The number of persons and places that may be granted a retail "class B" liquor license under this article is limited as provided in § 125.51(4), Wis. Stats. 
(c)  Corporations. No corporation organized under the laws of this state, any other state or foreign country may be issued any alcohol beverage license or permit unless such corporation meets the requirements of § 125.04(6), Wis. Stats. 
(d)  Age requirement. No license under this article, except an operator's license, shall be granted to any person who has not attained the legal drinking age. Operator's licenses may be issued only to applicants who have attained the age of 18. 
(e)  Effect of revocation of license. Whenever any license has been revoked, at least 12 months shall elapse before another license shall be granted to the person whose license was revoked. 
(Code 1983, § 11.15(1), (4)-(7)) 
Sec. 6-65. - Premises disqualifications. 
(a)  Restrictions on location. No "class A" or "class B" license or permit may be issued for premises the main entrance of which is less than 300 feet from the main entrance of any public or parochial school, hospital or church, except that this prohibition may be waived by a majority vote of the village board. The distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the highway from the main entrance of the school, church or hospital to the main entrance of the premises covered by the license or permit. The prohibition in this subsection does not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Premises covered by a license or permit on June 30, 1947. 
(2)  Premises covered by a license or permit prior to the occupation of real property within 300 feet thereof by any school, hospital or church building. 
(3)  A restaurant located within 300 feet of a church or school. This subsection applies only to restaurants in which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of their gross receipts. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes, assessments and claims. No license shall be granted for any premises for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the village are delinquent and unpaid or to any person delinquent in payment of such claims to the village. 
(c)  Issuance for sales in dwellings prohibited. No license shall be issued to any person for the purpose of possessing, selling or offering for sale any alcohol beverages in any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment. 
(Code 1983, § 11.15(2), (8), (9)) 
Sec. 6-66. - Application. 
(a)  Form. Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on the forms prescribed by the state department of revenue and § 125.04(3), Wis. Stats., and filed with the village clerk/treasurer not less than 15 days prior to the granting of such license, except for temporary class "B" beer license for an event lasting less than four days which shall be submitted to the clerk at least three days prior to the granting of the license as provided by § 125.04(3)(f)3, Wis. Stats. The premises shall be physically described, including every room and storage space to be covered by the license and including all rooms joined by connecting entrances or not separated by a solid wall. Such application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee and costs of publication as provided by § 125.04(3)(g)6., Wis. Stats. Further, as a condition of granting an initial operator's license, the applicant shall submit a recent personal photograph, be fingerprinted, and sign a waiver permitting the village to secure from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the state crime information bureau a record check of the applicant. A fee of $5.00, in addition to the annual fee, shall be paid to the village by the applicant to reimburse the village for expenses incurred in administering the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Application to be notarized. Applications shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant as provided by § 887.01, Wis. Stats. 
(c)  List of licensees. By July 15 of each year, the clerk shall forward to the state department of revenue a list containing the name, address and trade name of each person holding a license issued under this section, except a picnic, manager's or operator's license. 
(d)  Subsequent changes. If any fact given in an application subsequently changes, the licensee shall file a notice in writing of such change with the clerk/treasurer within ten days. 
(e)  Authorize clerk to issue licenses. The village clerk is authorized to issue temporary class "B" beer and temporary "class B" wine licenses, also known as "picnic licenses", without prior village board approval as provided by ch. 125, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 11.05; Ord. No. 07-03, 11-5-07) 
Sec. 6-67. - Form and expiration. 
    All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of issuance, the fee paid, the name of the licensee and, unless sooner revoked, shall expire on June 30 thereafter except as otherwise provided. The village clerk/treasurer shall affix his affidavit as required by § 125.04(4), Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 11.06) 
Sec. 6-68. - Transfer. 
(a)  As to person. No license shall be transferable as to licensee except as provided by § 125.04(12), Wis. Stats. 
(b)  As to place. Licenses issued pursuant to this article may be transferred as provided in § 125.04(12), Wis. Stats. Application for such transfer shall be made on blanks furnished by the state department of revenue. Proceedings for transfer shall be had in the same manner and form as the original application. 
(Code 1983, § 11.07) 
Sec. 6-69. - Posting and care. 
    Every license issued under this article shall be posted and at all times displayed as provided in § 125.04(10), Wis. Stats. No person shall post such license or permit any other person to post it upon premises other than those mentioned in the application or knowingly deface or destroy such license. 
(Code 1983, § 11.08) 
Sec. 6-70. - Revocation and suspension. 
(a)  Procedure. Whenever the holder of any license under this article violates any portion of this article, proceedings for the revocation of such license may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure established by § 125.12, Wis. Stats.; and the provisions therein relating to granting a new license shall likewise be applicable. 
(b)  Automatic revocation. Any license issued under the provisions of this article shall stand revoked without further proceedings upon the conviction of a licensee or employee, agent or representative thereof for a second offense under this article or for a violation of ch. 125 or 139, Wis. Stats.; any other state or federal liquor or fermented malt beverage laws; or of any felony under ch. 125, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 11.09) 
Sec. 6-71. - Nonrenewal. 
    Before renewal of any license issued under this article is refused, the licensee shall be given written notice of any charges or violations against him or the reasons proposed for nonrenewal and a copy of any proposed motion for nonrenewal and shall have an opportunity to be heard from the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 11.10) 
Sec. 6-72. - Fees. 
    Unless otherwise indicated, fees for licenses issued under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license, $100.00. 
(2)  Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license, $100.00. 
(3)  Temporary. 
a.  Temporary class "B" retailer's license to sell fermented, malt beverages at picnics, meetings or gatherings, a fee as permitted by § 125.226(6), Wis. Stats. $10.00 per occurrence. 
b.  Temporary class "B" retailer's license to sell wine not more than six percent alcohol by volume at picnics, meetings or gatherings, $10.00 per occurrence. (Note: Per § 125.51(10), Wis. Stats., both types of temporary licenses (beer and wine) for the same $10.00 fee.) 
(4)  Wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license, $25.00. 
(5)  Retailer "class A" intoxicating liquor license, $250.00. 
(6)  Retailer regular "class B" intoxicating liquor license, $300.00. 
(7)  Retailer reserve "class B" intoxicating liquor license, $300.00 per licensing year, plus initial $10,000.00. 
a.  1997 Wisconsin Act 27, effective December 1, 1997, established a new alcohol beverage license called a retail reserve "class B" intoxicating liquor license, and required all who granted such a license pay an initial fee of $10,000.00 in addition to the retail regular "class B" license fees. The number of retail reserve "class B" intoxicating liquor licenses available to a municipality is determined by a series of calculations described in § 125.51(4), Wis. Stats. The village board finds that businesses such as restaurants, hotels and taverns make important contributions to the village's economy and serve important public purpose, including, but not limited to, increasing the village's property tax base, providing employment and promoting tourism. The village board also finds that the new initial fees for a retail reserve "class B" intoxicating liquor license far exceeds the actual cost of licensing the activity, and the excessive license fee deters new business and is contrary to the above-stated public purposes. It is the purpose of this section to utilize the excess revenue generated by 1997 Wisconsin Act 27 to assist new retail reserve "class B" licenses in order to achieve the important public purposes identified herein: 
1.  The village board may provide a grant to a retail reserve "class B" licensee if the conditions of subsection 2., as follows, are met. 
2.  Following the issuance of an original retail reserve "class B" license and upon application, the village board may provide a grant to the licensee in an amount not to exceed $500.00 less than the amount actually paid by licensee to the Village of Kewaskum for the new (initial) retail reserve "class B" license. Prior to awarding the grant, the village board and/or the village clerk shall make such determination that the licensee is in compliance with the approved license. If it is found not in compliance with the approved license, no economic development grant may be authorized by the village board and/or village clerk, such finding in writing and cause thereof shall be delivered to the licensee as to the village findings. 
3.  The economic development grant shall be used to improve the interior or exterior of the licensed premises and to increase the taxability of the licensed premises. 
4.  The renewal of the retail reserve "class B" license will be subject to the normal annual fee as so noted within this section. 
(8)  Operator's. See § 125.17, Wis. Stats. Regular operator's license, $25.00 (new license) per year, $20.00 (renewal license) per year; temporary operator's license, $25.00 per year; and conversion of a provisional operator's license to regular operator's license, $10.00. 
a.  Operator's licenses may be granted to individuals by the village board for the purposes of complying with §§ 125.32(2) and 125.68(2), Wis. Stats. 
b.  Operator's licenses may be issued only on written application on forms provided by the village clerk. 
c.  Regular operator's licenses shall be valid for one year and shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
d.  Provisional operator's licenses may be granted to a person enrolled in a responsible beverage server course under § 125.17(6)(a), Wis. Stats., and shall be revoked if the applicant fails successfully to complete the course in which he enrolls. The provisional operator's license will be valid for a period of 15 days following the date of the course. Proof of course completion must be provided. 
(Code 1983, § 11.01; Ord. No. 2003-03, 1-20-03; Ord. No. 2005-05, 6-20-05) 
Sec. 6-73. - Quotas on "class A" licenses. 
(a)  Retail "combination class A" fermented malt beverage and intoxicating liquor license. For the betterment of the village it is hereby determined that a quota regarding "combination class A" fermented malt beverage and intoxicating liquor licenses be limited to eight such premises or as calculated to equal one for every 500 in population. 
(b)  Retail "class A" fermented malt beverage license. For the betterment of the village it is hereby determined that a quota regarding "class A" fermented malt beverage licenses be limited to eight such premises or as calculated to equal one for every 500 in population. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 14-04, § 1, 7-21-14) 
Sec. 6-74. - Cessation of operation. 
    Any licensee issued a license to sell alcohol beverages in the village for which a quota exists limiting the number of such licenses that may be issued by the village that fails to sell, serve, or provide alcohol beverages as permitted by such license for any period of 90 consecutive days during the licensing year, may have such license revoked by the village board for that reason, and the village board may decline to renew any such license for that reason. 
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § 1, 5-21-07) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2007-01 created § 6-73. In as much as there already exists a section so numbered, to avoid duplication, said provisions have been redesignated as § 6-74. 
Secs. 6-75-6-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 6-116. - Generally. 
(a)  Gambling and disorderly conduct prohibited. Each licensed premises shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner; and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct or gambling, except as provided by state law, shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises. 
(b)  Sales by clubs. No club shall sell intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages except to members and guests invited by members. 
(c)  Health, safety and sanitation requirements. No alcohol beverage license shall be issued for any premises that does not conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the state department of industry, labor and human relations pertaining to buildings and plumbing, to the rules and regulations of the state department of health and social services applicable to restaurants and to all such ordinances and regulations adopted by the village. Each licensed premises shall be maintained and conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and proper place for the purpose for which used. 
(d)  Sales to intoxicated persons. No licensee or permittee shall sell, vend, deal or traffic in alcohol beverages to or with a person who is intoxicated. 
(e)  Solicitation of drinks prohibited. No person shall solicit or be allowed to solicit drinks on a licensed premises. 
(f)  Sales to underage persons. No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in fermented malt beverages to or with any person under the legal drinking age not accompanied by his parent, guardian or adult spouse of legal drinking age, or sell, vend, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquor to or with any person under the legal drinking age. 
(Code 1983, §§ 11.15(3), 11.16) 
Sec. 6-117. - Presence of underage person in places of sale; penalty. 
(a)  Restrictions. An underage person not accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age may not enter, knowingly attempt to enter or be on any premises for which a license or permit for the retail sale of alcohol beverages has been issued, for any purpose except the transaction of business pertaining to the licensed premises with or for the licensee or his employee. The business may not be amusement or the purchase, receiving or consumption of edibles or beverages or similar activities that normally constitute activities of a customer of the premises. This subsection does not apply to: 
(1)  An underage person who is a resident, employee, lodger or boarder on the premises controlled by the proprietor, licensee or permittee of which the licensed premises consists or is a part. 
(2)  An underage person who enters or is on a class "A" or "class A" premises for the purpose of purchasing items other than alcohol beverages. An underage person so entering the premises may not remain on the premises after the purchase. 
(3)  Hotels, drugstores, grocery stores, bowling centers, service stations, vessels, cars operated by any railroad, regularly established athletic fields, stadiums, public facilities as defined in § 125.51(5)(b)1.d., Wis. Stats., that are owned by a county or municipality or centers for the visual or performing arts. 
(4)  Premises in the state fair park, concessions authorized on state-owned premises in the state parks and state forests as defined or designated in chs. 27 and 28, Wis. Stats., and parks owned or operated by agricultural societies. 
(5)  Ski chalets, golf courses and golf clubhouses, racetracks licensed under ch. 562, Wis. Stats., curling clubs, private soccer clubs and private tennis clubs. 
(6)  Premises operated under both a class "B" and "class B" license or permit and a restaurant permit where the principal business conducted is that of a restaurant. If the premises are operated under both a class "B" and "class B" license or permit and a restaurant permit, the principal business conducted is presumed to be the sale of alcohol beverages, but the presumption may be rebutted by competent evidence. 
(7)  Premises operating under both a "class C" license and a restaurant permit. 
(8)  An underage person who enters or remains on a class "B" or "class B" premises for the purpose of transacting business at an auction or market, if the person does not enter or remain in a room where alcohol beverages are sold, furnished or possessed. 
(9)  A person who is at least 18 years of age and who is working under a contract with the licensee, permittee or corporate agent to provide entertainment for customers on the premises. 
(10)  An underage person who enters or remains on class "B" or "class B" licensed premises on a date specified by the licensee or permittee during times when no alcohol beverages are consumed, sold or given away. During those times, the licensee, the agent named in the license if the licensee is a corporation or limited liability company or a person who has an operator's license shall be on the premises unless all alcohol beverages are stored in a locked portion of the premises. The licensee shall notify local law enforcement, in advance, of the times underage persons will be allowed on the premises under this subsection. 
(11)  An underage person who enters or remains in a dance hall attached to class "B" or "class B" licensed premises if the dance hall is separate from any room where alcohol beverages are sold, if there is a separate entrance to the dance hall and if no alcohol beverages are furnished or consumed by any person in the dance hall where the underage person is present. 
(12)  An underage person who enters and remains on premises for which a temporary class "B" license is issued under § 125.26(6), Wis. Stats., if the licensee is authorized by the official village board to permit underage persons to be on the premises under § 125.26(6), Wis. Stats., and if the licensee permits underage persons to be on the premises. 
(b)  Penalties. A licensee or permittee who directly or indirectly permits an underage person to enter or be on a licensed premises in violation of subsection (a) is subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00. 
(Code 1983, § 11.26) 
Sec. 6-118. - Underage persons; prohibitions; penalties. 
(a)  Any underage person who does any of the following is guilty of a violation: 
(1)  Procures or attempts to procure alcohol beverages from a licensee or permittee. 
(2)  Unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age, possesses or consumes alcohol beverages on licensed premises. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c), any underage person not accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age who knowingly possesses or consumes alcohol beverages is guilty of a violation. 
(c)  An underage person may possess alcohol beverages in the course of employment during his working hours if employed by any of the following: 
(1)  A brewer. 
(2)  A fermented malt beverages wholesaler. 
(3)  A permittee other than a class "B" or "class B" permittee. 
(4)  A facility for the production of alcohol fuel. 
(5)  A retail licensee or permittee under the conditions specified in §§ 125.32(2) or 125.68(2), Wis. Stats., or for delivery of unopened containers to the home or vehicle of a customer. 
(6)  A campus, if the underage person is at least 18 years of age and is under the immediate supervision of a person who has attained the legal drinking age. 
(d)  Any person violating subsection (a) is subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  For a first violation, a forfeiture of not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00, suspension of the person's operating privilege as provided under § 343.30(6)(b)1., Wis. Stats., participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under subsection (g) or any combination of these penalties. 
(2)  For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, either a forfeiture of not less than $300.00 nor more than $500.00, suspension of the person's operating privilege as provided under § 343.30(6)(b)2., Wis. Stats., participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under subsection (g) or any combination of these penalties. 
(3)  For a violation committed within 12 months of two previous violations, either a forfeiture of not less than $500.00 nor more than $750.00, revocation of the person's operating privilege under § 343.30(6)(b)3., Wis. Stats., participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under subsection (g) or any combination of these penalties. 
(4)  For a violation committed within 12 months of three or more previous violations, either a forfeiture of not less than $750.00 nor more than $1,000.00, revocation of the person's operating privilege under § 343.30(6)(b)3., Wis. Stats., participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under subsection (g) or any combination of these penalties. 
(e)  Any person violating subsection (b) is subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  For a first violation, a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00, suspension of the person's operating privilege as provided under § 343.30(6)(b)1., Wis. Stats., participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under subsection (g) or any combination of these penalties. 
(2)  For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, either a forfeiture of not less than $200.00 nor more than $300.00, suspension of the person's operating privilege as provided under § 343.30(6)(b)2., Wis. Stats., participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under subsection (g) or any combination of these penalties. 
(3)  For a violation committed within 12 months of two previous violations, either a forfeiture of not less than $300.00 nor more than $500.00, revocation of the person's operating privilege under § 343.30(6)(b)3., Wis. Stats., participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under subsection (g) or any combination of these penalties. 
(4)  For a violation committed within 12 months of three or more previous violations, either a forfeiture of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00, revocation of the person's operating privilege under § 343.30(6)(b)3., Wis. Stats., participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under subsection (g) or any combination of these penalties. 
(f)  For purposes of subsection (d) or (e), all violations arising out of the same incident or occurrence shall be counted as a single violation. 
(g)  Supervised work program. 
(1)  A supervised work program ordered under subsection (d) or (e) shall be administered by the county department under § 46.215 or 46.22, Wis. Stats., or by a community agency approved by the court. The court shall set standards for the supervised work program within the budgetary limits established by the county board of supervisors. The supervised work program may provide the person with reasonable compensation reflecting the market value of the work performed or it may consist of uncompensated community service work. Community service work ordered under subsection (d) or (e), other than community service work performed under a supervised work program, shall be administered by a public agency or nonprofit charitable organization approved by the court. The court may use any available resources, including any community service work program, in ordering the child to perform community service work under subsection (d) or (e). 
(2)  The supervised work program or other community service work shall be of a constructive nature designed to promote the person's rehabilitation, shall be appropriate to the person's age level and physical ability, and shall be combined with counseling from a member of the staff of the county department, community agency, public agency or nonprofit charitable organization or other qualified person. The supervised work program or other community service work may not conflict with the person's regular attendance at school. The amount of work required shall be reasonably related to the seriousness of the person's offense. 
(h)  When a court revokes or suspends a person's operating privilege under subsection (d) or (e), the department of transportation may not disclose information concerning or relating to the revocation or suspension to any person other than a court, district attorney, county corporation counsel, city, village or town attorney, law enforcement agency or the person whose operating privilege is revoked or suspended. A person entitled to receive information under this subsection may not disclose the information to any other person or agency. 
(i)  A person who is under 18 years of age on the date of disposition is subject to § 938.344, Wis. Stats., unless proceedings have been instituted against the person in a court of civil or criminal jurisdiction after dismissal of the citation under § 938.344(3), Wis. Stats. 
(j)  Assessment; treatment and education program. 
(1)  In this subsection, "defendant" means a person found guilty of violating subsection (a) or (b) who is 18, 19 or 20 years of age. 
(2)  After ordering a penalty under subsection (d) or (e), the court, with the agreement of the defendant, may enter an additional order staying the execution of the penalty order and suspending or modifying the penalty imposed. The order under this subsection shall require the defendant to do any of the following: 
a.  Submit to an alcohol abuse assessment that conforms to the criteria specified under § 938.547(4), Wis. Stats., and that is conducted by an approved treatment facility. The order shall designate an approved treatment facility to conduct the alcohol abuse assessment and shall specify the date by which the assessment must be completed. 
b.  Participate in an outpatient alcohol abuse treatment program at an approved treatment facility, if an alcohol abuse assessment conducted under subsection (j)(2)a recommends treatment. 
c.  Participate in a court-approved alcohol abuse education program. 
(3)  If the approved treatment facility, with the written informed consent of the defendant, notifies the agency primarily responsible for providing services to the defendant that the defendant has submitted to an assessment under subsection (j)(2)a and that the defendant does not need treatment or education, the court shall notify the defendant of whether or not the penalty will be reinstated. 
(4)  If the defendant completes the alcohol abuse treatment program or court-approved alcohol abuse education program, the approved treatment facility or court-approved alcohol abuse education program shall, with the written informed consent of the defendant, notify the agency primarily responsible for providing services to the defendant that the defendant has complied with the order; and the court shall notify the defendant of whether or not the penalty will be reinstated. If the court had ordered the suspension of the defendant's operating privilege under subsection (d) or (e), the court may order the secretary of transportation to reinstate the operating privilege of the defendant if he completes the alcohol abuse treatment program or court-approved alcohol abuse education program. 
(5)  If an approved treatment facility or court-approved alcohol abuse education program, with the written informed consent of the defendant, notifies the agency primarily responsible for providing services to the defendant that the defendant is not participating in the program or that the defendant has not satisfactorily completed a recommended alcohol abuse treatment program or an education program, the court shall hold a hearing to determine whether the penalties under subsection (d) or (e) should be imposed. 
(Code 1983, § 11.27) 
Sec. 6-119. - Record of purchaser's age. 
    Every retail alcohol beverage licensee or permittee may cause a book to be kept for the purposes of this division. The licensee or permittee, or his employee, shall require any person who has shown documentary proof which substantiates that the person is of legal drinking age to sign the book if the person's age is in question. The book shall show the date of the purchase of alcohol beverages, the identification used in making the purchase, the address of the purchaser, and the purchaser's signature. 
(Code 1983, § 11.27(3)) 
Sec. 6-120. - Closing hours. 
    Premises for which a wholesale or retail liquor or fermented malt beverage license has been issued may remain open for the conduct of their regular business but may not sell during the following hours: 
(1)  If a wholesale license, between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except on Saturday when the closing hour shall be 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  If a retail "class A" license, between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. for sale of intoxicating liquor. 
(3)  If a retail "class A" license, between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. for sale of fermented malt beverages. 
(4)  If a retail "class B" license, between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays. On January 1, premises operating under a "class B" license are not required to close. No package, container or bottle sales may be made after midnight. 
(5)  Hotels and restaurants the principal business of which is the furnishing of food or lodging to patrons, bowling centers, indoor horseshoe pitching facilities, curling clubs, golf courses and golf clubhouses may remain open for the conduct of their regular business; but no intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages shall be sold during prohibited hours. 
(Code 1983, § 11.17; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 2-20-12) 
Chapters 7-9 - RESERVED 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 46; nuisances, ch. 58; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Strays generally, § 170.01 et seq., Wis. Stats.; animals distrained, § 172.01 et seq., Wis. Stats.; dogs generally, § 174.001 et seq., Wis. Stats. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Animals and fowl not to run at large. 
    No person having in his possession or under his control any animal or fowl shall allow the same to run at large within the village. 
(Code 1983, § 9.07; Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-2. - Noisy animals or fowl. 
    The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl which by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises which annoys or disturbs others within the village is prohibited. 
(Code 1983, § 10.05(10); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 5-21-12) 
Sec. 10-3. - Records required by kennels, pet shops; licensing. 
(a)  No person operating a kennel or pet shop or other person selling pets within the village shall sell or place such animals without first preparing accurate and complete records of such sale. Such records are necessary in tracing the location and movement of animals suspected of rabies exposure. 
(b)  The annual kennel fee shall be as set from time to time by the village board for any person owning four or more dogs, plus as set from time to time by the village board for each dog in excess of six. A conditional use permit is required for first issuance of a kennel license. 
(1)  All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors. 
(2)  Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent escape. 
(Code 1983, §§ 12.01(7), 12.04(10); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-4. - Vicious animals. 
    Any pet determined to be a fierce or vicious animal may be seized and impounded under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of not less than 14 days. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(8)(a); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-5. - Dangerous animals regulated. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. It is hereby declared that this regulation of dangerous animals is a matter of public interest pertaining to the health, safety and welfare of residents of and visitors to the Village of Kewaskum, and that existing laws are inadequate to deal with the threat to public health and safety posed by dangerous animals. It is further declared that the owning, keeping or harboring of dangerous animals is a public nuisance. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Animal means mammals, reptiles and birds. 
(2)  At large means that the dog /cat/animal is off premises of the owner or keeper and not accompanied and under the control of a person of suitable age and able to control the dog/animal. 
(3)  Dangerous dog as used in this ordinance means any dog which: 
a.  Because of its aggressive nature, training or characteristic behavior, is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to humans, and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in the manner required by this ordinance; 
b.  When provoked, chases or approaches a person in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack on public or private property; 
c.  Has caused less than serious injuries to humans, livestock or domestic animals after the owner was notified or should have known the dog previously injured or caused injury to a person, livestock or domestic animal; 
d.  Has been found to be dangerous by the Municipal Court of the Village of Kewaskum in a trial or hearing upon a charge of harboring a dangerous animal. 
(4)  Department shall mean the police department. 
(5)  Impoundment shall mean the confinement of an animal in a department-approved, supervised facility such as a veterinarian's kennel, commercially operated kennel, or the Washington County Humane Society. 
(6)  Owner shall mean the owner, keeper, custodian or person having charge, harboring or having the care, custody, whether temporarily or permanent, of an animal. 
(7)  Permit shall include the otherwise unregulated right to keep an animal currently not covered by a requirement for a village license or permit. 
(8)  Premises of the owner shall be defined as the residence of said owner, including the attached property surrounding said residence that is leased or owned by said owner, but not including any common area, park or recreational property jointly owned or leased by the members of a homeowners' or tenants' association. 
(9)  Serious injury is defined as broken bones or wounds that require sutures. 
(10)  Subcommittee shall mean a subcommittee of the protection and public safety committee consisting of three members appointed by the village president and ratified by the village board. 
(11)  Vicious dog as used in this ordinance means any dog: 
a.  With a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack or cause serious injury to human beings or domestic animals; 
b.  Which without provocation, attacks or bites, or has attacked or bitten a human being or domestic animal causing serious injury; 
c.  Owned or harbored primarily or in part for the porous of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting; 
d.  Which has been found to be vicious by the Municipal Court of the Village of Kewaskum in a trial or hearing upon a charge of harboring a vicious animal. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, §§ 174.05-174.10, Wis. Stats. 
(c)  Impoundment-Biting or attacking animal. 
(1)  The department shall have the power to summarily and immediately impound an animal whenever the department has reasonable grounds pursuant to subsection (d) to believe that the animal is a dangerous animal, pending the results of an investigation by the department. Any law enforcement officer or duly authorized department employee may enter and inspect private property to enforce the provision of this section. The owner of the animal shall be liable to the village for the costs and expenses of impounding and keeping said animal, unless the department fails to declare the animal dangerous or the department determination is ultimately overturned by the protection and public safety committee or the Municipal Court. 
(2)  An animal, impounded pursuant to this section, may be returned to the owner upon payment of all outstanding village fees and charges, including costs and expenses of impounding the animal, when the investigation is completed. 
(3)  In lieu of impoundment, if the animal is currently immunized against rabies, or if the animal species is at low risk for transmitting this or other diseases, the department may permit the animal to be confined at the owner's residence provided that the owner complies with conditions set forth by the department. (Refer to section 10-62 of the Municipal Code.) 
(4)  The owner or custodian of an animal confined under subsection (3) above shall immediately notify the department if said animal is loose, unconfined, has attacked or bitten or injured another animal or has attacked, bitten or injured a human being or has died. The animal shall not be sold or given away during the impoundment period. 
(d)  Determination. The department shall investigate situations in which there are reasonable grounds to believe an animal is dangerous. Reasonable grounds to believe an animal is dangerous are that the animal: 
(1)  Has attacked, bitten or injured another animal or human being engaged in a lawful activity; or 
(2)  Has without provocation and off the property of its owner, chased, confronted or approached a person in a menacing fashion such as would put an average person in fear of attack; or 
(3)  Has been trained for fighting or attack and is being handled, kept or maintained in a manner that causes or should cause an owner to know that it potentially poses a threat to public health and safety; or 
(4)  Has acted in any manner that causes or should cause an owner to know that the animal is a threat to public health and safety. 
(e)  Dangerous animal, declared. The department, after considering appropriate evidence, may declare any animal to be a dangerous animal (refer to subsection (d) above). The department shall make a reasonable attempt to personally notify the owner of the pendency of the department's investigation and shall notify the owner in writing of its determination. Mailing a copy of the determination to the owner's last known address and posting in accordance with approved department policy shall satisfy this notice requirement. 
(f)  Dangerous animal, disposition. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor or keep any animal declared by the department to be dangerous, except as allowed in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Any animal declared by the department to be a dangerous animal shall be humanely destroyed, removed from the village or placed under restrictions as set forth in department policies. The police chief or his designee shall issue an order authorizing the destruction, removal or restriction of the animal within two days after the time for appeal as provided in subsection (h) below has passed without notice of appeal being filed. 
(3)  Any animal declared by the department to be dangerous, if not already impounded by the department, shall be immediately surrendered to the department upon the order of the police chief or his designee, and it is the duty of the department to contact the Washington County Humane Society to take up and impound any such animal. 
(g)  Subsequent determination and penalty. 
(1)  The department may make a new determination if an owner fails to comply with the terms, conditions or restrictions imposed in subsection (f)(2) above. 
(2)  The failure of any person to comply with any term, condition or restriction imposed by the department is a violation of this section. 
(h)  Subcommittee review of determination. The owner or any person aggrieved by a department determination declaring any animal to be a dangerous animal may appeal such determination to the protection and public safety committee by filing a notice of appeal stating the grounds therefor with the chief of police within seven days of the date of mailing of the department determination under subsection (e) above. The protection and public safety committee shall schedule a hearing on whether to affirm, conditionally affirm or reject the department determination within 32 days, but not sooner than five days, and shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner, bite or attack victims and their representatives, if any, departmental witnesses and other interested parties of such hearing and the opportunity to present evidence and testimony to the subcommittee. The subcommittee shall, within a reasonable period of time after the hearing, issue its decision in writing and serve a copy of the same by first class mail upon the owner and all parties requesting the same. 
(i)  Appeals to municipal court. Any person aggrieved by a determination of the protection and public safety committee under subsection (h) above may appeal such action on a dangerous animal determination to municipal court by writ of certiorari within 20 days of notification of such final action by mailing of the decision under subsection (h). 
(j)  Prosecution. It is the intent of this section that any investigation or determination under this section shall not prohibit the village from prosecuting the same owner for other animal control violations relating to the same animal or other animal. 
(k)  Forfeiture. 
(1)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. Each and every day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(2)  The failure or neglect of any person to comply with any lawful order of the department issued pursuant to this section is a violation of this section. 
(l)  Severability. In the event that any subsection of this section shall be declared or adjudged by a court or competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other subsections of this section, which shall be in full force and effect as if the said subsection(s) were not originally a part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 3-15-99; Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Secs. 10-6-10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-11, adopted May 19, 2003, amended Ch. 10 by adding provisions pertaining to birds and wild animals to Art. II. At the editor's discretion, to better reflect the contents of Art. II, the title has been changed from "Dogs and Cats" to "Dogs, Cats and Other Animals". 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-41. - Licenses. 
(a)  Required. No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog or cat more than five months of age without complying with the provisions of §§ 174.05-174.09, Wis. Stats., relating to the listing, licensing and tagging of dogs and cats. 
(b)  Cats. Every owner of a cat five months or older shall annually, within 30 days from the date such cat becomes five months of age, pay his cat license tax and obtain a license therefor at the office of the village clerk. The annual cat license fee shall be as set from time to time by the village board, for each neutered male cat and spayed female cat; and as set from time to time by the village board for each male or female cat. The fee shall be half these amounts if such cat becomes five months of age after July 1. 
(c)  Dogs. Every owner of a dog five months or older shall annually pay his dog license tax and obtain a license therefor at the office of the village clerk. The annual dog license fee for neutered males and spayed females shall be as set from time to time by the village board. The annual license fee for each male and unspayed female dog shall be as set from time to time by the village board. 
(1)  Late fees. The village treasurer shall assess and collect a late fee of $5.00 from every owner of a dog, cat or other licensed animal five months of age or over if the owner failed to obtain a license prior to April 1 of each year, or within 30 days of acquiring ownership of a licensable dog, cat or other licensed animal or if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the dog, cat or other animal reached the age. Said late fee shall be charged in addition to the required fee. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of the license the owner shall present evidence that current immunizations against rabies or other needed vaccinations have been received. An animal is considered to be unlicensed if a valid license tag is not attached to a collar which is kept on the animal. 
(Code 1983, §§ 12.01(1), (5), (6), 12.04(1); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
State Law reference- Dog tax generally, § 174.05, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 10-42. - Not to run at large. 
    The owner or keeper of any dog, cat or animal licensed or unlicensed, shall not permit the dog, cat or animal to run at large in the village. A dog, cat or animal shall be deemed to be at large unless under the control of a person by means of a chain, rope or cord of sufficient strength to control the actions of such dog, cat or animal or such personal presence and attention as will reasonably control the conduct of such dog, cat or animal. Any police officer within the village shall cause any dog, cat or animal running at large to be seized, impounded or restrained. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(2); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-43. - Restrictions on keeping of dogs. 
    No person within the village shall own, harbor or keep any dog that: 
(1)  Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway in the village. 
(2)  Assaults or attacks any person. 
(3)  Habitually barks or howls to the annoyance of any person. 
(4)  Kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal. 
(5)  Is known to be infected with rabies. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(4); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-44. - Birds and animals. 
(a)  Protection of birds and animals. No person shall, within the Village, catch, kill wound, worry or molest any bird, destroy or injure the nest or eggs of any bird, nor shall any person permit any dog or animal belonging to them, or in their charge, custody or control, to chase, worry, molest, destroy or catch any animal or bird within the village excepting rats and mice. Any animal or bird that is deemed to be a nuisance may be dealt with as prescribed by the chief of police or Washington County Humane Society. This section does not prohibit the village nor other proper authority to manage wildlife within the municipal boundaries of the village. 
(b)  Keeping of fowl (birds) and livestock (animals) regulated. No person shall keep, raise or have in their possession any live fowl or livestock within the village Limits, erect or maintain and use on any lot or parcel of land within the village any yard, coop, structure or other building for the purpose of keeping or housing any type of fowl and livestock, including but not limited to horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, pigs (swine), hoofed animals, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guinea hens or pheasants, pigeons or other domestic fowl and livestock. Except, however, the keeping of racing or show pigeons. 
(c)  Running at large. The owner or keeper of one or more horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, pigs (swine), chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guinea hens or pheasants, pigeons or other domestic fowl and livestock shall prevent them from running at large in any part of the village. 
(d)  Clarification. This section shall not apply to any lands zoned agricultural within the village. 
(e)  Miniature pot bellied pigs. A "miniature pot bellied pig" shall mean a cloven-hoofed animal, also known as a Vietnamese, Chinese or Asian pot bellied pig which is domesticated, does not exceed 22 inches in height at the shoulders and does not exceed 150 pounds in weight. The provisions of subsection (b) do not apply to or include the species Sus scrofia, more commonly known as a miniature pot bellied pig. Owners or keepers of miniature pot belly pigs in the village must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Owners and keepers of a miniature potbellied pig shall pay a license fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and obtain a license in the same manner as is provided for licensing dogs under §§ 174.05 and 174.07, Wis. Stats., respectively, as well provided for by sedtion 10-41(c)(1), (2) above. 
(2)  Miniature potbellied pigs must be spayed or neutered prior to receiving the license required by section 10-44(e)(1) above. Breeding of miniature potbellied pigs is prohibited in the village. 
(3)  Miniature potbellied pigs are to be inoculated for erysipelas, pneumonia, rhinitis and rabies (once every three years). 
(4)  Only one miniature potbellied pig shall be kept within or upon any parcel or dwelling unit within the village limits. The owner or keeper of a pig shall properly water and feed it at regular intervals and shall keep the premises occupied by it in a sanitary condition. 
(5)  No owner or keeper of any miniature potbellied pig shall permit or allow the pig to "run at large within the village" as that term is defined in section 10-05(b)(2). 
(f)  Inspection of premises. Premises used in the keeping or maintaining of one or more dogs, cats, birds and animals shall be open to inspection of the village officials or their duly designated representatives at all times. 
(g)  "Waste products and manure. 
(1)  The owner or keeper in charge of any fowl or animal shall not permit solid fecal matter of such fowl or animal to be deposited on any street, alley or other public or private property unless such material is immediately removed by the owner or keeper in charge. 
(2)  The owner or keeper in charge of private property shall not permit solid fecal matter of fowl and animals kept on private property to accumulate on the private property, including the space between the street or curb and the sidewalk adjacent to such property, for a period in excess of 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Secs. 10-45-10-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WILD ANIMALS 

Sec. 10-60. - Wild animals; prohibition on keeping. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or have in their possession or under their control within the village any poisonous reptile or other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile, any dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities specifically: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or have under their possession or under their control within the village any of the following animals: 
a.  All poisonous animals and reptiles including rear-fang snakes. 
b.  Apes: Chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (hylobates); gorillas (Gorilla); orangutans (Pongo); ans siamangs (Symphalangus). 
c.  Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus). 
d.  Bears (Ursidae). 
e.  Cheetahs (Acinonyx). 
f.  Crocodilians (Crocodilia and Alligators) 30 inches in length or more. 
g.  Constrictor snakes, six feet in length or more. 
h.  Coyotes (Canis latrans) Carnivore/Canidae: (wolves and foxes). 
i.  Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonia). 
j.  Game cocks and other fighting birds. 
k.  Hippopotami (Hippopotamidea). 
l.  Hyenas (Hyaenidea). 
m.  Jaguars (Panthera onca). 
n.  Leopards (Panthera pardus). 
o.  Lions (Panthera leo). 
p.  Lynxes (Lynx). 
q.  Marsupials (Kangaroos and Opossums). 
r.  Monkeys, old world (Cercopithecidae). 
s.  Mustelids (Skunks, Weasels, Otters and Badgers) (except domesticated Ferret). 
t.  Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions and panthers. 
u.  Ocelots (Felis pardalis). 
v.  Rhinoceroses (Rhinocero tidae). 
w.  Snow leopards (Panthera uncia). 
x.  Tigers (Panthera tigris). 
y.  Viverrids (Mongooses, Civets and Genets). 
z.  Poisonous insects. 
(b)  Pet shops. The provisions of subsection (a) above shall not apply to licensed pet shops, zoological gardens, circuses, professional animal acts and wildlife exhibits if: 
(1)  Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the village. 
(2)  All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors. 
(3)  Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent escape. 
(4)  No person lives within 100 feet of the quarters in which the animals are kept. 
(c)  Exceptions. "Wild animal" does not include captive-bred species of caged birds, rodents, turtles, fish, and nonpoisonous, nonconstricting snakes. 
(Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Secs. 10-61-10-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CANINE HYBRIDS 

Sec. 10-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Wolf/dog hybrid means any cross-breed resulting from the mating of a domesticated dog and a wolf, coyote, jackal or dingo or resulting from the mating of any wolf/dog hybrid and another wolf/dog hybrid or a domesticated dog. As used in this definition: 
(1)  The term "canine animal" includes all members of the family canidae except foxes. 
(2)  The term "domesticated dog" means Canis familiaris. 
(3)  The term "wolf" includes both Canis lupus and Canis niger. 
(4)  The term "coyote" means Canis latrans. 
(5)  The term "jackal" means Canis aureus. 
(6)  The term "dingo" means Canis dingo. 
(Ord. No. 95-12, § 12.10(3), 12-11-95; Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-67. - Requirements for keeping. 
(a)  All of the provisions of this article and the provisions of this chapter relating to dogs, with the exceptions of differences in this division of the provisions relating to quarantine of animals that have bitten a person, shall likewise apply to wolf/dog hybrids. If a wolf/dog hybrid bites a person, the animal shall be sacrificed pursuant to § 95.21(4)(b), Wis. Stats. 
(b)  The owner of any wolf/dog hybrid and the owner of any property on which a wolf/dog hybrid is kept shall see that the animal is at all times confined according to the minimum requirements of this division. 
(c)  A wolf/dog hybrid may be kept only in an enclosure that meets the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  The enclosure shall be constructed of woven, galvanized after weaving, wire, securely anchored by stainless steel or copper rings. Such enclosure shall be not less than 500 square feet in area plus 250 square feet for each additional canine animal kept therein and shall be the location in which the animal is primarily kept. 
(2)  The enclosure shall extend to a height of not less than eight feet, and shall be surrounded from ground level to a height of four feet by quarter-inch galvanized mesh screening. 
(3)  The base and top of the enclosure shall be constructed of securely anchored wire mesh and extend inward a distance of not less than two feet at the top of each enclosure at an angle of not less than 45 degrees, and at the base shall be covered by at least four inches of crushed stone. 
(4)  The enclosure shall be kept locked with a case-hardened lock at all times when the animal is unattended, and the enclosure shall have double entrance gates or doors so as to prevent an animal from escaping past an open gate or door. 
(d)  A wolf/dog hybrid may be transported only if confined in a secure, locked container with no openings not covered with mesh screen. This subsection does not prohibit the walking of such animals on a leash, subject to the requirements of local leash laws. 
(e)  In order to ensure compliance with this division, no person in possession of any registration papers, certificate, advertisement or other written evidence by which the bloodlines of a canine animal found within this village or its ownership might be ascertained may refuse to produce the same for the inspection of any law enforcement, conservation or public health officer or court upon demand. 
(f)  The foregoing provisions shall not apply to doctors of veterinary medicine in temporary possession of such animals in the ordinary course of their practice. 
(g)  No person shall willfully or negligently release or abandon a wolf/dog hybrid in this village. 
(h)  Any person who violates this division shall be subject to section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 95-12, §§ 1, 2, 4-9, 12-11-95; Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-68. - Licenses. 
    The annual license fee for canine hybrids shall be as follows: 
(1)  For neutered males and spayed females, as set from time to time by the village board. 
(2)  For males and unspayed females, as set from time to time by the village board. 
(Ord. No. 95-12, § 12.01(6)(a), 12-11-95; Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Secs. 10-69-10-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 10-90. - Enforcement authority. 
    The police department may promulgate and adopt rules and regulations deemed necessary to cope with an outbreak of rabies in the village. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(5)(b); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-91. - Notification of animal bite. 
    Any person having knowledge that a dog, cat or pet regulated in this article has bitten any person shall within 24 hours notify the police department giving, if possible, the name and address of the owner and circumstances under which the bite occurred. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(7); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-92. - Rabies vaccination required. 
    Every owner of any dog or cat four months of age or older shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies every three years by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(5)(a); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
State Law reference- Rabies vaccinations generally, § 95.21, Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 10-93. - Duties of veterinarian, certificate, tag. 
(a)  Each veterinarian shall inoculate the pets described in this division with appropriate rabies vaccine and shall, at the time of such inoculation, complete a certificate of rabies vaccination, which shall include the owner's name and address, description of pet, date of vaccination, and manufacturer's name and serial number of the vaccine administered, and shall present such certificate to the owner of such pet, forward a copy of such certificate to the village clerk, and retain a copy of such certificate. 
(b)  Each veterinarian shall, at the time of such inoculation, present a tag of durable material to the owner of such pet. Such tags shall be numbered serially, contain the year of issuance, and shall be attached to the collar of such pet as evidence of rabies vaccination. 
(c)  The owners of any dog or cat shall present the veterinarian's rabies certificate and tag required by subsection (a) to the village clerk before such official shall issue an annual dog or cat license as required by the village. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(6); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-94. - Quarantine. 
    Any domestic animal defined in § 174.001, Wis. Stats., suspected of being afflicted with rabies, which has bitten any person causing an abrasion of the skin on such person, shall be seized and impounded under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian for not less than 14 days. If, upon examination by such veterinarian, the animal has no signs of rabies at the end of such impoundment, it shall be disposed of according to law. If such animal has not been vaccinated as required in this subdivision, it shall be inoculated, as required in this subdivision, prior to release to its owner. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(8)(c); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-95. - Domestic animal without tag. 
    Any domestic animal found not wearing a valid vaccination tag shall be impounded under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian for not less than three days, and may be reclaimed by the owner of the animal upon compliance with the rabies vaccination requirement. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(8)(b); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-96. - Domestic animal bitten by rabid animal. 
    Any domestic animal not vaccinated as required in this division that is known to have been bitten by a rabid animal shall be seized, and upon consent of the owner of such domestic animal, immediately destroyed. If the owner does not consent to the disposal of the affected pet, such animal shall be impounded in strict isolation and quarantined in suitable impoundment facilities under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a minimum of six months. If such animal has been vaccinated as required in this division, it shall be revaccinated immediately and impounded for 30 days following such revaccination. If the owner of a domestic animal known to have been bitten by a rabid animal refuses to comply with these regulations, such animal shall be immediately destroyed. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(8)(d); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-97. - State law operative. 
    Nothing in this division shall affect the operation of § 95.21, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(8)(f)) 
Secs. 10-98-10-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Tagged or untagged at-large dogs subject to impoundment, § 174.042, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 10-121. - Enforcement authority. 
(a)  The police department shall enforce the seizure, confinement and impounding of animals. 
(b)  Any police officer who has acted pursuant to subsection (a) shall notify the owner personally or through the mail, if such owner be known to the officer or can be ascertained with reasonable effort. Such officer shall read the "lost and found" column of the local newspapers having general circulation in the village to determine whether a dog or cat is a lost dog or cat, and shall promptly communicate with the advertiser thereof if such be found. If such owner be unknown or cannot be ascertained, the officer may post written notice in three public places in the village, giving a description of the dog or cat, stating where it is impounded and the conditions for its release within 48 hours, Sundays excepted, after such officer shall have taken the cat or dog into his possession. If after seven days the owner does not claim the cat or dog, such officer or any party designated by the chief of police shall dispose of or arrange for the disposal of the dog or cat in a proper and humane manner. Every officer who has received a dog or cat under this subsection shall keep a record of the dog or cat, describing the dog or cat with reasonable certainty of identification and listing the name and address of the party to whom the dog or cat was delivered or the manner in which the dog or cat was otherwise disposed of. In addition, any person to whom the dog or cat is delivered must sign a statement to that effect giving his name, address and the date of delivery or receipt of the dog or cat. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(2)(b), (9); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-122. - Conditions of release. 
    The conditions of release for a licensed dog or cat shall be the reimbursement to the village clerk for any expenditures the village has incurred by impounding the dog or cat. The conditions for the release of an unlicensed dog or cat are the purchase of a license plus the reimbursement to the village clerk for the expenditures incurred by the village in impounding the dog or cat. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(3); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 10-123. - Payment of fees. 
    The owner of an impounded animal shall bear and be responsible for the payment of all impoundment fees, all expenses incurred during such impoundment, and all medical expenses incurred by any person by reason of injuries sustained by a fierce or vicious animal or by a suspected or known rabid animal. 
(Code 1983, § 12.04(8)(e); Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-03) 
Chapters 11-13 - RESERVED 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-306 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 42; shoreland-wetland zoning, ch. 74; solid waste, ch. 78; plan for storage of solid waste required before issuance of certain building permits, § 78-45; excavations in streets and sidewalks, § 82-76 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Enforcement of building codes generally, § 62.17, Wis. Stats.; inspection warrants generally, § 66.122, Wis. Stats.; manufactured building code generally, § 66.302, Wis. Stats.; one- and two-family building code generally, § 101.60 et seq., Wis. Stats. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Title and scope. 
(a)  This chapter shall be known and cited as the "municipal building code" and shall be construed to secure its expressed intent and to ensure public safety, health and welfare insofar as they are dependent upon building construction. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall govern the design, construction, alteration, demolition, and moving of all buildings and structures. 
(Code 1983, §§ 30.00, 30.01) 
Sec. 14-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words and phrases not otherwise defined in this chapter shall have the meanings accepted by common usage. 
    Accessory building means a detached building, not used as a dwelling unit but incidental to that of the main building and which is located on the same lot. Accessory building does not mean farm building. 
    Addition means any new construction whereby an existing building or structure, or building or structure in the course of construction, is increased in area or cubic content. 
    Adjoining lot line means the line between adjoining lots, plots of land, or parcels of land of different or same ownership. 
    Alley means a municipal right-of-way that affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties. A street shall not be considered an alley. 
    Allowable stress means the specified maximum permissible stress of a material expressed in load per unit area. 
    Alteration means a substantial change or modification other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to systems involved within a dwelling. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms occupied or intended or designed to be occupied by one family for living or sleeping purposes. 
    Approved means an approval of the state department of industry, labor and human relations, or its authorized representative. Approval is not to be construed as an assumption of any legal responsibility for the design or construction of the dwelling or building component. 
    Area as applied to dimensions, means the maximum horizontal projected area of a building, structure, room, apartment or open space, not including overhangs. 
    Attic means a space, not suitable for human occupancy, under the roof and above the ceiling of the topmost story of any building or part thereof. 
    Balcony means a landing or porch projecting from the wall of a building. 
    Basement means that portion of a dwelling between floor and ceiling below or partly below and partly above grade but so located that the vertical distance from the grade to the floor below is more than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling. 
    Bearing means that area of any structural unit of a building or structure in direct contact with the supports that receive the loads from that unit. 
    Building means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building component means any subsystem, subassembly, or their system designed for use in or as part of a structure, which may include structural, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems and other systems affecting health and safety. 
    Building, existing, means a building erected prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or one for which a legal building permit has been issued. 
    Building inspector means the officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this article or his regularly authorized deputy. Same as "building official." 
    Building system means plans, specifications and documentation for a system of manufactured buildings or for a type or a system of building components, which may include structural, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and variations submitted as part of the building system. 
    Ceiling height means the clear vertical distance from the finished floor to the finished ceiling. 
    Chimney means one or more vertical, or nearly so, passageways or flues for the purpose of conveying flue gases to the atmosphere. 
    Chimney connector has the same meaning as "smoke pipe." 
    Closed construction means any building, building component, assembly or system manufactured in such a manner that it cannot be inspected before installation at the building site without disassembly, damage or destruction. 
    Coefficient of performance (COP) is the ratio of the rate of net heat removal or net heat output to the rate of total energy input, expressed in consistent units and under designated rated conditions. 
    Combustion efficiency is expressed in percentage and is defined as 100 percent minus stack losses in percent of heat input. Stack losses are losses due to sensible heat in dry flue gas, losses due to incomplete combustion, and losses due to sensible and latent heat in moisture formed by combustion of hydrogen in the fuel. 
    Compliance assurance program means the detailed system documentation and methods of assuring that manufactured dwellings and dwelling components are manufactured, stored, transported, assembled, handled and installed in accordance with this article. 
    Cooling load is the rate at which heat must be removed from the space to maintain a selected indoor air temperature during periods of design outdoor weather conditions. 
    Cubic contents means the actual cubic space enclosed within the outer surfaces of the outside or enclosed walls, outer surfaces of the roof and the finished surfaces of the lowest floors of a building or structure. Cubic space does not include the contents of courts open to the sky. 
    Dead load means the vertical load due to all permanent structural and nonstructural components of the building such as joists, rafters, sheathing, finishes and construction assemblies such as walls, partitions, floors, ceilings and roofs, and systems. 
    Degree day, heating. Degree days are figured as the number of degrees the mean outdoor temperature deviates from 65°F each day during the heating season. For example, if on December 15 the low temperature was +30°F and the high temperature was +50°F, the mean temperature would equal (30° + 50°) ° 2 = 40°; therefore, 65° - 40° = 25 degree days. 
    Department means the state department of industry, labor and human relations. 
    Detached building means any building not physically connected to the dwelling. 
    Dwelling means a building designed or used or intended to be used as a residence or place of abode. 
    Energy efficiency ratio is the ratio of net cooling capacity in Btu's per hour to total rate of electric input, in watts, under designated operating conditions. 
    Equipment, as specifically regulated by this chapter, includes heating, cooling, air conditioning, and ventilating systems; plumbing and sanitary systems; electric light and power systems; telephone, electronic and radio signal and annunciator systems; dry cleaning, dyeing and washing machines; elevators and dumbwaiters; gas pipe systems; standpipes; sprinkler systems; fire protection apparatus, fire extinguishers, and pumps, oil burners, stokers, and conveyors; refrigerating systems; devices, machinery and apparatus of every description; furnaces, boilers; high- or low-pressure steam systems; gasoline pumps; all movable or portable containers of every description; all air pressure or other tanks; and all other self-contained systems used in conjunction with buildings or structures. 
    Established grade means the grade of the street as established by ordinance at the centerline of the street. 
    Family means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, and includes a group of not more than two persons (excluding servants) who need not be related by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit. 
    Farm operation is as defined in § 102.04(3), Wis. Stats. 
    Farm premises means the area is planted and cultivated. The term "farm premises" does not include greenhouses, structures or other areas unless used principally for the production of food or farm products. 
    Farm products means agricultural, horticultural, and arboricultural crops. Animals considered within the definition of agricultural include livestock, bees, poultry, furbearing animals, and wildlife or aquatic life. 
    Farming means the operation of a farm premises owned or rented by the operator. 
    Fire district means zoned areas of the village within which wood frame construction is limited except as otherwise provided for in this article. 
    Firebox means that part of the fireplace used as the combustion chamber. 
    Floor area means the net area of any floor space enclosed by exterior walls, fire walls, or absolute fire separation exclusive of open spaces. 
    Footings means that portion of the foundation of a structure that spreads and transmits loads directly to the soil or the piles. 
    Foundation means the supporting structure as a whole, below the lowest floor upon which rests the superstructure of a building or structure. 
    Garage means a building or portion thereof in which a motor vehicle containing gasoline, distillate, or other volatile flammable liquid in its tank is stored, repaired or kept. 
    Garage, private means a building or a portion of a building in which only motor vehicles used by the tenants of the building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept. 
    Gas appliance means any furnace or heater, air conditioner, refrigerator, stove having an electrical supply cord, dishwasher, dryer, swimming pool heater, or other similar appliance or device used in a dwelling or dwelling unit that uses a gaseous fuel for operation. 
    Grade, building, means elevation of the ground adjacent to the structure. 
    Grade, lumber means the classification of lumber in regard to stress and grade. 
    Habitable room means any room used for sleeping, living, dining or for food preparation, excluding such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, hallways, laundries, storage spaces, utility rooms and similar spaces. 
    Hearth means the floor of the fireplace. The inner part of the hearth is located within the fireplace opening. The outer part of the hearth is outside the fireplace opening. 
    Heated space is any space provided with a supply of heat to maintain the temperature of the space to at least 50°F. Heat supplied by convection from the energy-consuming systems may satisfy this requirement in basements if the energy-consuming systems are not insulated. 
    Heating load is the probable heat loss of each room or space to be heated, based on maintaining a selected indoor air temperature during periods of design outdoor weather conditions. The total heat load includes the transmission losses of heat transmitted through the wall, floor, ceiling, glass or other surfaces; the infiltration losses or heat required to warm outdoor air that leaks in through cracks and crevices, around doors and windows, or through open doors and windows; or heat required to warm outdoor air used for ventilation. 
    Independent inspection agency means any person certified by the department to perform certified inspections under this article. 
    Initial construction means the date of issuance of the state uniform building permit. 
    Installation means the assembly of a manufactured building on site and the process of affixing a manufactured building to land, a foundation, footing or an existing building. 
    Intermittent ignition device means an ignition device actuated only when a gas appliance is in operation. 
    Landing means the level portion of a stairs located within a flight of stairs or located at the base and foot of a stairs. 
    Lintel means the beam or girder placed over an opening in a wall that supports the wall construction above. 
    Listed and listing means equipment or building components tested by an independent testing agency and accepted by the department. 
    Live load means all imposed, transient, moving loads, or loads due to impact, and including movable partitions in a building or structure other than dead loads. 
    Loft means an upper room or floor open to the floor below. 
    Lot means a parcel of land in a single ownership, occupied or to be occupied by not more than one principal or main building and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are required by this or other codes, and having its principal frontage upon a street. 
    Lot line means a line dividing one lot, plot of land, or parcel of land from an adjoining lot, plot of land, or parcel of land. 
    Manufacture means the process of making, fabricating, constructing, forming or assembling a product from raw, unfinished, semifinished or finished materials. 
    Manufactured building means any structure or component thereof intended for use as a dwelling and: 
(1)  Is of closed construction and fabricated or assembled on site in manufacturing facilities for installation, connection or assembly and installation at the building site; or 
(2)  Is a building of open construction made or assembled in manufacturing facilities away from the building site for installation, connection, or assembly and installation on the building site and for which certification is sought by the manufacturer. 
The term does not include a building of open construction not subject to subsection (2) above. A single- or double-width mobile home is not considered a manufactured home and is not subject to this article. 
    Masonry. 
(1)  Hollow unit is a masonry unit in which the net cross-sectional area parallel to the bearing face is less than 75 percent of the gross cross-sectional area. 
(2)  Solid unit means masonry units having net cross-sectional areas of 75 percent or more of the gross cross-sectional area. 
    Multiwythe wall is a masonry wall composed of two or more wythes of masonry units tied or bonded together. 
    Nonconforming building means a lawfully existing building, premises, structure, use, materials, or equipment that does not conform to the requirements of this article. 
    Occupancy or use means the purpose for which a building, structure, equipment, materials or premises or part thereof is used or intended to be used as regulated by this article. 
    Open construction means any building, building component, assembly or system manufactured in such a manner that it can be readily inspected at the building site without disassembly, damage or destruction. 
    Owner means any person having a legal or equitable interest in the dwelling. 
    Perm is the designation for the unit permeance, which is a substitute for the unit, one grain per (hour) (square foot) (inch of mercury vapor pressure difference). 
    Pilaster means a projection of masonry or a filled cell area of masonry for the purpose of bearing concentration loads or to stiffen the wall against lateral forces. 
    Principal building means a single main building or structure on a lot for specific use or occupancies. 
    Recreational dwelling unit means a permanent structure occupied occasionally or seasonally solely for recreational purposes and not used as a principal residence. 
    Repair means the reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance. The word "repair" or "repairs" shall not apply to any change of construction. 
    Resistance, thermal (R), is a measure of the ability to retard the flow of heat. The R-value is the reciprocal of a heat transfer coefficient, expressed by U (R = 1/U). The higher the R-value of a material, the more difficult it is for heat to flow through the material. 
    Required means mandatory by the provisions of this article. 
    Room means a space within a building or structure completely enclosed with walls, partitions, floor and ceiling except for necessary openings for light, ventilation, ingress and egress. 
    Shall, as used in this article, is mandatory; same for "must." 
    Single-wythe wall means a masonry wall consisting of one unit thickness. 
    Smoke chamber means that part of a fireplace that acts as a funnel to compress the smoke and gases from the fire so that they will enter the chimney above. 
    Smoke pipe means a connector between the solid or liquid fuel-burning appliance and the chimney. 
    Square footage of a building means the actual area in square feet enclosed by the exterior perimeter of the building walls on each separate floor level. 
    Stairway means one or more flights of steps, and the necessary platforms of landings connecting them, to form a continuous passage from one elevation to another. 
    Step means a unit consisting of one riser and one tread, alone or in series. 
    Story means that portion of a building located above the basement, between the floor and the ceiling. 
    Stove means a nonportable solid fuel-burning, vented, nonducted heat-producing appliance located in the space that it is intended to heat. This definition does not include cooking appliances. 
    Stovepipe means the same as "smoke pipe." 
    Strain means a change in the physical shape of a material caused by stress. 
    Stress means internal resistance to an external force expressed in load per unit area; stresses acting perpendicular (compression or tension) to the surface, shear stresses acting in the plane of the surface, or bending stresses causing curving. 
    Structural analysis means a branch of the physical sciences that uses the principles of mechanics in analyzing the impact of loads and forces and their effect on the physical properties of materials in the form of internal stress and strain. 
    Structure means anything constructed, erected and framed of component parts, and which is fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground for any occupancy or use whatsoever, excluding fencing. 
    Thermal transmittance (U) is the coefficient of heat transmission or thermal transmittance (air to air) expressed in units of Btu per (hour) (square foot) (degree F). It is the time rate of heat flow. The U-value applies to combinations of different materials used in series along the heat flow path and also to single materials that comprise a building section, and includes cavity air spaces and surface air films on both sides. The lower the U-value of a material, the more difficult it is for heat to flow through the material. 
    Throat, fireplace, means the slot-like opening above the firebox through which flames, smoke and other products of combustion pass into the smoke chamber. 
    Unusual construction means any construction methods or materials not covered in this article. 
    Vent means a vertical flue or passageway to vent fuel-burning appliances. 
    Vent connector means a connector between a fuel-burning appliance and the chimney or vent. 
    Wall means and includes the following: 
(1)  Bearing wall means a wall that supports any load in addition to its own weight. 
(2)  Cavity wall means a wall built of masonry units or of plain concrete, or a combination of these materials, so arranged as to provide an air space within the wall, and in which the facing and backing (inner and outer parts) of the wall are tied together with metal ties. 
(3)  Curtain wall means a nonbearing wall between columns or piers. 
(4)  Exterior wall means an outer enclosing wall of a building or structure. 
(5)  Faced wall means a wall in which the masonry facing and backing are so bonded as to exert common action under load. 
(6)  Nonbearing wall means a wall that supports no load other than its own weight. 
(7)  Panel wall means a nonbearing wall in skeleton construction, built between columns or piers and wholly supported at each story. 
(8)  Partition means an interior vertical structure usually of light construction serving to enclose an area, room, space or division, extended from floor to ceiling, and having wall surfaces of approved materials as permitted by this article. 
(9)  Retaining wall means a wall used to resist laterally imposed pressures. 
(10)  Veneered wall means a wall having masonry facing attached to the backing but not so bonded as to exert common action under load, also having outer facing for the purpose of providing ornamentation, protection or insulation. 
    Window means a glazed opening in an exterior wall, including glazed portions of doors, within a conditioned space. 
    Wisconsin insignia means a device or seal approved by the department to certify compliance with this article. 
(Code 1983, § 30.14) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-3. - Violations. 
(a)  No person shall erect, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in violation of any provisions of this chapter, or cause, permit or suffer any such violations to be committed. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $1.00 or more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for a period of not less than one day or more than six months, or until such forfeiture and costs are paid. It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate the violation as expeditiously as possible, and each day that such violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  If in any action a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the building inspector constitute a defense. 
(Code 1983, § 30.51) 
Sec. 14-4. - Application of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. 
    The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, chs. 20 through 25, inclusive, and all amendments thereto, are hereby made a part of this chapter by reference and shall apply to all one- and two-family dwellings and alterations and additions thereto, the initial construction of which was commenced after the effective dates of the various chapters of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. A copy of that code is on file in the office of the village clerk/treasurer. 
(Code 1983, § 30.025) 
Sec. 14-5. - Application of Wisconsin Uniform Building Code. 
    All buildings and structures erected, altered, repaired, moved or demolished that are used or designed to be used for the purpose defined in this chapter shall comply in full with the requirements of this chapter. 
(1)  Zoning laws. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to repeal, modify or constitute an alternative to any lawful zoning regulations. 
(2)  New buildings. The construction requirements of the Wisconsin Uniform Building Code shall apply to all buildings not covered under section 14-4. 
(3)  Existing buildings. The Wisconsin Uniform Building Code shall also apply to buildings and conditions described in this section: 
a.  An existing building to be occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling, which building was not previously so occupied. 
b.  An existing structure that is altered or repaired, when the cost of such alterations or repair during the life of the structure exceeds 50 percent of the equalized value of the structure, such value to be determined by the assessor. 
c.  Additions and alterations, regardless of cost, made to an existing building shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. The provisions of subsection (4) of this section shall also apply. 
d.  Whenever more than 25 percent of the roof covering of a building is replaced in any 12-month period, all roof covering shall be in conformity with applicable sections of this chapter. 
e.  Any addition or alteration, regardless of cost, made to a building shall be made in conformity with applicable sections of this chapter. 
(4)  Alterations and repairs. The following provisions shall apply to buildings altered or repaired: 
a.  Alterations. When not in conflict with any regulations, alterations to any existing building or structure, accommodating a legal occupancy and use but of nonconforming type of construction, that involve either the structural members of floors or roofs, beams, girders, columns, bearing or other walls, room, heating and air conditioning systems, arrangement, light and ventilation, changes in location of exit stairways or exits, or any or all of the above, such existing construction shall be made to conform to the minimum requirements of this chapter applicable to such occupancy and use and given type of construction. 
b.  Repairs. Repairs for purposes of maintenance or replacements in any existing building or structure that do not involve the structural portions of the building or structure, or that do not effect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection, or exterior aesthetic appearance and that do not increase a given occupancy and use shall be deemed minor repairs. 
c.  When alterations not permitted. When an existing building or structure, which for any reason whatsoever does not conform to the regulations in this chapter, has deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to an extent greater than 50 percent of the equalized value of the building or structure, no alterations or moving of such building or structure shall be permitted. Any such building or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and welfare and shall be ordered vacated and thereafter demolished and debris removed from the premises. 
d.  When required. When any of the structural members of any building or structure have deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to less than their required strength, the owner of such a building or structure shall cause such structural members to be restored to their required strength, failing in which the building or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and shall be vacated; and thereafter no further occupancy or use of the same shall be permitted until the regulations of this chapter are complied with. 
e.  Extent of deterioration. The amount and extent of deterioration of any existing building or structure shall be determined by the building inspector. 
f.  Use of unsanitary building. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use or permit the occupancy or use of any building or structure that is unsanitary or dilapidated, or deteriorated, or out of repair, thereby being unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use until the regulations of this chapter have been complied with. 
(Code 1983, § 30.03) 
Sec. 14-6. - Construction site sanitation facilities. 
    The village shall require all construction sites to have placed for the health and welfare of those present portable sanitation facilities. An exception is allowed if public access is provided to a sanitation facility within 300 feet of the construction. 
(Code 1983, § 14.09) 
Sec. 14-7. - Codes adopted by reference. 
    Wisconsin Administrative Code Building and Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning, requirements. Wisconsin Commercial Building Code Chs. SPS 360-366. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 7-20-15) 
Secs. 14-8-14-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-56. - Department of building inspection created. 
    There is hereby created the department of building inspection. 
(Code 1983, § 30.04) 
Sec. 14-57. - Building inspector. 
(a)  Head of building inspection department. The building inspector appointed by the village shall act as head of the building inspection department. 
(b)  Duties. The building inspector is vested with the authority and responsibility to enforce all laws controlling safe building construction. He shall make periodic inspections of existing public buildings to determine their safety. He shall make inspections at the site of buildings damaged by any cause whatsoever to determine the safety of buildings affected thereby. 
(c)  Rights. The building inspector or his authorized agent shall have the power and authority at all reasonable hours, for any proper purpose, to enter upon any public or private premises and make inspection thereof and to require the production of the permit for any building, plumbing, electrical or heating work being done or the required license therefor. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises to the building inspector or agent thereof while in the performance of their duties. 
(d)  Records. There shall be kept in the department of building inspection a record of all applications for building permits in a book for such purpose, and each permit shall be regularly numbered in the order of its issue. Also, a record showing the number, description and size of all buildings erected, indicating the kind of materials used and the cost of each building and aggregate cost of all buildings in the various classes, shall be kept. There shall be kept in the department of building inspection a record of all inspections made, of all removal and condemnation of buildings, and a record of all fees collected showing the date of their receipt. The building inspector shall make a written annual report to the village board relative to these matters. 
(Code 1983, § 30.04) 
Sec. 14-58. - Permits-Generally. 
(a)  Permits required. No building or structure or any part thereof shall be built, enlarged, altered or demolished within the village or moved into, within or out of the village except as hereinafter provided unless a permit therefor shall first be obtained by the owner or his agent from the building inspector. Permits are required for the following: 
(1)  Building. 
(2)  Air conditioning. 
(3)  Wrecking or razing. 
(4)  Heating. 
(5)  Moving of buildings. 
(6)  Occupancy. 
(7)  Reroofing and residing. 
(8)  Other permits as required by the village. 
(b)  Application for permits. Application for a permit required by this section shall be made in writing upon a blank form to be furnished by the building inspector and shall state the name and address of owner of the building and the owner of the land on which it is to be erected and the name and address of the designer, and shall set forth a legal description of the land on which the building is to be located, the location of the building, the house number thereof, and such other information as the building inspector may require. With such application, there shall be submitted to the building inspector three complete sets of plans, specifications and three copies of a survey. 
(1)  Survey. The survey shall be prepared and certified by a surveyor registered by the state; shall be made in no case prior to one year prior to the issuance of a building permit; and shall bear the date of the survey. The certified survey shall also show the following: 
a.  Location and dimensions of all buildings on the lot, both existing and proposed. 
b.  Dimensions of the lot. 
c.  Dimensions showing all setbacks to all buildings on the lot. 
d.  Proposed grade of proposed structure, to village datum. 
e.  Grade of lot and of road opposite lot. 
f.  Grade and setback of adjacent buildings. If adjacent lot is vacant, submit elevation of nearest buildings on same side of road. 
g.  Type of monuments at each corner of lot. 
h.  Watercourses or existing drainage ditches. 
i.  Seal and signature of surveyor. 
(2)  Plans and specifications. All plans shall be drawn to a scale not less than one-quarter inch per foot, on paper or cloth in ink, or by some other process that will not fade or obliterate, and shall disclose the existing and proposed provisions for water supply, sanitary sewer connections and surface water drainage. All dimensions shall be accurately figured. Drawings that do not show all necessary detail shall be rejected. A complete set of plans for residential construction shall consist of: 
a.  All elevations. 
b.  All floor plans. 
c.  Complete construction details. 
d.  Fireplace details (three-quarters inch per foot) showing cross section of fireplace and flues. 
e.  Plans of garage when garage is to be built immediately, or location of garage when it is to be built at a later date. 
All plans shall remain on file in the office of the building inspector until at least one year after the completion of the building, after which time the building inspector may return the same to the owner, may keep them for public record, or may destroy them. 
(c)  Approval of plans and issuance of permits. If the building inspector determines that the plans submitted for a one- or two-family dwelling substantially conform to the provisions of this code and other legal requirements, an approval shall be issued. The plans shall be stamped "conditionally approved" by the building inspector or certified independent inspection agency. One copy shall be returned to the applicant and one copy shall be retained by the building inspector. The conditions of approval shall be indicated by a letter or on the permit. All conditions of the approval shall be met during construction. 
(d)  Waiver of some requirements. At the option of the building inspector, plans, data, specifications and survey need not be submitted with an application for permit to execute minor alterations and repairs to any building, structure or equipment, provided the proposed construction is sufficiently described in the application for a permit. 
(e)  Seal of registered engineer or architect. All plans, data and specifications for the construction of any building or structure or for any construction in connection with existing buildings and structures, other than one- and two-family residences, containing more than 50,000 cubic feet, total volume, submitted with an application for a permit, shall bear the seal of the registered architect or registered engineer. The plans shall also be stamped as approved as required by the state department of industry, labor and human relations. Such building or structure shall be constructed under the supervision of an architect or engineer, who shall be responsible for its erection in accordance with the approved plans. No permit shall be granted for such structure unless such construction will be under the supervision of an architect or engineer, as required by statute. A written statement to this effect shall be filed by the architect or engineer, with the building inspector with the application for a permit. 
(f)  Drainage. 
(1)  Grading of lots. The plans shall show the present and proposed grades of the lot on which it is proposed to erect the building for which a building permit is sought and of the immediately adjoining property in sufficient detail to indicate the surface water drainage before and after the completion of grading. No permit shall be issued if the erection of the building and the proposed grades shall unreasonably obstruct the natural flow of water from the surface of adjoining property or obstruct the flow of any existing ravine, ditch, drain or stormwater sewer draining neighboring property, unless suitable provision is made for such flow by means of an adequate ditch or pipe, which shall be shown on the plans, and shall be constructed so as to provide continuous drainage at all times. 
(2)  Stormwater drains. No dwelling shall be erected nor shall existing provisions for conveyance of water from the roof of any dwelling be altered or replaced unless provision is made to convey water from the roof of the dwelling in such a manner that such water will not, directly or indirectly, pass thence into the sanitary sewer system. No stormwater or surface water drains may be connected with the sanitary sewer system, whether installed above or below the surface of the ground. 
(g)  Fees. Before receiving a building permit, the owner or his agent shall pay the fee established by the village board and on file in the office of the building inspector. In applying the provisions of this chapter in respect to new work, existing buildings, alterations and repairs, the physical value of the work shall be determined by the building inspector on the basis of current costs, or as otherwise provided in the local ordinances. 
(Code 1983, § 30.05(1)-(5), (8)) 
Sec. 14-59. - Same-Issuance and revocation. 
(a)  Building inspector to issue permit. 
(1)  The state uniform building permit shall be issued if the requirements for filing and fees are satisfied and the plans have been conditionally approved. The permit shall expire 24 months after issuance if the dwelling exterior has not been completed. The village shall send a copy of the application to the department. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered in any respect that involves any of the above-mentioned ordinances, laws or orders, or that involves the safety of the building, except with the written consent of the building inspector filed with such application. 
(2)  In case adequate plans are presented, the building inspector, at his discretion, may issue a permit for a part of the building before receiving the plans and specifications of the entire building. It shall be unlawful to commence work on any building or alteration before the building permit has been issued, with the exception of foundations and footings as set out in subsection (4) of this section. The issuance of a permit upon the plans and specifications shall not prevent the building inspector from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of any ordinances of the village or laws of the state or lawful orders issued pursuant thereto. 
(3)  For the construction of buildings requiring approval of the state department of industry, labor and human relations, no permit shall be issued until such approved plans are received by the building inspector. 
(4)  Construction may begin on footings and foundations prior to the issuance of the state uniform building permit where a permit to start construction is obtained. Upon submittal of the application for a permit to start construction, a plot plan, complete footing and foundation information including exterior grading, and a fee, the department or the village enforcing this chapter may issue a permit to start construction of the footings and foundation. The issuance of a permit to start construction shall not influence the approval or denial of the application. 
(5)  § 66.036, Wis. Stats., prohibits issuance of building permits by counties, cities, towns and villages for structures requiring connection to a private domestic sewerage treatment and disposal system unless such system satisfies all applicable requirements and all necessary permits for such system have been obtained. 
(b)  Inspector may revoke permits. 
(1)  The building inspector may revoke any permit, certificate of occupancy, or approval issued under the regulations of this chapter and may stop construction or use of approved new materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices or appliances for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Whenever there is a violation of any regulation of this chapter or of any other ordinance, law or lawful orders or statute relating to the same subject matter. 
b.  Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes dangerous to life or property. 
c.  Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provisions of the application for permit, or of the permit. 
d.  Whenever in the opinion of the building inspector there is inadequate supervision provided on the job site. 
e.  Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been made in the application for permit, plans, drawings, data specifications, or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance of the permit or approval was based. 
f.  Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an approval or occupancy given by the building inspector for the use of any new materials, equipment, methods of construction devices or appliances. 
(2)  Pursuant to § 62.17(2), Wis. Stats., the notice revoking a permit, certificate of occupancy, or approval shall be in writing and may be served upon the applicant for the permit, owner of the premises, and his agent, if any, and on the person having charge of construction. 
(3)  Pursuant to § 62.17(2), Wis. Stats., a revocation placard shall also be posted upon the building, structure, equipment or premises in question by the building inspector. 
(4)  After the notice is served upon the persons as aforesaid and posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any construction operation whatsoever on the premises, and the permit which has been so revoked shall be null and void, and before any construction or operation is again resumed, a new permit, as required by this chapter, shall be procured and fees paid therefor, and thereafter the resumption of any construction or operation shall be in compliance with the regulation of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 30.05(6), (7)) 
Sec. 14-60. - Same-Failure to obtain. 
    No person shall commence work prior to obtaining a permit therefor. Double fees shall be charged if work is commenced prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Code 1983, § 30.52) 
Sec. 14-61. - Same-Posting. 
    The Wisconsin uniform building permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the dwelling site. 
(Code 1983, § 30.06) 
Sec. 14-62. - Inspections. 
(a)  Notification. Upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, required inspections of the construction of any buildings, structures or equipment shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Inspection to determine if the location on the premises is in compliance with approved certified lot or plot plan of the premises and the terms of the permit. 
(2)  Inspection to determine if the construction of footings as to thickness, width, placing of reinforced steel, if required, and foundation walls is in compliance with approved plans, data and the terms of the permit. Recertification of the footings and foundation location and elevation shall be provided to the building inspector prior to pouring concrete. 
(3)  Inspection of all wall, floor and roof framing, fire stopping, and bracing when completed, and of all pipes, chimneys, ventilating and other ducts, shafts and equipment when in place, but before any such work is covered, enclosed or concealed by other construction. 
(4)  Inspection prior to laying concrete for basement floor to inspect subgrade, drain tile, and forms. 
(5)  Upon the completion of any building, structure, equipment or construction for which a permit was issued and before the same is occupied or used, a final inspection shall be made by the building inspector, and until such building, structure, or equipment is in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and terms of the permit, no occupancy shall be maintained. If the construction conforms to the requirements of this chapter a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)  Coordinated inspections. All provisions of the laws and regulations of the village, and of legally adopted rules of local fire and health officials in respect to the operation, equipment, housekeeping, fire protection, handling and storage of flammable materials, liquids and gases, and the maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions of use in occupancy in all buildings shall be strictly enforced by the administrative officials to whom such authority is delegated. Whenever inspection by any authorized enforcement officer discloses any violation of the provisions of this chapter, or of any other rules, regulations or laws, he shall immediately notify the administrative officer having jurisdiction of the violation. 
(c)  Certified report. The building inspector may require a certified report of all required inspections as regulated by this chapter from the registered architect or registered engineer supervising the construction of any building, structure or equipment requiring their supervision. Such certified report shall state in detail that all construction work has been executed in accordance with all of the regulations of this chapter, approved plans, specifications, terms of the permit; and further that such construction work was executed in accordance with accepted architectural and engineering standard procedures. 
(Code 1983, § 30.09) 
Sec. 14-63. - Stop work order. 
    Whenever the provisions of this chapter or of the plans approved thereunder are not complied with, a stop work order shall be served on the owner or his representative and a copy thereof posted at the site of the construction. Such stop work order shall not be removed except by written notice of the building inspector after satisfactory evidence has been supplied that the violation has been corrected. 
(Code 1983, § 30.10) 
Sec. 14-64. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Inspections. 
(1)  The building inspector shall make a final inspection of all new buildings, additions and alterations. If no violations of this chapter or any other ordinance are found, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy, stating the purpose for which the building is to be used. 
(2)  No building or part thereof shall be occupied until such certificate has been issued, nor shall any building be occupied in any manner which conflicts with the conditions set forth in the certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Use discontinued. 
(1)  Whenever any building or portion thereof is being used or occupied contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the building inspector shall order such use or occupancy discontinued and the building or portion thereof vacated, by notice served on any person using or causing such use or occupancy to be continued; and such person shall vacate such building or portion thereof within ten days after receipt of the notice or make the building or portion thereof comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Any building, structure or premises, or any part thereof, vacated or damaged by any cause whatsoever so as to jeopardize public safety or health shall not be occupied or used under an existing certificate of occupancy or without the same until an application has been filed and a new certificate of occupancy issued. 
(c)  Change. It shall be unlawful to change the use of any building, structure, premises or part thereof without first obtaining from the building inspector an approval of such change in the occupancy or use, and a certificate of occupancy therefor. 
(d)  Hardship. The building inspector shall have the authority and power to permit the occupancy of any building or structure in the village, prior to issuance of an occupancy certificate, in all such cases of hardship as in his judgment and discretion warrant occupancy before final stage of completion as set forth in this chapter. Before granting such permission, the building inspector shall first examine the premises and determine if it is safe and sanitary. The building inspector shall determine the time within which such building or structure can be completed. Such time should not exceed 120 days. 
(Code 1983, § 30.11) 
Sec. 14-65. - Board of appeals, or other assigned board or commission. 
    Any person feeling himself aggrieved by any order or ruling of the building inspector may appeal from such ruling to the board of appeals within 20 days after written notice of such ruling shall have been delivered to him. Such appeal is to be in writing, setting forth the order appealed from, and the respects in which the person feeling himself aggrieved claims that the order or ruling is erroneous or illegal. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the clerk, who shall thereupon notify the building inspector of the appeal, and the appeal shall be heard at the next meeting of the board of appeals. The board of appeals, after consideration thereof, shall affirm, reverse or modify the ruling as is just in the premises. The ruling or order of the inspection shall be enforced until changed by the board of appeals. 
(Code 1983, § 30.09(4)) 
Secs. 14-66-14-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOVING BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 

Sec. 14-121. - Generally. 
    No person shall move any building or structure upon any of the public rights-of-way of the village without first obtaining a permit therefor from the building inspector and upon the payment of the required fee. Every such permit issued by the building inspector for the moving of a building shall designate the route to be taken, the conditions to be complied with, and shall limit the time during which the moving operations shall be continued. 
(Code 1983, § 30.07(1)) 
Sec. 14-122. - Moving damaged buildings. 
    No building shall be repaired, altered or moved within or into the village that has deteriorated or has been damaged by any cause, including such moving and separation from its foundation and service connections in case of moved buildings, to 50 percent or more of its equalized value; and no permit shall be granted to repair, alter or move such building within or into the village. 
(Code 1983, § 30.07(2)) 
Sec. 14-123. - Continuous movement. 
    The movement of buildings shall be a continuous operation during all the hours of the day, and day by day and at night, until such movement is fully completed. All of such operations shall be performed with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street crossing or intersection, or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant or any other public facility. Lights shall be kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during the night. 
(Code 1983, § 30.07(3)) 
Sec. 14-124. - Street repair. 
    Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall, within one day after the building reaches its destination, report that fact to the building inspector, who shall thereupon in the company of the director of public works inspect the streets and highways over which the building has been moved and ascertain their condition. If the removal of the building has caused any damage to any street or highway, the person to whom the permit was issued shall forthwith place them in as good repair as they were before the permit was granted. On the failure of the permittee to do so within ten days thereafter to the satisfaction of the village, the village shall repair the damage done to such streets and hold the person obtaining such permit and the sureties on his bond responsible for the payment of same. 
(Code 1983, § 30.07(4)) 
Sec. 14-125. - Conformance with code. 
    No permit shall be issued to move a building within or into the village and to establish it upon a location within the village until the building inspector has made an investigation of such building at the location from which it is to be moved, and is satisfied from such investigation that the building is in a sound and stable condition and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of this chapter in all respects. A complete plan of all further repairs, improvements and remodeling with reference to such building shall be submitted to the building inspector; and he shall make a finding of fact to the effect that all such repairs, improvements and remodeling are in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, and that when same are completed, the building as such will so comply with this chapter. If a building is to be moved from the village to some point outside the boundaries of the village, the provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans and specifications for proposed alterations to such building may be disregarded. 
(Code 1983, § 30.07(5)) 
Sec. 14-126. - Bond. 
(a)  Before a permit is issued to move any building over any public way in this village, the party applying therefor shall give a bond to the village in a sum to be fixed by the building inspector, which shall not be less than $1,000.00, which bond shall be executed by a corporate surety or two personal sureties to be approved by the village board or designated agent conditioned upon, among other things, the indemnification to the village for any costs or expenses incurred by it in connection with any claims for damages to any persons or property, and the payment of any judgment together with the costs and expenses incurred by the village in connection therewith, arising out of the removal of the building for which the permit is issued. 
(b)  Unless the building inspector, upon investigation, shall find it to be a fact that the excavation exposed by the removal of such building from its foundation shall not be so close to a public thoroughfare as to permit the accidental falling therein of travelers or the location, nature and physical characteristics of the premises and the falling into such excavation of children under 12 years of age unlikely, the bond required by subsection (a) shall be further conditioned upon the permittee's erecting adequate barriers and within 48 hours filling in such excavation or adopting and employing such other means, devices or methods approved by the building inspector and reasonably adopted or calculated to prevent the occurrences set forth herein. 
(Code 1983, § 30.07(6)) 
Sec. 14-127. - Insurance. 
    The building inspector shall require in addition to the bond indicated in section 14-126(a), public liability insurance covering injury to one person in the sum of not less than $100,000.00 and for one accident in a sum of not less than $200,000.00, together with property damage insurance in a sum of not less than $50,000.00, or such other coverage as deemed necessary. 
(Code 1983, § 30.07(7)) 
Sec. 14-128. - Consideration of applications for permits. 
(a)  No permit to move a building shall be issued unless it has been found as a fact by the plan commission by at least a majority vote after an examination of the application for the permit, which shall include exterior elevations of the building and accurate photographs of all sides and views of the same; and if it is proposed to alter the exterior of the building, plans and specifications of such proposed alterations and after a view of the building proposed to be moved and of the site at which it is to be located, that the exterior architectural appeal and functional plans of the building to be moved or moved and altered, will not be so at variance with either the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the buildings already constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood, or the character of the applicable district established by the zoning ordinances of the village, or any ordinance amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values of the neighborhood within the applicable district. If the applicant proposes to alter the exterior of the building after moving the building, he shall submit with his application papers complete plans and specifications for the proposed alterations. Before a permit shall be issued for a building to be moved and altered, the applicant shall give a bond to the village's plan commission, which shall not be less than $1,000.00 to be executed in the manner provided in section 14-126 to the effect that he will within a time to be set by the plan commission complete the proposed exterior alterations to the building in the manner set forth in his plans and specifications. This bond shall be in addition to any other bond or surety that may be required by other applicable ordinances of the village. No occupancy permit shall be issued for the building until the exterior alterations proposed to be made have been completed. 
(b)  Upon application being made to the building inspector, he shall request a meeting of the plan commission to consider applications for moving permits that he has found comply in all respects with all other ordinances of the village. The plan commission may, if it desires, hear the applicant for the moving permit in question and/or the owner of the lot on which it is proposed to locate the building in question, together with any other persons, either residents or property owners, desiring to be heard, giving such notice of hearing as they may deem sufficient. Such hearing may be adjourned for a reasonable length of time, and within 48 hours after the close of the hearing, the plan commission shall, in writing, make or refuse to make the finding required by this section and file it in the office of the clerk, who shall send a copy of it to the building inspector. 
(Code 1983, § 30.07(8)) 
Secs. 14-129-14-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RAZING BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Enforcement of building codes generally, § 62.17, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 14-161. - Demolition; removal; razing of buildings. 
(a)  The building inspector is hereby authorized to act for the village under the provisions of § 66.05, Wis. Stats., relating to the razing of buildings and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. The village clerk/treasurer is authorized to place the assessment and collect the special tax as therein provided. 
(b)  Before a building can be demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service connections within the building, such as water, electric, gas, sewer, and other connections. A permit to demolish or to remove a building shall not be issued until it is ascertained that service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. Excavations shall be filled with solid fill to match lot grade within five days of removal of the structure. Any excavation shall be protected with appropriate fences, barriers and/or lights. 
(Code 1983, § 30.08) 
Secs. 14-162-14-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOUSING CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- One- and two-family housing generally, § 101.60 et seq., Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 14-186. - Applicability of sections 14-4 and 14-5. 
    All buildings or structures shall follow the applicable requirements of sections 14-4 and 14-5. 
(Code 1983, § 30.15(1)) 
Sec. 14-187. - Room areas. 
(a)  Room sizes for one- and two-family dwellings shall be equal to or greater than those listed in table No. 2. Multiple-family buildings shall have room sizes as approved by the village. Minimum room areas shall not include areas used for storage or closet purposes. 
(b)  Rooms and spaces not regulated in this division as to area shall be connected to a living or other habitable room. Rooms and spaces not regulated in this division and of areas less than the minimum areas required in this division shall not be used for living, dining, sleeping or kitchen purposes. 
(c)  No habitable rooms shall be permitted in basements unless the vertical distance from grade to ceiling is greater than the vertical distance grade to floor below. 
(d)  No additional dwelling units shall be created or maintained by rearranging room suites, by subdividing rooms, or by alterations in any existing building or structure unless such dwelling units have been authorized by permit and comply with this division and other applicable regulations. 
TABLE NO. 2 
ROOM AREAS 
Category Requirement 
(square feet) Minimum 
Dimension 
(feet) Living room 160 11 Living room with dining space 180 Dining room  80 Kitchen, usable floor area  60  6 Bedroom 100 Other habitable rooms  70 Bathroom See subsection (f)(3)  
(Code 1983, § 30.15(2)) 
Sec. 14-188. - Ceiling heights. 
(a)  Except as otherwise permitted by local requirements the minimum clear ceiling height of all habitable rooms in one- and two-family homes shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet six inches. Basement ceiling height shall be a minimum of six feet ten inches under joists. 
(b)  Sloping roofs may penetrate rooms provided that any portion of any room under a sloping roof having a height of less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing areas or volumes of such rooms. Rooms under a sloping roof shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet six inches for not less than half the required area of the room. 
(c)  Rooms in any building or structure having ceiling heights or areas that do not conform to the regulations of this section shall not be used for human habitation. For ceiling heights of bath and toilet rooms, see section 14-192 of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 30.15(3)) 
Sec. 14-189. - Light and ventilation. 
(a)  Natural light. All habitable rooms, except those located in basements, shall be provided with natural light by means of glazed openings of at least eight percent of the net floor area. 
(b)  Ventilation. Natural or mechanical ventilation shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Natural ventilation. All habitable rooms, except kitchens and bathrooms, shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior doors or windows of at least 3.5 percent of the net floor area. 
(2)  Mechanical ventilation. Where a mechanical ventilation system is provided in lieu of openable exterior openings providing natural ventilation, the system shall be capable of providing at least one air change per hour. Exhaust ventilation shall terminate outside the building. 
(c)  Cold-side venting. Cold-side venting of insulation shall be provided at roof/attic, flat-roof/ceiling and sloping-roof/ceiling assemblies. Ventilation shall be provided at the rate of one square foot of free ventilating area for each 300 square feet of area. At least 50 percent of the vents shall be located at the soffit area. 
(d)  Crawl space venting. Unheated crawl spaces shall be provided with a minimum of two ventilators located at opposite sides of the crawl space. 
(e)  Exhaust fan venting. Exhaust fans are required in all baths, shower rooms, utility rooms, when no openable window is available. Kitchen must have an exhaust fan. Clothes dryers must be vented to the outside. 
(Code 1983, § 30.15(4)(a)-(e)) 
Sec. 14-190. - Safety glass. 
    Glass in entrance and exit doors, sliding glass doors, storm doors, bathtub enclosures, shower doors, and fixed glass panels immediately adjacent to doors shall be safety glass. 
(Code 1983, § 30.15(4)(f)) 
Sec. 14-191. - Stairways, landings, platforms and roof decks. 
(a)  Every exit stairway shall not be less than three feet in width, and no more than four inches on one side may be used for handrails. Every platform shall be at least as wide as the stairway, measured at right angles to the direction of travel. Whenever a door opens onto a stairway, a platform shall be provided extending at least the full width of the door in the direction of travel. 
(b)  If stairways are provided in addition to those required by code, such additional stairways need not conform to the width requirements of this article. 
(c)  All stairway landings, platforms, roof decks or similar elevations or depressions more than two feet above or below adjacent grade or floor level shall have a guardrail on the open sides thereof, at least 36 inches in height, with an intermediate rail at midheight, or vertical rails at 11 inches maximum spacing on-center. 
(d)  Stairways on the outside of buildings and an integral part thereof, having more than three risers, shall have a handrail on each side. 
Note: All exterior doors that swing outwards where there is more than eight inches above grade shall have a platform with minimum dimensions of three feet, supported on a foundation wall or other approved supports to a minimum depth of 48 inches below grade. 
(e)  All stairways and steps shall have a uniform rise of not more than eight inches, and a minimum tread width of nine inches. Risers shall be measured from tread to tread, and treads shall be measured from rise to rise. There shall be no more than 18 risers in any one run. 
(f)  The continuous clear head room measured perpendicularly from the nosing shall be not less than six feet eight inches, except that for basement stairways such head room may be six feet four inches. 
(g)  Winders may be used provided they are designed so the tread width 18 inches from the converging end will not be less than nine inches. 
(h)  All stairways and steps of more than three risers shall have at least one handrail. The handrail around stairways shall be not less than two feet eight inches high, measured above the stair nosing. The handrail shall be installed on the open side if any, and this shall meet the minimum requirement. 
(Code 1983, § 30.15(5)) 
Sec. 14-192. - Toilets, bathrooms and kitchens. 
(a)  In every dwelling there shall be provided in each dwelling unit and connected to a plumbing system at least one kitchen sink, one water closet, one bathtub or shower, and one lavatory. 
(b)  Wherever public water supply is not available, there shall be provided on the premises, for each dwelling unit, means for sanitary disposal of sewerage without health hazards or nuisance, and in conformity with generally accepted standards. 
(c)  Bathrooms for required toilets, tubs or showers, or lavatories shall have a minimum floor area of not less than 12 square feet for each water closet and each tub, and ten square feet for each shower, lavatory, or other sanitary plumbing fixture or equipment installed therein. The ceiling height of the required bathroom shall be not less than seven feet. Powder rooms or second baths are not subject to the above but shall have a minimum floor area of 14 square feet with a minimum dimension of three feet in one direction. 
(d)  Each bathroom or toilet room shall be provided with a door. No bathroom or toilet room shall open directly into a kitchen, nor shall such room provide sole access to any habitable room. 
(e)  Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with means of ventilation as required by section 14-189 for habitable rooms, or positive mechanical ventilation, providing one air change every five minutes. 
(f)  All mechanical ventilation shall be ducted directly to the outside. However, exhaust fans with filters may be used without terminating to the outside if approved by the department of industry, labor and human relations. 
(Code 1983, § 30.15(6)) 
Sec. 14-193. - Exits, openings, corridors and hallways. 
(a)  Exterior stairways other than to the first floor and basement shall not be allowed. Every residential home shall have two exits on the first floor. Duplexes shall have two separate stairways or one stairway and an outside porch not more than ten feet above the ground. 
(b)  Access to each dwelling unit shall be provided without passing through any part of any other dwelling unit. In dwelling units, every habitable room shall have access to every other habitable room without passing through a bathroom or toilet room. 
(c)  Doors or openings shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Exterior doors. The minimum size for at least one main entrance door to a residence shall be three feet wide, by six feet eight inches high. The rear or side door shall be two feet eight inches wide by six feet eight inches high. 
(2)  Interior doors. Minimum size door serving as exit from any habitable rooms shall be two feet six inches wide by six feet six inches high. Bathrooms and closets other than linen and broom closets can be served by a door a minimum of two feet wide. 
(3)  Openings. An opening used without a door shall be the same size as the required minimum size of door. 
(d)  Corridors and hallways between rooms shall be not less than 36 inches wide. 
(Code 1983, § 30.15(7)) 
Sec. 14-194. - Attics, access thereto. 
    In every building and structure having an attic there shall be provided permanent access thereto by means of a scuttle, disappearing or permanently installed stairway. The minimum size opening shall be 24 inches by 20 inches. 
(Code 1983, § 30.15(8)) 
Sec. 14-195. - Insulation. 
    Insulation in all buildings or structures and additions thereto shall be installed as required by Ind. 22.06 of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. 
(Code 1983, § 30.15(9)) 
Secs. 14-196-14-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOIL AND EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-236. - Soil requirements. 
(a)  Soil-bearing capacity. No footing or foundation shall be placed on soil with a bearing capacity of less than 2,000 pounds per square foot (PSF) unless the footing or foundation has been designed through structural analysis. The soil-bearing values of common soils may be determined through soil identification. 
Type of Soil PSF   
Quicksand, alluvial and filled soils, determined by test but not more than .....  1,000 
Wet, soft clay; very loose silt; silty clay ..... 2,000 
Loose, fine sand; medium clay; loose sandy clay soils ..... 2,000 
Stiff clay; firm inorganic silt ..... 3,000 
Medium (firm sand; loose sandy gravel; firm sand clay soils; hard dry clay) ..... 4,000 
Dense sand and gravel; very compact mixture of clay, sand and gravel ..... 6,000 
Rock ..... 12,000 
(1)  Minimum soil-bearing values. If the soil located directly under a footing or foundation overlies a layer of soil having a smaller allowable bearing value, the smaller soil-bearing value shall be used. 
(2)  Unprepared fill material, organic material. No footing or foundation shall be placed upon unprepared fill material, organic soil, alluvial soil or mud unless the load will be supported. When requested, soil data shall be provided. 
(3)  Landfill sites. The decomposition of organic material in landfill sites established for the disposal of organic wastes may produce odorous, toxic and explosive concentrations of gas that may seep into buildings through storm sewers and similar underground utilities unless provisions are taken to release the gases to the atmosphere. 
(b)  Boring and tests, when required. When the safe sustaining power of the soil is in doubt, the building inspector shall direct that the necessary boring and test be made by a qualified engineer and at the expense of the owner or agent to determine the safe value of the soil. 
(Code 1983, § 30.16) 
Sec. 14-237. - Excavations. 
(a)  All excavations for buildings and structures and parts thereof shall be protected and guarded against danger to life or injury to persons or property. 
(b)  No trench for sewer or other excavations shall be made below any foundation wall nearer than three feet to any corner of the foundation. No trench for sewer or other excavations shall be made nearer to any column or pier footing than 11/2 times the depth of the excavation below the footing. 
(c)  Any property owner (owner of an interest in land) making or causing an excavation to be made to a depth of 12 feet or less below the grade shall protect the excavation so that the soil of adjoining property will not cave in or settle, but shall not be liable for the expense of underpinning or extending the foundation of buildings on adjoining properties where the excavation is not in excess of 12 feet in depth. Before commencing the excavation the person making or causing the excavation at their own expense is to cause notification to the adjoining property owners to be made and informing them that the adjoining buildings should be protected. The owners of the adjoining property shall be given access to the excavation for the purpose of protecting such adjoining buildings. 
Exception. The 30-day time limit for written notification may be waived if such waiver is signed by the owners of adjoining properties. 
Property owners (owners of an interest in land) making or causing an excavation to be made exceeding 12 feet in depth below the grade shall protect the excavation so that the soil of adjoining property will not cave in or settle, and shall extend the foundation of their buildings to a depth of 12 feet below grade at their own expense as provided in the preceding paragraph. 
(d)  Whenever an excavation or foundation for building purposes has remained open for a period of 30 days with no work having been done at the site for that period, the building inspector shall serve a notice upon the owner of the property that work at the site be commenced forthwith or that the excavation be filled to grade. The order shall be served upon the owner or his agent and upon the holder of any encumbrance of record as provided in § 66.05, Wis. Stats. If the owner fails to comply with the order within 15 days after the service thereof, the excavation shall be filled to grade and the cost charged against the real estate as a special charge as provided by § 66.05(2), Wis. Stats. In addition to filling the excavation, any person who violates this section is subject to the provisions of section 14-3. 
(Code 1983, § 30.17) 
Secs. 14-238-14-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FOOTINGS AND FOUNDATIONS 

Sec. 14-261. - Footings. 
(a)  Generally. Footings shall be of adequate bearing area to safely distribute all live and dead loads to the supporting soil without exceeding the bearing capacity of the soil. Footings placed in unstable soils shall be formed. 
(b)  Type and size concrete footings. Unless designed by structural analysis, footings shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Continuous footings. The minimum width on each side of the foundation wall shall measure at least four inches wider than the wall, and the minimum depth shall be eight inches. 
(2)  Pier and column footings. The minimum horizontal dimensions of column or pier footings shall be two feet by two feet and shall be at least 12 inches in depth. 
(3)  Stepped footings. Where variations in the elevations of the bottom wall footings are necessary, it shall be spanned with an approved lintel. 
Exception. A vertical connection between the footings at the step may be constructed of concrete eight inches thick and of the same width as the footings, if there is less than two feet difference in elevation. 
(4)  Chimney and fireplace footings. Footings for chimneys or fireplaces shall be at least four inches wider than the outside dimension of the chimney or fireplace foundation and at least 12 inches thick. 
(5)  Trench footings. Footings poured integrally with the wall at least eight inches wide may be used for a one-story structure when soil conditions assure that trench walls will not collapse. 
(c)  Frost protection. The bottom of all footings shall be a minimum of four feet below grade. Footings shall not be placed upon frozen material. 
(d)  Curing. Concrete footings shall cure at least 24 hours before foundation wall or wall forms are begun to be constructed. 
(e)  Drain tiles. All foundation walls of basements, cellars or other occupied spaces shall have drain tiles on each side of such walls. Bleeder tiles shall be placed in the foundation footing at not more than eight-foot centers. Drain tiles shall be connected to a sump pit provided with a pump to discharge the water at grade, or shall be connected to the storm sewer house drain. Drain tiles shall be covered with 12 inches of #2 washed stone or other approved porous material. Drain tile and stone shall be placed prior to starting the fourth foundation block course. 
(Code 1983, § 30.18) 
Sec. 14-262. - Foundations. 
(a)  Generally. Foundation walls shall be masonry and shall be continuous under all habitable areas of principal buildings including an attached garage; and shall be designed and constructed to support the loads placed thereon without exceeding the allowable stresses of the materials therein. 
Exceptions. Overhanging bays and projecting floors are permitted providing that such cantilevered floors do not exceed four feet. Cantilevered porches and balconies may project six feet providing they do not support a roof. In each case the joists must return twice the distance they project. Clear minimum space of eight inches shall be provided below the bottom of joists to grade. 
(b)  Strength. Structural analysis shall be submitted to the building inspector when requested. 
(c)  Decay and termite protection. The top of foundation walls under all buildings or structures of wood frame construction shall be at least eight inches above lot grade at all exterior walls, and no exterior wood siding or construction shall be less than six inches above grade. 
Exception. Wood pressure treated with a preservative, or of a naturally durable, decay-resistant species and grade of lumber or protected against decay and termites may be used for: 
(1)  Sills that rest on concrete or masonry walls and are less than eight inches from exposed earth. 
(2)  Ends of wood girders entering masonry or concrete walls and having clearances of less than one-half inch on the top, sides and ends. 
(3)  Wood siding less than six inches from the earth. 
(4)  Wood embedded in earth. 
(5)  All pressure-treated wood shall be identified. 
(d)  Foundation wall thickness. 
(1)  Concrete foundation walls. Unless designed through structural analysis, the minimum thickness of concrete foundation walls shall be determined from table A; but in no case shall the thickness be less than the thickness of the wall it supports. 
(2)  Masonry foundation walls. Unless designed through structural analysis, the masonry foundation walls shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Unreinforced masonry wall; thickness. The minimum thickness of unreinforced masonry foundation walls shall be determined by table B, but in no case shall the thickness be less than the thickness of the wall it supports. 
b.  Reinforced masonry wall; thickness. Reinforced masonry walls shall be reinforced in accordance with the requirements of tables C and D. In partially reinforced masonry walls, vertical reinforcement shall be provided on each side of any opening, at each wall corner, and at intervals indicated in the tables. 
(e)  Pilasters. When a girder whose span exceeds 12 feet frames into a masonry wall, pilasters of a minimum size of four inches by 12 inches built integrally with the wall shall be provided. 
(f)  Girder bearing. Four inches of end bearing shall be provided for girders framing into foundation wall; and when wood girders are used, an air space shall be provided between the foundation walls and the ends and sides of the girder. 
(g)  Dampproofing. Masonry foundation walls of basements and crawl spaces shall be made dampproof by the application to the exterior surfaces thereof of a continuous coat of three-eighths-inch thick waterproof cement mortar or Portland cement mortar plus a coat of bituminous dampproofing material over the parging from top of stone to finish grade. One coat of bituminous dampproofing material shall be applied to concrete foundation wall from top of stone to finish grade. When a minimum of one-eighth-inch thickness of an approved surface bonding cement is applied to an exterior masonry foundation wall, it shall qualify as dampproof. 
TABLE A 
CONCRETE WALL THICKNESS 
Type of Concrete Nominal Thickness 
(inches) Maximum Height of 
Unbalanced Fill 1 for 
Material of Wall 
Being Supported 
(Wood frame-feet) 3,000 psi  6  6.5 Unreinforced concrete  8 
10 
12 2 
14  8  
 9  
10  
11.5  
1 Unbalanced fill is the difference in elevation between the outside grade and the basement floor. 
2 The maximum height of unbalanced fill for a 12-inch thick plain concrete wall may be increased to 12 feet provided the wall is constructed of concrete with a minimum compressive value of 6,000 psi at 28 days. 
TABLE B 
MAXIMUM DEPTH BELOW GRADE* (HEIGHT OF FILL) AND 
THICKNESS FOR VARIOUS CONCRETE MASONRY 
FOUNDATION WALLS WITHOUT PILASTERS 
Maximum Depth Below Grade, Feet, When Wall Support Wall Construction Nominal 
 Thickness, Inches, and 
  Type of Unit Frame Construction 
(feet) Masonry, or Masonry 
Veneer Construction 
(feet) Hollow-load bearing    8-inch 5 (6) 6   10-inch 6 (7) 7   12-inch 7 7 Solid load bearing    8-inch 5 (7) 7   10-inch 6 (7) 7   12-inch 7 7  
* In well-drained sand and gravel soils, the height of the unbalanced fill may be increased to the values in parentheses. 
TABLE C 
MAXIMUM DEPTH BELOW GRADE (HEIGHT OF FILL) FOR VARIOUS 
CONCRETE MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH PILASTERS 
Wall Construction Nominal 
 Thickness, Inches, and 
  Type of Unit Total Height 
of Wall 
(feet) Maximum 
Pilaster 
Spacing O.C. 
(feet) Pilaster 
Size 
(nominal) Maximum Depth 
Below Grade 
(feet) 8-inch hollow load-bearing 7.5 11 16? × 16? 6.5 8-inch hollow load-bearing with solid pilasters or filled cells of hollow units 7.5 20 16? × 16? 6.5  
TABLE D 
MAXIMUM DEPTH BELOW GRADE FOR PARTIALLY 
REINFORCED MASONRY WALLS 
Wall Construction Nominal 
 Thickness, Inches, and 
  Type of Unit Total 
Height 
of Wall 
(feet) Reinforcement 
Size and 
Spacing 
(feet) 
Center to Center Maximum 
Depth Below 
Grade 
(feet) 8-inch hollow load-bearing 7.0 to 8.5 #5 bars @ 8;ft; 
#6 bars @ 8;ft; 
#7 bars @ 8;ft; 6.5 
7.5 
7.5  
(Code 1983, § 30.19) 
Secs. 14-263-14-285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GARAGES 

Sec. 14-286. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attached private garage means a private garage attached directly to the principal building, or attached by means of an enclosed or open breezeway, porch, terrace or vestibule, or a private garage so constructed as to form an integral part of the principal building. 
    Detached private garage means a private garage entirely separated from the principal building. 
(Code 1983, § 30.43(1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-287. - Location of detached garages. 
    Detached garages shall be governed by the following unless otherwise provided for in appropriate zoning codes: 
(1)  Garages of wood frame construction shall be located not less than ten feet from any residence building, except that such distance may be reduced to not less than five feet when the adjacent wall is protected as required for attached garages. 
(2)  Garages of masonry wall construction shall not be located less than five feet from any residence building. 
(Code 1983, § 30.43(2)) 
Sec. 14-288. - Area. 
    All private garages shall be governed by the following unless otherwise provided for in appropriate zoning codes: 
(1)  Masonry bearing wall, 1,200 square feet maximum. 
(2)  Metal frame construction, 720 square feet maximum. 
(3)  Wood frame construction, 720 square feet maximum. 
(Code 1983, § 30.43(3)) 
Sec. 14-289. - Foundations and footings. 
    Attached private garages shall be provided with the same type footings and foundations as required for the principal building. Concrete floors shall be not less than four inches in thickness. Detached private garages may be built with a continuous floating slab of reinforced concrete not less than four inches in thickness. Reinforcement shall be a minimum of six-by-six inch, number ten-by-ten wire mesh. The slab shall be provided with a thickened edge all around, eight inches wide and eight inches below the top of slab. Exterior wall curbs shall be provided not less than four inches above the finished ground grade adjacent to the garage. Bolts three-eighths inch in diameter with nuts and washers attached, six inches long, shall be embedded three inches in the concrete curb of detached garages eight feet on centers. 
(Code 1983, § 30.43(4)) 
Sec. 14-290. - Floor surface. 
    The floor in all private garages shall be of concrete construction, and sloped toward the exterior garage door or opening. No openings or pits in the floor shall be permitted, except for drainage. 
(Code 1983, § 30.43(5)) 
Sec. 14-291. - Construction. 
    Private garages shall be constructed as follows: 
(1)  Load-bearing foundation walls and partitions shall be constructed as herein regulated except as stated above. 
(2)  Detached private garages of wood frame construction shall be constructed with the following requirements: 
a.  Studs may have a maximum spacing of 24 inches on centers. 
b.  Diagonal corner bracing may be applied on the inside surface of studs. 
c.  Corner posts may consist of two two-inch by four-inch studs or a single four-inch by four-inch stud. 
d.  Horizontal bracing and collar beams may be two-inch by six-inch with a maximum spacing of four-foot on center. 
(Code 1983, § 30.43(6)) 
Sec. 14-292. - Attached private garages. 
    Private garages may be attached to or made part of residence buildings when in compliance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Separation from dwelling areas. Attached garages shall be separated from the dwelling unit by at least a one-hour rated construction. One-hour fire-resistive construction shall include the following assemblies and materials: 
a.  Two-inch brick or stone veneer. 
b.  Metal lath or perforated rock lath and three-fourths inch of plaster. 
c.  Five-eighths inch of vermiculite plaster board. 
d.  Five-eighths inch fire code gypsum plaster board. 
(2)  Door to principal building. An attached private garage may have a door connecting directly into the principal building, provided the floor of such garage is at least eight inches below the floor of the principal building. Such door shall be a metal or solid wood door not less than 13/4 inches in thickness. A maximum 100 square inches of one-quarter-inch stationary wire glass window may be permitted in such door. 
(Code 1983, § 30.43(7)) 
Sec. 14-293. - Garage heating. 
    All open flame equipment shall be effectively separated by not less than one-hour fire-resistive wall, floor or ceiling; however, suspended furnaces or direct fired units that are fired with a liquid fuel or gas may be used without an enclosure, provided they are located at least seven feet above the floor and at least six inches from any combustible wall or ceiling. All units shall be supported by noncombustible brackets or hangers. 
(Code 1983, § 30.43(8)) 
Secs. 14-294-14-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PLUMBING 

Sec. 14-326. - State regulations adopted. 
(a)  Ch. 145, Wis. Stats., and the state plumbing code, chs. ILHR 81-86, Wis. Adm. Code, are adopted and by reference made a part of this section with the same force and affect as though set out in full. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of such regulations shall constitute a violation of this section, punishable according to the penalties provided in this article. 
(b)  A copy of the state plumbing code shall be on file in the offices of the plumbing inspector and the village clerk/treasurer. 
(Code 1983, § 15.01) 
Sec. 14-327. - Plumbing inspector. 
(a)  Appointment, term and compensation. The village board shall appoint a plumbing inspector, along with such other plumbing inspectors as it deems necessary, who shall be a licensed plumber or practical plumber, skilled sanitarian or competent person familiar with plumbing and who, unless under civil service, shall serve for an indefinite term, subject to removal without cause, and whose compensation shall be as fixed by the board from time-to-time. 
(b)  Duties and authority. 
(1)  Generally. The plumbing inspector shall enforce all provisions of this article and all other state and village provisions relating to the construction, installation, alteration and repair of all plumbing within the village and shall make such inspections, perform such tests and issue such orders as may be necessary for such enforcement. 
(2)  Authority to enter premises. 
a.  In the discharge of his duties, the plumbing inspector or his authorized agent may enter any building, upon presentation of the proper credentials, during reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and may require the production of any permit or license required under this article. No person shall interfere with the inspector or his authorized agent while in the performance of his duties; and any person so interfering shall be in violation of this article and subject to a penalty as provided by section 14-332. 
b.  If consent to entry to personal or real properties that are not public buildings, or to portions of public buildings that are not open to the public, for inspection purposes has been denied, the plumbing inspector shall obtain a special inspection warrant under §§ 66.122, 66.123, Wis. Stats. 
(3)  Permits. The plumbing inspector or his authorized agent shall prepare suitable forms for permit applications and permits, shall take applications and issue to qualified applicants permits as required for all work contemplated by this article, and shall maintain suitable records of the permits issued. He shall weekly submit permit fees collected by his office to the village clerk/treasurer. 
(4)  Records and reports. 
a.  To the village board. The plumbing inspector shall keep in his office a daily record of all the transactions of his office, including permits issued and fees received, and shall make such reports thereon to the village board as it may require. 
b.  To the department of health and social services. The plumbing inspector shall make such reports to the department of health and social services as are required under § 145.04(3), Wis. Stats. 
c.  Record of special locations. The plumbing inspector shall keep a record of all sewer and water connections and shall make maps showing the locations of the same and the positions of all house drains, connections, junctions and other data necessary for the efficient operation of his office. 
(5)  Stop work orders. The plumbing inspector may order work stopped on the construction, installation, alteration or repair of plumbing when such work is being done in violation of this article. Work so stopped shall not be resumed except with written permission of the plumbing inspector, provided if the stop work order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written order within a reasonable period of time. 
(Code 1983, § 15.03) 
Sec. 14-328. - Plumbing permits. 
(a)  Required. No work contemplated by this article shall be started until a permit therefor has been obtained from the plumbing inspector or his authorized agent, provided no permit shall be required for minor repairs to faucets or the removal of stoppages in soil and waste pipes. 
(b)  Application. The application shall be in writing upon forms the plumbing inspector shall provide and shall include the name of the owner and the description of the property on which the work is to be done, along with such pertinent information as the plumbing inspector may require, and shall state that the property owner and the applicant will be bound by and subject to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Issuance, term, suspension and revocation. When the plumbing inspector is satisfied that the work proposed by the applicant can be done in conformity with the provisions of this article, and after the appropriate fees have been paid to him, he shall issue the permit. Such permit shall be good for the continuous performance of the work named thereon. A permit shall automatically expire when work ceases for a period of 60 days without good and reasonable cause for same and shall automatically expire on completion of the work for which it was issued; provided the plumbing inspector may, upon notice, suspend or revoke such permit for violation of the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Restrictions on issuance. 
(1)  No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person who is in violation of this article until such violation has been corrected. 
(2)  No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person against whom an order issued by the plumbing inspector is pending, provided this restriction may be waived by the plumbing inspector. 
(e)  Appeals for failure to issue, suspension and revocation. Any person directly interested who is aggrieved by the decision of the plumbing inspector to refuse to issue a permit or to suspend or revoke such permit or to order work stopped under section 14-327(b)(5) may obtain review of such determination under chapter 2. 
(f)  Fees. 
(1)  Amount. Plumbing permit fees, which shall be paid before the permit is issued, shall be set by the village board from time-to-time. 
(2)  Penalty for failure to obtain permit. If plumbing work is begun before the permit has been obtained, double the above fees shall be charged. 
(Code 1983, § 15.04) 
Sec. 14-329. - Plumbers to be licensed. 
    All plumbing work shall be done only by a plumber licensed by the state for such work, provided a property owner may make repairs or installations in a single-family building owned and occupied by him as his home if a permit therefor is issued and the work is done in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 15.05) 
Sec. 14-330. - Registration of plumbers. 
(a)  Required. All master plumbers engaged in the business of plumbing in the village and all journeymen plumbers and apprentice plumbers working at the plumbing trade in the village shall register with the plumbing inspector, who shall keep such registration on file in his office. 
(b)  Information to be supplied. Such registration shall consist of the full name and address, license number and current receipt number of each master or journeyman licensee. For an apprentice, the year of apprenticeship and the shop to which he is indentured shall be indicated. 
(c)  Registration requirements limited. The purpose of this section is solely to provide for the administration of state licensing requirements and this article. No fee shall be charged for any plumber's registration, nor shall any information other than that specified in subsection (b) of this section be required. 
(Code 1983, § 15.06) 
Sec. 14-331. - Sump pump regulations. 
(1)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(a)  Sump pump discharge means all clear water discharged from a sump or other source which is pumped or otherwise channeled across real estate, greenway, or terrace area piping. Generally to the stormwater system. 
(2)  Restrictions. Except as otherwise provided in this section, where existing sump and stormwater drainage lines exist, all sump pump discharges shall be connected directly to a storm sewer by means of an underground closed pipe. Where storm laterals are not present, upon review, permission may be granted to discharge sump pump stormwater into open curb and gutter. Permission may be granted based on criteria such as, existing topography, alternative options available, and any other site specific conditions which may justify the installation. Sump pump discharge piping shall not lie across public sidewalk or the surface of the street terrace area. 
(3)  Prohibited sanitary sewer discharges. The connection of roof downspouts, sump pump discharges, exterior foundation drains, area drains or other sources of surface run off or ground water to a building sewer or drain which discharges directly to a public sanitary sewer is prohibited. The connection of roof down spouts, or other sources of direct surface run off discharge is prohibited to the sump pump discharge piping system. 
(4)  Time for connection. 
(a)  New construction connections. 
1.  Where storm sewer lateral is available. The sump pump discharge line shall be connected prior to building occupancy. This requirement may be waived by the public works committee on written request of the property owner, for good cause shown. Any request must be written and submitted with the building permit application. 
2.  Failure to comply with connection requirement shall be viewed as a violation with fines applied. 
(b)  Existing building connections. 
1.  In the event of a new installation, or underground piping becoming available, existing sump pump discharge lines shall be connected within 45 days of the lateral being available. This requirement may be waived by the public works committee on written request of the property owner, for good cause shown. 
(5)  Installation requirements. All laterals on private property shall conform to § COMM 82.36, Wis. Adm. Code. The sump pump lateral material shall be PVC Schedule 40 pipe and fittings with a minimum diameter of four inches, or Schedule 80 piping will be permitted. Installation shall be made by a licensed plumber following plumbing permit issuance, and must be inspected by the village. The director of public works shall determine lateral locations on street reconstruction projects. 
(6)  Development cost. The developer constructing a new street shall pay for the installation of laterals, where determined necessary through engineering review, from the storm sewer system, (including down the greenway or terrace), and to each lot, to the right-of-way line. Requirements will be part of the engineering review of the subdivision. This requirement also applies to PUD, planned unit developments. 
(7)  Maintenance/replacement cost. The property owner shall be responsible for any and all cost of maintenance, repairs, or replacement. This cost includes the piping in the greenway or terrace area, leading to discharge in a catch basin or storm sewer main. The property owner/owners are responsible for piping to the catch basin. 
(a)  In the event that the village makes repairs, performs maintenance, hires a contractor or performs any other service, property owners shall be billed the costs, administration and handling charges, along with any other costs. 
(b)  Charges shall be calculated for each property, by taking the total expenses and charges incurred, and proportionately applying to all properties along the line, or piping, based on the lot footage, side adjacent to the piping. The full width or footage of the lot shall be used, even if the pipe is only along a portion of the lot footage. 
(c)  Bills and invoices shall be due and payable in full, 90 days after issuance. 
(d)  Any past due bill or invoice shall have an interest penalty of six percent annual percentage rate if the invoice is not paid within 30 days. 
(e)  If not paid within such 30 days, such charge shall be extended upon the current or next tax roll against the property involved as a charge for current services, as provided in § 66.0627, Wis. Stats. Interest will accrue, and administrative fees may be applied, until funds and payment are received by the village. 
(8)  Right of entry, identification and compliance. 
(a)  Right of entry. The village building inspector or other duly authorized employee of the village, bearing proper credentials and photo identification, shall be permitted, at all reasonable times, to enter all properties with a sanitary sewer connection for inspection, observation or testing for the purposes set forth in this section. 
(b)  Identification, right to enter easements. The village building inspector or other duly authorized employee of the village, bearing proper credentials and photo identification, shall be permitted to enter easements for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement, all subject to the terms, if any, of this duly negotiated easement. 
(c)  Compliance. The property owner will be provided 30 days to comply with any compliance deficiencies. Reinspection will be performed after 30 days to verify satisfactory compliance. 
(9)  Enforcement. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined $25.00 for each separate violation. Each day in which a violation continues may be deemed a separate offense. This section shall not preclude the village from enforcing compliance with this ordinance by any other means. The building inspector, after providing written notice to the owner, shall assess the fine. 
(Code 1983, § 15.07; Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 10-20-08; Ord. No. 09-07, §§ 1, 2, 10-5-09) 
Sec. 14-332. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or any regulation, rule or order made under this article, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 15.10) 
Secs. 14-333-14-365. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Cable television, ch. 22. 

Sec. 14-366. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Satellite dish antennas means dish-shaped antennas designed to receive television broadcasts relayed by microwave signals from earth orbiting communication satellites. 
(Code 1983, § 30.48(1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-367. - Residential use. 
    Satellite dish antennas installed in any residential district within this village shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Not more than one satellite dish antenna may be allowed per individual recorded residential lot. 
(2)  Satellite dish antennas shall be allowed in rear and side yards; however, satellite dish antennas in side yards may not be any closer to the streetline than the established setback of the principal building or structure. 
(3)  Satellite dish antennas shall not exceed 12 feet in diameter. 
(4)  Side and rear yard setbacks shall be equal to or greater than the required side and rear yard setbacks for the principal structure within the respective zoning district, but not less than the total vertical height of the satellite dish antennas. 
(5)  Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas shall meet the height requirement for accessory structures in the zoning district in which they are located. Building-mounted satellite dish antennas shall not exceed the maximum height regulation of the zoning district in which they are located. 
(6)  All satellite dish antennas shall be permanently mounted in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for installation. All installations shall meet a minimum wind load design velocity of 80 miles per hour. 
(7)  No form of advertising or identification is allowed on the dish or framework other than the customary manufacturer's identification plates. 
(8)  Portable or trailer-mounted satellite dish antennas are not allowed. Exception: Temporary installations for on-site testing and proposed demonstrations may be allowed for periods not to exceed two days. 
(9)  Electrical installations in connection with receiving stations, including grounding of the system, shall be in accordance with the Wis. Admin. Code. 
(10)  All cable used to conduct current or signals from the satellite dish antenna to the receivers shall be installed underground. 
(11)  Satellite dish antennas that cause any harmful interference with radio and/or television broadcasting or reception on adjacent properties shall be governed in accordance with Federal Communications Commission standards. 
(Code 1983, § 30.48(2)(a)-(k)) 
Sec. 14-368. - Building permit required. 
(a)  No satellite dish antennas shall be erected within this village without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector. 
(b)  Applications for permit shall be accompanied by sufficient information to allow the building inspector adequate review of the proposed installation to ensure compliance with this article. 
(c)  Any person feeling himself aggrieved by this article or decision of the building inspector may appeal to the community zoning board of appeals. 
(d)  The fee for a permit required by this article shall be as set forth from time-to-time by the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 30.48(2)(l)-(n), (3)) 
Secs. 14-369-14-391. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PUBLIC SAFETY RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 14-392. - Definitions. 
(a)  Channel performance criterion or CPC is defined as the minimum performance level in a faded channel pursuant to TSB-88, clause 4.2. 
(b)  Delivered audio quality or DAQ is defined as the telecommunication industry's standards for audio quality over a telecommunications system. The individual DAQ levels are defined as set out in Table 1. 
TABLE 1 
DELIVERED AUDIO QUALITY DEFINITIONS 
DAQ Subjective Performance Description 1 Unusable, speech present but unreadable [not understandable]. 2 Understandable with considerable effort. Frequent repetition due to noise/distortion. 3 Speech understandable with slight effort. Occasional repetition due to noise/distortion. 3.4 Speech understandable with repetition only rarely required. Some noise/distortion. 4 Speech easily understood. Occasional noise/distortion. 4.5 Speech easily understood. Infrequent noise/distortion. 5 Speech easily understood.  
(c)  TSB-88 is defined as the "Telecommunication System Bulletin" published by the Telecommunications Industry Association. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 14-393. - Minimum standards. 
    Except as otherwise provided, no person, government or organization shall maintain, own, erect or construct any building or structure which is used, entirely or in part, for commercial, multifamily, or institutional use or cause the same to be done which fails to support adequate radio coverage to public safety service workers, including but not limited to firefighters and law enforcement officers. For the purpose of this article, adequate radio coverage shall include all of the following: 
(a)  A minimum performance level of DAQ 3.4 available in 95 percent of the area of each floor of the building when transmitted from the Washington County Communication System; 
(b)  A minimum performance level of DAQ 3.4 received at the Washington County Communication System when transmitted from 95 percent of the area of each floor of the building, via a portable radio, worn at the waist on a belt, using a public safety lapel microphone; 
(c)  A CPC rated at a DAQ level of 3.4 which shall be attainable by public safety radio systems in 95 percent of the area of each floor of a building subject to this article; and 
(d)  The frequency range which must be supported shall be 150.000 MHz to 160.000 MHz from the Washington County Communications System. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 14-394. - Testing procedures. 
    The fire department is hereby given the authority to inspect and test structures in the village to assure compliance with this section. Upon receiving reasonable notice of the village's intent to inspect and test a structure, the structure's owner shall provide access to the structure so the inspection and tests can be conducted. 
(a)  Initial tests. A representative from the fire department shall perform the initial tests to confirm a structure is in compliance with this section. During construction of a new structure, tests shall occur prior to construction, during construction when the exterior walls are in place and upon completion of the structure. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued to any new structure if the structure fails to comply with this section. 
(b)  Periodic tests. A representative from the fire department may perform annual or periodic tests on individual structures within the village as deemed necessary by the fire chief or police chief. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 14-395. - Interference and amplification. 
(a)  Structures which cannot independently support adequate radio coverage as required by the minimum standards herein shall be equipped with amplification equipment as needed in order to achieve the required adequate radio coverage. Amplification equipment includes a radiating cable system or an internal multi-antenna system with or without FCC type-accepted signal amplifiers. The installation of the amplification equipment shall not be detrimental to the operation of the Washington County Communications System. Amplification equipment shall be kept in a water resistant enclosure. 
(b)  The radiating cable system, coaxial cable system or other types of cabling used in support of the in-building communications system must be installed in protected areas to provide extended survivability in the event of fire. The installation shall follow the applicable sections of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) regulations and the National Electric Code (NEC) that have been adopted by this Code. 
(c)  In the event the public safety communications system within the structure is diminished, interfered with or disrupted by other radio signals distributed by others operating within the structure, the owner of the structure shall have the non-public safety radio signals within the structure disabled until such time as the interaction with the public safety system is acceptable to the police department and fire department. 
(d)  If any part of an installed system contains electrically powered components, the system shall be capable of operating on an independent battery or generator system for a period of at least 12 hours without external power. Any battery system shall automatically recharge with an external power source. 
(e)  Circuits supplying power to amplification equipment must comply with the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association as found in NFPA 72, which is hereby adopted by reference, as amended from time-to-time. 
(f)  The owner of a structure shall maintain any amplification equipment required by this section in an operating condition. The amplification equipment in commercial structures may be inspected periodically as deemed necessary by the fire chief or police chief. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 14-396. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to single-family or two-family structures not put to commercial or institutional use. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, basements and other areas below grade, parking garages, stairwells, and utility tunnels must meet the minimum standards of this section, but elevators may be excluded. A parking structure adjacent or separate from the building is considered to be a stand-alone structure and will be tested accordingly. 
(c)  The owner of any structure with a valid occupancy permit on the effective date of this section that is not in compliance with the requirements of this section shall be required to meet the minimum standards of this section only under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The interior of the structure has a DAQ of 1 or less in 95 percent of the structure, as determined by the fire inspector; or 
(2)  Upon remodeling of the structure or a change in the use of the structure, as determined by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 14-397. - Injunctive relief. 
    In addition to the other penalties allowed under this Code, the village attorney may seek injunctive relief if appropriate to bring structures into compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 7-20-09) 
Chapters 15-17 - RESERVED 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Finance and tax, § 2-451 et seq.; alcohol beverages, ch. 6; cable television, ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-31. - Penalty. 
    Except where otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall fail to obtain a license or permit as required under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 12.13) 
Secs. 18-32-18-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license businesses generally, § 61.34(1), Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 18-56. - Issuance and revocation of licenses. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided by the laws of the state or ordinances of the village, the following provisions shall apply to the issuance, transfer and revocation of all licenses and permits under the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Clerk/treasurer to furnish forms. All applications for licenses or permits shall be made upon regular forms approved by the village board and furnished by the village clerk/treasurer to the applicant. 
(2)  Fees to be paid in advance. The amount of the license or permit fee shall be first paid to the village clerk/treasurer, and his receipt therefor shall be attached to the application. 
(3)  Application to be signed; when notarized. The application shall be signed by the applicant and, where required, shall be sworn to before a notary public or other public officer authorized to administer oaths, and filed with the village clerk/treasurer. 
(4)  Consideration and hearing. The village clerk/treasurer shall present such application to the village board at its next meeting held after the filing thereof, except when a village officer, board or commission is first required to examine or report upon such application, in which case the clerk/treasurer shall refer the application for report to such officer, board or commission and shall present the application and report thereon to the village board as soon as reasonably possible thereafter. Opportunity shall be given by the village board to any person to be heard for or against the granting of any license or permit. 
(5)  Issuance. The village clerk/treasurer shall issue such license or permit only after its issuance has been authorized by the village board or proper officer. 
(6)  Approval or denial by administrative authorities. When administrative authority to issue any license or permit is delegated to any village officer, board or commission under the terms of this chapter, such officer, board or commission shall grant such license or permit when proper application has been made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless the granting of the same appears to be contrary to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. Reasons for denial of any license or permit shall be reduced to writing and delivered or mailed to the applicant. The applicant may at any time within 30 days thereafter request the village board to review such determination, or any failure to make the same, under chapter 2 of this Code. 
(7)  Conditions of license. 
a.  All obligations to village to be paid. Before any license or permit shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter, the village clerk/treasurer shall check all village records to determine whether any applicant is in arrears for taxes or any other obligation to any department of the village. If the clerk/treasurer finds any applicant to be in arrears for taxes or any other obligation, the issuing officer or department shall withhold all licenses and permits for which application has been made until such taxes or obligations have been paid in full. 
b.  Consent to inspection of premises. As a condition of the granting of any license or permit, the licensee or permittee shall agree in writing that during the period of such license or permit the chief of police, police officers or other duly authorized officials of the village may at all reasonable hours enter into and upon the licensed premises for the purpose of inspecting the premises to ascertain if all village ordinances and state laws are being obeyed. 
(8)  Transfer of license or permit. Licenses or permits shall not be transferable from one person to another. Any license may be transferred from one location to another by approval of the village board. A fee of $10.00 shall be charged for any such transfer. 
(9)  Replacement of lost or destroyed license or permit. Whenever any license or permit shall be lost or destroyed without fault on the part of the holder or his agent or employees, a duplicate in lieu thereof may be issued by the village clerk/treasurer, upon satisfying himself of the facts, for a fee of $5.00. 
(10)  Revocation of licenses or permits. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any license or permit issued by the village board or any officer or department of the village may be revoked by the village board at any regular or special meeting by a majority vote in favor of such revocation, provided that no license or permit shall be revoked until the holder thereof has been given an opportunity to be heard by the village board. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the permit or license holder either personally or by registered mail by the village clerk/treasurer in the time and manner as directed by the village board. Any license or permit issued by the village board, any village 
officer or department shall be and remain the property of the village; and upon revocation thereof the license or permit shall be returned to the clerk/treasurer's office; and if not returned after demand, the village reserves the right to institute suit against the holder or anyone having possession of such license or permit for the return of the same. Any person failing to return any such license or permit after revocation thereof and demand having been made shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-11. Whenever any license or permit shall be revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the fee paid therefor shall be made. 
(Code 1983, § 12.02) 
Sec. 18-57. - Licenses and permit fees. 
    A license shall be required for the sale of each of the following or the conduct of the business or activity at the indicated license fee: 
(1)  Alcohol beverages. As set out in section 6-72 of this Code. 
(2)  Animals. As set from time to time by the village board. 
(3)  Auctions. As set from time to time by the village board per day. 
(4)  Auctioneers. As set from time to time by the village board per year. 
(5)  Bicycles. As set from time to time by the village board; nonexpiring during the ownership of the bicycle by the licensee. 
(6)  Dance hall. As set from time to time by the village board. 
(7)  Dance permit. As set from time to time by the village board. 
(8)  Junk and salvage dealers. As set from time to time by the village board. 
(9)  Direct sellers. As set from time to time by the village board. 
(10)  Soft drink/snack vending machines. As set from time to time by the village board. 
(11)  Pawnbrokers and secondhand and jewelry dealers. As set from time to time by the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 12.01(1)-(4), (8)-(11), (13); Ord. No. 98-3, 3-16-98) 
Secs. 18-58-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNK AND SALVAGE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Junkyards generally, § 84.31, Wis. Stats.; village may be more restrictive, §§ 59.07(38), 84.31(9), Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 18-121. - Junk and salvage dealers. 
(a)  Condition of premises. Premises licensed under this article and all structures on the premises shall be so situated and constructed that the business may be carried on in a sanitary manner; shall contain no fire hazards; and shall be arranged so that thorough inspection may be made at any time by the proper health, fire, building and police authorities. All necessary steps shall be taken to eliminate rodents and vermin. 
(b)  Records to be kept. Every licensee under this article shall keep a record of all valuable materials purchased, with the name and address of the party from whom purchased, the kind and quantity purchased, the serial number of the item purchased, and the date of the transaction. Such record shall be kept in a book, which shall be open to inspection by police officers at any time. 
(Code 1983, § 12.09) 
Secs. 18-122-18-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DIRECT SELLERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate, § 66.083, Wis. Stats. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-156. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable organization includes any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation or one purporting to be such. 
    Direct seller means any individual who, for himself or for a partnership, association or corporation, sells goods or takes sales orders for the later delivery of goods at any location other than the permanent business place or residence of such individual, partnership, association or corporation and shall include but not be limited to peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer. 
    Goods includes personal property of any kind and includes goods provided incidental to services offered or sold. 
    Permanent merchant means a direct seller who, for at least one year prior to the consideration of the application of this section to such merchant, has continuously operated an established place of business in the village, or has continuously resided in the village and now does business from his residence. 
(Code 1983, § 12.08(2)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-157. - Exemptions from article. 
    The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this article: 
(1)  Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes. 
(2)  Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods. 
(3)  Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown. 
(4)  Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such goods in their regular course of business. 
(5)  Any person who has an established place of business where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact with and specifically requested a home visit by such person. 
(6)  Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the prospective customer. 
(7)  Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of goods. 
(8)  Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law. 
(9)  Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales for or on behalf of such organization, provided that there is submitted to the clerk/treasurer proof that such charitable organization is registered under § 440.41, Wis. Stats. Any charitable organization not registered under § 440.41, Wis. Stats., or which is exempt from that statute's registration requirements, shall be required to register under this section. 
(10)  Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom complaint has been made to the clerk/treasurer, that such person is a transient merchant; provided that there is submitted to the clerk/treasurer proof that such person has leased for at least one year, or purchased, the premises from which he is conducting business or proof that such person has conducted such business in the village for at least one year prior to the date complaint was made. 
(Code 1983, § 12.08(3)) 
Sec. 18-158. - Regulations; requirements; records. 
(a)  Prohibited practices. 
(1)  A direct seller shall be prohibited from calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place or remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises. 
(2)  A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his visit, his identity, or the identity of the organization he represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being offered shall actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Such portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the goods. 
(3)  No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed. 
(4)  No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any sound-amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the source. 
(5)  No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he is conducting business. 
(b)  Disclosure requirements. 
(1)  After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his name, the name of the company or organization he is affiliated with if any, and the identity of the goods or services he offers to sell. 
(2)  If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales order for the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel the transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25.00, in accordance with § 423.203, Wis. Stats.; and the seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of §§ 423.203(1)(a), (b), (c), (2), (3), Wis. Stats. 
(3)  If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, he shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement; the amount paid in advance; whether full, partial or no advance payment is made; the name, address and telephone number of the seller; the delivery or performance date; and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof. 
(c)  Records. The chief of police shall report to the clerk/treasurer all convictions for violation of this article, and the clerk/treasurer shall note any such violation on the record of the registrant convicted. 
(Code 1983, § 12.08(8)) 
Secs. 18-159-18-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 18-180. - Required. 
    No direct seller shall engage in direct sales within the village without being registered for that purpose as provided in this division. 
(Code 1983, § 12.08(1)) 
Sec. 18-181. - Application. 
(a)  Applicants for registration as required by this division shall complete and return to the clerk/treasurer a registration form furnished by the clerk/treasurer, which shall require the following information: 
(1)  Name, middle initial, permanent address and telephone number and temporary address, if any. 
(2)  Date of birth, height, weight, color of hair and eyes. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold. 
(4)  Temporary address and telephone number from which business shall be conducted, if any. 
(5)  Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods offered and any services offered. 
(6)  Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable. 
(7)  Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the applicant in the conduct of his business. 
(8)  Last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where the applicant conducted similar business. 
(9)  Place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving the village. 
(10)  Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to the applicant's transient merchant business within the last five years, the nature of the offense and the place of conviction. 
(b)  Applicants shall present to the clerk/treasurer for examination: 
(1)  A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required. 
(2)  A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights and measures where the applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities. 
(3)  A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law. Such certificate shall state that the applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for license is made. 
(c)  At the time the registration is returned, the fee required in section 18-57 shall be paid to the clerk/treasurer to cover the cost of processing such registration. 
(d)  The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the clerk/treasurer his agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with his direct sales activities, if the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally. 
(e)  Upon payment of the fee and the signing of the statement, the clerk/treasurer shall register the applicant as a direct seller and date the entry. Such registration shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in section 18-182(b). 
(Code 1983, § 12.08(4)) 
Sec. 18-182. - Investigation; refusal of application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of each application referred to in section 18-181, the clerk/treasurer shall refer it immediately to the chief of police, who shall make and complete an investigation of the statements made in such registration and certify on the application his approval or disapproval within 72 hours of the filing of such application. 
(b)  The clerk/treasurer shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation above, that the application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages and towns, not exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or the applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of section 18-181(b). 
(Code 1983, § 12.08(5)) 
Sec. 18-183. - Appeal. 
    Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the administrative review procedure provided by section 2-366 et seq., of this Code, or under the provisions of §§ 68.07-68.16, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 12.08(6)) 
Cross reference- Administrative review, § 2-366 et seq. 
Sec. 18-184. - Revocation. 
(a)  Registration may be revoked by the village board after notice and hearing if the registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application of registration; made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sales; violated any provision of this article; or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in direct selling. 
(b)  Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing; such notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and a statement of the acts upon which the hearing will be based. 
(Code 1983, § 12.08(9)) 
Secs. 18-185-18-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC DANCES AND DANCE HALLS 

Sec. 18-241. - License required. 
    No person shall conduct or manage for gain within the village any dance hall or pavilion without obtaining a license therefor. 
(Code 1983, § 12.05(1)) 
Sec. 18-242. - Application for license. 
    Every application for a license required by section 18-241 shall be made upon a blank furnished by the village clerk/treasurer and verified and shall contain the name, place of residence, age and occupation of the applicant, the purpose for which a license is desired, and the place where he proposes to carry on or conduct such dance hall or pavilion within the village. The village clerk/treasurer shall issue a license to the applicant upon his compliance with all the provisions of this Code and upon payment of the proper fees. 
(Code 1983, § 12.05(2)) 
Sec. 18-243. - Fees for annual license. 
    The annual fee for a license required by section 18-241 shall be as prescribed in section 18-57. A license for a portion of the year may be obtained after January 1, but such license shall be at the same rate as the annual license fee and will continue from the date of issuance until December 31. 
(Code 1983, § 12.05(3)) 
Sec. 18-244. - Dance permit required. 
    No person subject to the requirements of section 18-241 shall conduct or hold any dance within the village without first obtaining from the village clerk/treasurer a dance permit. 
(Code 1983, § 12.05(4)) 
Sec. 18-245. - Application for dance permit. 
    Every application for a dance permit shall be made upon a blank furnished by the village clerk/treasurer and shall be made at least five days before the dance shall be held. The application shall contain the name and address of the person, association or corporation making application; nature of the entertainment; date and place thereof; time during which the dance shall be conducted; and the fee that shall be charged for admission to the dance. The village clerk/treasurer shall issue a dance permit to the applicant upon compliance with all the provisions of this Code and upon payment of the proper fees. 
(Code 1983, § 12.05(5)) 
Sec. 18-246. - Fee for dance permit. 
    The fee for a dance permit shall be as prescribed in section 18-57. 
(Code 1983, § 12.05(6)) 
Sec. 18-247. - Dance supervisor. 
    The chief of police shall inspect all dance halls for which licenses are required. The chief of police shall appoint a dance supervisor for each dance for which a dance permit shall be issued. The dance supervisor shall inspect any dance hall in which a dance is to be held and supervise the dance for which a dance permit has been issued. The fee charged in section 18-57 shall be used to defray the costs of administering this section. 
(Code 1983, § 12.05(7)) 
Secs. 18-248-18-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 18-281. - License required; fee; investigation; limitations; display. 
(a)  License required. No person shall engage in the business of tattooing in the village on unlicensed property. 
(b)  Fee. The license fee required is $50.00 per annum and must be renewed on or before July 1 of each year. 
(c)  Application investigation. The application for license shall be given to the health officer. The village clerk/treasurer shall issue the license only after the health officer, after an investigation and inspection of the premises where tattooing is proposed to be practiced, certifies that the sanitary conditions prevailing upon the premises comply with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Licenses limited. There shall be no more than one license issued per 20,000 population in the village. 
(e)  Display. The license issued shall be posted at all times on the licensed premises in a conspicuous location. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 6-19-95) 
Sec. 18-282. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved means acceptable to the health officer based upon a determination of conformance to good public health practices. 
    Health officer means and includes the health officer or an authorized agent of the health officer. 
    Sterilize means submission to the steam pressure (autoclave) method with at least 15 pounds of pressure per square inch at 250 degrees Fahrenheit for at least 30 minutes. 
    Tattooing means and includes any method of placing or removing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin of a person with ink or color by the aid of needles or instruments. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 2, 6-19-95) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-283. - Health and sanitary requirements. 
(a)  Premises. 
(1)  All tattooing establishments shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Antiseptic procedures shall be followed to ensure physical cleanliness and sanitation. 
(2)  The health officer shall have the right under sections 18-56(7)(b) and 18-286 to inspect any tattoo shop licensed under the provisions of this article for the purpose of determining whether or not any of the terms of this article are being violated. 
(3)  A hand-washing facility supplied with hot and cold water under pressure, soap and single-service towels shall be located in the room in which the tattoo is administered. 
(4)  Approved waste containers with nonabsorbent plastic liners shall be used for all tissues, towels, gauze pads and other similar items used on the customer. 
(5)  No person shall be present in the immediate vicinity of the area in which tattoos are administered unless authorized by the tattoo operator to be there. 
(b)  Equipment. 
(1)  Sterilization of equipment required. 
a.  All tattoo establishments shall be equipped with an autoclave in good working order and manufactured with the temperature and pressure gauges marked and visible on the outside of the unit. 
b.  Needles shall be used on only one customer and then discarded after use. 
c.  Needles and/or swabs may not be reused on the same person. All waste materials must be disposed of in accordance with ILHR regulations dealing with biohazards. 
d.  All instruments shall be thoroughly cleaned before being sterilized. This may be done with an ultrasonic cleaner or with a probe; needles or brushes should be able to enter the smallest opening of the instrument. After cleaning, instruments shall be rinsed under fresh running tap water. 
e.  After sterilization, all needles and other instruments not individually wrapped shall be stored in a sterilized and covered glass container or in a stainless steel tray and submerged in an approved sterilizing and disinfecting solution. The health officer shall supply all establishments licensed under this article with a list of approved sterilizing and disinfecting solutions. 
f.  Equipment or instruments requiring sterilization may be wrapped with an approved paper or plastic or placed in glass or plastic tubes. All such packages or containers shall be marked with temperature recording tape or labels and dated with the date of sterilization. 
(2)  Stencils. 
a.  Plastic stencils shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use and sanitized by immersion for ten minutes in a chlorine disinfectant solution prepared by mixing one tablespoon of household bleach containing five percent chlorine with one pint of water. A fresh solution of chlorine must be prepared for each stencil. After sanitizing, the stencils shall be rinsed in running tap water and air dried or blotted dry with a clean, single-service towel. Prior to use, each precleaned stencil shall be rinsed in a 70 percent isopropyl alcohol solution. 
b.  Paper stencils shall only be used once. New paper stencils shall be used for every individual. 
(3)  Dyes and inks. 
a.  All pigments, dyes and instruments used in the practice of tattooing shall be sterilized before use. 
b.  The licensee shall submit in writing to the health officer the source of all dyes and inks used in administering tattoos. 
c.  Dyes or inks shall be taken only from squeeze bottle containers in which the dyes or inks have been sterilized. 
d.  Immediately before applying a tattoo, the dye to be used for the tattoo shall be squeezed from the sterile dye bottles into sterile disposable cups. Upon the completion of the tattoo, the cups and unused dye shall be discarded. Any dye in which the needles were dipped shall not be used on another person. 
(c)  Skin preparation. 
(1)  Aseptic techniques must be utilized in the practice of tattooing. 
a.  Each operator is required to scrub his hands thoroughly before commencing tattooing on the customer's skin. 
b.  If the customer's skin is to be shaved, the skin shall be washed with a cleansing, medicated soap before shaving. A safety razor shall be used. A new blade shall be used for each customer. The blade shall be discarded after each use. Reusable blade holders shall be sterilized after each use. If disposable blade holders are used, they may be used on one customer only and then must be discarded. 
c.  The skin area to be tattooed shall be prepared by thoroughly washing the area with 70 percent isopropyl alcohol or other method approved by the health officer. 
d.  Single-use gauze pads, cloths and towels shall be used in the skin cleaning and preparation process. 
e.  Petroleum jelly used for applying stencils shall be dispensed from a single-use disposable container or with a sterile tongue blade or sterile applicator stick, which shall be discarded after each use. 
(2)  After completing work on any person, the tattooed area shall be washed with 70 percent isopropyl alcohol. A dry, sterile gauze dressing shall be used to cover the tattooed area. Use of medicated ointment on the tattooed area is permitted. 
(d)  General supplies. 
(1)  All tattooing establishments shall have clean, laundered towels, washcloths and disposable paper towels in sufficient quantity for the sanitary operation of the practice of tattooing. 
(2)  A clean towel and washcloth shall be used for each customer. 
(3)  Clean towels and washcloths shall be stored in a closed, dustproof container. 
(4)  Soiled towels and washcloths shall be stored in an approved covered container. 
(5)  All operators shall wear clean, washable garments. 
(6)  The operating table, chair and supply tables shall be constructed of a material capable of being easily and thoroughly cleaned. 
(e)  Operator requirements. 
(1)  The operator shall be free of communicable diseases that may be transmitted by the practice of tattooing. 
(2)  Operators with open sores or skin infections on the hand or hands shall not be permitted to engage in the practice of tattooing. 
(3)  The operator shall not use tobacco in any form while administering the tattoo. 
(4)  The operator shall wash his hands thoroughly with soap and water before any skin preparation or tattooing; the hands shall be dried with individual single-service towels. 
(5)  Physical examination of operators. 
a.  The health officer shall have the power to require any tattooer to submit to a practicing physician for a physical examination whenever the tattooer is suspected of having any infectious or contagious disease that may be transmitted by the practice of tattooing. The expense of the physical examination shall be paid by the tattooer. 
b.  Any tattooer notified to appear for a physical examination, as may be required by subsection a, shall immediately cease working as a tattooer and shall not be allowed to work thereafter as a tattooer until he shall have first received a certificate in writing from a practicing physician that he is not inflicted with any infectious or contagious condition or disease that may be transmitted by the practice of tattooing. 
(f)  Customers. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo any person under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  Inquiry shall be made, and no tattooing shall be performed on any person who is suspected of having jaundice or hepatitis or who has recovered from jaundice or hepatitis within the preceding six months. 
(3)  Tattooing shall not be performed on any person in an area with an evident skin infection or other skin disease or condition, including but not limited to rashes, pimples, boils or infections. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 3, 6-19-95) 
Sec. 18-284. - Record retention; penalties. 
(a)  Record retention. Records shall be kept of all tattoos administered, including the name of the customer, date, time, identification of tattoo, and the operator's name. Records shall be kept on the premises of the tattoo shop where tattoos are administered. These records shall be available for inspection for a period of six months after the date the tattoo is applied. Inspections of these records can be made by the health officer or a law enforcement officer in the act of investigating a complaint in reference to license violations. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person found to have violated any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 4, 6-19-95) 
Sec. 18-285. - Suspension and revocation of licenses; grounds. 
    Licenses issued under this article may be suspended or revoked pursuant to section 18-56 and this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 12.11(1), 6-19-95) 
Cross reference- Administrative review, § 2-366 et seq. 
Sec. 18-286. - Inspection. 
    The health officer or an authorized representative may enter any establishment licensed under this article to inspect the premises, secure samples or specimens, examine and copy any relevant document, or obtain photographs or other evidence needed to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 12.11(3), 6-19-95) 
Sec. 18-287. - Enforcement of rules and regulations. 
    Whenever, upon inspection of a licensed establishment by an authorized agent of the health officer or by the health officer, it is found the establishment is not operating or equipped as required in sections 2-283 and 2-284, the health officer or an agent shall notify in writing the person operating the premises and shall specify the requirements described by state law or code and local ordinance to make such place of business conform to the standards established, and shall specify the time limit within which compliance shall take place. If the time limit in the order is not met, or any extension of time granted for compliance, the permit to operate the establishment may be suspended by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 12.11(2), 6-19-95) 
Sec. 18-288. - Emergency health hazard situations. 
    Where, as a result of an inspection, the health officer or an agent has reasonable cause to believe that any inspected construction, sanitary condition, method or operation of premises or equipment used on the premises creates a danger to health, the health officer may issue a temporary order prohibiting the continued operation that creates the immediate danger to health. The health officer or authorized agent may, in addition to the above, without written notice, suspend a tattoo establishment license where such violations of exist to such a degree as to constitute, in the opinion of the health officer, an immediate health hazard. By so doing, the licensee must immediately cease all operations authorized by the license or permit. § 97.12(2), Wis. Stats., is incorporated by reference in this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 12.11(4), 6-19-95) 
Sec. 18-289. - Appeal by the operator. 
    Any person aggrieved by an order of the health officer may appeal such order to the board of health within 30 days after the issuance of such order. The board of health may either reaffirm, summarily set aside or modify the order, or set a date for a hearing on the matter. The action taken by the board of health may either suspend the order or continue it in force pending determination of the issue. If the board of health has summarily modified the order, the person aggrieved may appeal from the modified order. The procedures for appeal of health department orders as found in section 1-11 shall apply. An order of the board of health may be appealed to the circuit court of the county pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 12.11(5), 6-19-95) 
Secs. 18-290-18-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND AND JEWELRY DEALERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers and secondhand and jewelry dealers, § 134.71, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 18-301. - License required. 
    No person shall conduct or manage for gain within the village any pawn, second and jewelry shop without obtaining a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, 3-16-98) 
Sec. 18-302. - Application for license. 
    Every application for a license required by section 18-301 shall be made upon a blank furnished by the village clerk/treasurer and verified and shall contain all noted and required information. The village clerk/treasurer shall issue a license to the applicant upon his compliance with all the provisions of this Code and state law, upon payment of the proper fees and law enforcement recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, 3-16-98) 
Sec. 18-303. - Conditions of premises. 
    Premises licensed under this article and all structures on the premises shall be so situated and constructed that the business may be carried on in a sanitary manner; shall contain no fire hazards; and shall be arranged so that thorough inspection may be made at any time by the proper health, fire, building and police authorities. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, 3-16-98) 
Chapters 19-21 - RESERVED 
Chapter 22 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Satellite dish antennas, § 14-366 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Authority regarding CATV, § 66.082, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 22-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable Television Franchise Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.01, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable means coaxial and/or fiberoptic cables, wave guides or other conductors and equipment for providing television or other services by cable or through its facilities as herein contemplated, and including closed circuit special event programs and educational television. 
    Grantee means a person or entity to whom or which a franchise under this chapter is granted by the village, along with the lawful successors or assigns of such person or entity. 
    Gross revenues means any revenue, derived directly or indirectly by a grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents and any persons or entities in which a grantee has a financial interest of five percent or more, from or in connection with the operation of a cable system in the village, including but not limited to basic or extended basic subscriber service monthly fees, pay cable fees, installation and reconnection fees. The term does not include any taxes on services furnished by a grantee and imposed directly upon any subscriber or used by the village, state or other governmental unit and collected by a grantee on behalf of the governmental unit. 
    Normal business hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the village are open to serve customers, plus at least one night per week until 8:00 p.m. and at least four hours on the weekend. 
    Normal operating conditions means those conditions affecting service within the control of the grantee. Those conditions presumed to be outside normal operating conditions include natural disasters, human-caused disasters and civil disturbances, power or telephone outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions where such condition limits the grantee's ability to provide service. Those conditions presumed to be within normal operating conditions include special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance, rebuild or upgrade of the cable system. 
    Street means the surface of and space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive, now or hereafter existing as such within the village. 
    Subscriber means any person or entity legally receiving for any purpose the services of a grantee in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.03, 4-1-96) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-3. - Grant of franchise. 
    This chapter allows the village to grant to a franchise grantee, its successors and assigns, a nonexclusive license to install, maintain and operate a cable television system for the distribution of television signals, frequency-modulated radio signals and any other electronic signals capable of being transmitted over a fiberoptic and/or coaxial cable network and closed circuit television programs for a term not to exceed 15 years, provided that the franchise grantee conforms to the conditions, limitations and requirements of this chapter. This chapter may be amended from time to time by the village through the enactment of amendments to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.02, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-4. - Acceptance by grantee. 
    A franchise granted under this chapter shall be effective upon written acceptance of the franchise being filed with the clerk/treasurer. The filing must take place within 30 days of the offer of the franchise being made by the village. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.21, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-5. - Grantee without recourse. 
(a)  A grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the village for any loss, cost or expense, or damage arising out of any provisions or requirements of a franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the village, or for the failure of the village to have authority to grant all or any part of the franchise. 
(b)  The grantee acknowledges that in accepting a franchise it does so relying on its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the village to grant the franchise. 
(c)  By accepting a franchise, a grantee acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of the village or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed herein. 
(d)  The grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof, and is willing to and does accept all the risks of the meeting of such terms and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.26, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-6. - Contest of validity. 
    A grantee agrees by acceptance of a franchise that it will not at any time set up against the village in a claim for proceeding any condition or term of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void, or that the village had no power or authority to make such term or condition, but shall be required to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their entirety. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.28, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-7. - Village rules. 
(a)  The village reserves the right to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained in this chapter and existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police powers. Such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not be in substantial conflict with the rights granted in this chapter and not be in conflict with the laws of the state. 
(b)  The village may, during the term of a franchise, free of charge where aerial construction exists, maintain upon the poles of the grantee within the village limits wire and pole fixtures necessary for a police and fire alarm system, such wires and fixtures to be constructed and maintained to the satisfaction of the grantee and in accordance with its specifications. 
(c)  The village may inspect all construction or installation work during such construction or installation, or at any time after completion thereof, in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other governing ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.18, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-8. - Incorporation of amendments. 
    This chapter and a franchise granted under this chapter may be amended to incorporate amendments to the statutes, rules and regulations of the federal government as they are promulgated by the federal government. Any provision in this chapter in conflict with or preempted by such rules, regulations or statutes shall be superseded. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.22, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-9. - Franchise territory. 
    A franchise granted under this chapter is for the then present territorial limits of the village. For any households or areas existing or added to the franchise territory during the term of the franchise, service shall be extended within one year wherever density reaches 20 dwelling units per mile. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.07, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-10. - Description of the system. 
(a)  A village cable system shall be at least 450 MHz in bandwidth when newly built, rebuilt or significantly upgraded. 
(b)  A grantee shall, upon request of the village, provide a complete written description of the cable system in the village. Such written description shall be updated as substantial changes are made. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.12, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-11. - Franchise fee and financial reporting. 
(a)  Franchise fee payment. As compensation for permission to use the streets and public ways of the village for the construction, operation, maintenance, modification and reconstruction of a cable system, and for the village's costs in establishing a regulatory program for a grantee, the grantee shall pay to the village each year an amount equal to five percent of the grantee's annual gross revenues. 
(b)  Payment schedule; estimated payments; late payments. 
(1)  The franchise fee shall be paid on a quarterly basis according to the following schedule: revenues for January through March shall be reflected in a May 15 payment; revenues for April through June shall be reflected in an August 15 payment; revenues for July through September shall be reflected in a November 15 payment; and revenues for October through December shall be reflected in a February 15 payment. 
(2)  The grantee may make estimated payments for the first three-quarters of a calendar year, provided that no estimated quarterly payment is less than 25 percent of the previous year's total annual payment, and that any discrepancy between the estimated quarterly payments and the total owed for the calendar year is corrected by the February 15 payment. 
(3)  Payments made after any due date shall be subject to a late payment fee in the amount of 25 percent for any portion of a month the payment is late, with a maximum of one late payment assessment in any one calendar month. Late payments owed in any second calendar month will be assessed the 25 percent charge based on the previous month's assessment, including that month's late payment assessment. 
(4)  If the grantee agrees to charge a subscriber no more than actual costs the grantee incurs in collecting that subscriber's late payment, the grantee shall pay to the village a late payment fee of 1.5 percent per month or portion thereof for any late franchise fee payments. 
(c)  Annual report. No later than April 15 of each year the grantee shall present to the village a report of system finances for the previous year, which shall include gross revenues from all sources and detail of the amount contributed by each revenue component within the franchise territory. In addition, upon request of the village, the grantee shall present to the village an audited, consolidated financial statement showing operating expenses, net income and an end-of-year balance sheet. 
(d)  Acceptance not considered release. No acceptance of any payment by the village shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the village may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.17, 4-1-96) 
State Law reference- Authority, § 66.082(3)(c), Wis. Stats. 
Sec. 22-12. - Waiver of charges. 
(a)  During a franchise, a grantee shall provide one free outlet and basic and expanded basic cable service to each municipally owned or leased building passed by the cable system and used substantially for municipal purposes, as well as to any and all schools, whether private or public, within the franchise territory. 
(b)  The grantee shall be required to provide one dedicated, noncommercial access channel, including wiring and insertion equipment needed to connect to the cable system. 
(c)  Upon 270 days' notice by the village, the grantee shall, at the option of the village, be required to add an additional access channel, including wiring and insertion equipment needed to connect to the cable system, at a location within the franchise territory chosen by the village. 
(d)  The village shall have sole authority to administer the community access channels unless it chooses to delegate such authority. A grantee shall not be responsible for the equipment or operating costs for community access channels, except as provided for in a franchise agreement. 
(e)  The grantee shall provide the village with an emergency alert override capable of securely accepting from a remote location and displaying village information on all channels. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.19, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-13. - Rates. 
(a)  Rates charged by a grantee for service shall be fair and reasonable. Before any service is sold to any customer, the grantee shall file with the village clerk/treasurer its schedule of rates for installation, monthly service charges and any other charges related to the operation of the cable system, together with a statement of the rights and obligations of subscribers. 
(b)  Subsequent additions or amendments to rates and service charges shall likewise be filed with the clerk/treasurer at least 30 days before the same become effective. 
(c)  The village reserves the option to regulate rates for cable service, should such power be allowed under federal and state law. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.13, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-14. - Subscriber service. 
(a)  A grantee shall be required to provide a location within the village open during normal business hours to receive customer payments, and to deliver, exchange or accept return of cable equipment. 
(b)  The grantee shall provide access to a local or toll-free telephone number for programming questions and service requests. The number shall be either staffed or provided with answering capabilities 24 hours a day. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.11, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-15. - Customer service standards. 
(a)  Sufficient service facilities required. A grantee shall maintain resources sufficient and near enough to the franchise territory to provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with this section and other provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Service standards. The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. only for good cause and for the shortest possible time. Service may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance and repair, except on nights commencing on Saturday and Sunday and on holidays. Scheduled or predictable service interruptions, except for weekly routine maintenance, insofar as possible shall be preceded by notice, which may be provided across the cable system. The interruptions shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system to the extent practicable. The grantee shall maintain a written log or an equivalent capable of access and reproduction of all service interruptions and requests for service, which log shall be available for village inspection during the franchise period. 
(c)  Telephone lines. The grantee shall provide local toll-free or collect call telephone access to its subscribers within the franchise territory. Any calls should be answered by a customer service representative during normal business hours; calls outside this period may be answered by an automated response mechanism, but such calls should be processed by a grantee's representative within 12 hours. The grantee shall provide sufficient phone answering capacity that customer calls are answered on average within 30 seconds 90 percent of the time; and that customers receive a busy signal no more than three percent of the time. Violations of these standards shall be subject to penalties under provisions of section 22-23. 
(d)  Installation. The grantee shall complete requests for subscriber installations within seven business days of order placement when the installation is within 150 feet of the existing cable system. Installation requests required to be honored under this chapter beyond the 150-foot standard must be completed within 14 days. If the grantee fails to meet these standards, the grantee shall provide the subscriber with a free month of the requested service. The grantee may request the village toll these periods for reasonable circumstances beyond its control. 
(e)  Repair standards. The grantee shall maintain a repair force capable, under normal operating circumstances, of responding to service interruption and degradation complaints made during normal business hours within four hours. For complaints made outside normal business hours, the grantee must respond within 16 hours. For the purpose of this subsection, "response" shall mean at a minimum contacting the subscriber by phone or in person. Where a grantee misses either of these deadlines, the grantee must provide the subscriber with one month's free service. The grantee may request the village toll the repair period for reasonable circumstances beyond its control. 
(f)  Service call scheduling. When the grantee needs to arrange a service appointment at a subscriber's location, the grantee must offer the subscriber a service window not to exceed four hours in duration. The grantee may not cancel a service window without the subscriber's consent. Where a grantee misses a service window, the grantee must provide the subscriber with one month's free service. The grantee may request the village toll the service call period for reasonable circumstances beyond its control. 
(g)  Service interruptions and significant degradation. When the grantee has failed to provide a subscriber with appropriate service due to service outage or significant audio or video degradation not due to the subscriber's equipment or action, the subscriber may request a rebate of any fees paid for the affected service under the following schedule, and the grantee must provide such rebates. For the purposes of this section, the outage or degradation period shall begin when the subscriber provides notice to the grantee of the outage or degradation. For the purposes of this section, any complaints of outage or degradation by a subscriber within any month shall be cumulative. The grantee may request the village waive or modify the rebate provisions for reasonable circumstances beyond its control. 
(1)  For periods at least four hours long but under 24 hours, a rebate of 1/30 of the monthly fee for affected services for each instance. 
(2)  For periods of at least 24 hours, a rebate of one-tenth of the monthly fee for affected services for each 24-hour period or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.29, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-16. - Technical performance. 
    The cable system shall be operated to comply with or exceed all guidelines and standards set by the FCC for signal quality and leakage. The village reserves the right to test the system or any part thereof and independently measure the signal quality. The grantee shall provide reasonable access to its facilities and any assistance necessary for such testing. The system shall comply at all times with the applicable National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.09, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-17. - Subscriber privacy. 
(a)  No monitoring of any authorized terminal connected to the system shall take place without specific written authorization by the user of the terminal in question on each occasion and written notice to the village, except as may be required for normal maintenance of the system. 
(b)  A grantee shall not, except as required by governmental action, provide any data concerning specific subscribers or users or their use of subscriber services without first securing written authorization from the subscribers or users as required in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984. 
(c)  Subscribers and users shall retain the right to deactivate their terminals, but shall continue to be responsible for charges until the grantee is notified to terminate service. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.08, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-18. - Open books and records. 
    A grantee shall manage all of its operations in accordance with the policy of totally open books and records vis-a-vis the village. The authorized officers or agents of the village shall have the right to inspect, upon notice, during normal business hours all books, records, maps, plans, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test results, records of request for service and other like materials of the grantee that relate to the operation of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.10, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-19. - Protection of nonsubscribers. 
    A grantee shall at all times keep its cables and other appurtenances used for transmitting signals shielded in such a manner that there will be no interference with signals received by radios or televisions not connected to the grantee's service. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.23, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-20. - Conditions on street occupancy. 
(a)  Use. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a grantee within the village shall be so located as not to cause interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and not to cause interference with the rights of or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, alleys or other public ways and places. 
(b)  Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall first give notice to the director of public works of any contemplated disturbances of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, and shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the director of public works, replace and restore all pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surface of any street or alley disturbed in as good condition as before such work commenced. The grantee shall otherwise comply with village ordinances relating to street openings. 
(c)  Relocation. If at any time during a franchise the village shall elect to alter or change the location or grade of any street, alley or other public way, the grantee, upon 72-hour notice by the village, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. If any construction by the grantee is in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the grantee shall likewise, upon reasonable notice by the village, remove, relay and relocate its property in such a manner as to remedy such violation at its own expense. 
(d)  Placement of fixtures. The grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures where they will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone or other fixture, water hydrant or main. All such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed between the outer edge of the sidewalk and the curbline where such boundaries exist, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on such alley in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on the streets, alleys and public ways. However, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use by the grantee of existing public utility poles where practical, providing mutually satisfactory rental agreements can be entered into with the grantee. 
(e)  Underground service. The grantee shall install underground service in areas where electric and phone services are underground. Unless a greater depth is required, the minimum depth for underground cable service at the time of initial installation shall be 12 inches. 
(f)  Temporary removal of wire for building moving. A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the village, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expenses of such temporary raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee may require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given advance notice of at least five working days to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(g)  Tree trimming. The grantee, to the same extent that the village has such authority, may trim trees that overhang streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the village so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee. The grantee must apply to the village for a no-fee permit before trimming trees. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.14, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-21. - Waiver of objections. 
    By the adoption of this chapter, the village expressly waives all objections it has or may have to the legal rights of the grantee to attach its cables, equipment and transmission lines to the poles of the village, pursuant to an agreement. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.25, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-22. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Indemnification. The grantee shall defend and save the village, its agents and employees, harmless from all claims, damages, losses and expenses, including attorney's fees, sustained by the village on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever arising out of: 
(1)  The enactment of this chapter and granting of a franchise thereunder. 
(2)  The installation, operation or maintenance of the cable system except for acts of the village, its agents or employees, unless such acts are at the request of and under the direction or supervision of the grantee. 
(b)  Notification and filing. The village shall notify the grantee within ten days after the presentation of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the village on the part of the grantee. The grantee shall furnish to the village, before any franchise becomes effective, satisfactory evidence in writing that the grantee has in force and will maintain in force during the term of the franchise public liability insurance. 
(c)  Liability insurance. 
(1)  A grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the permit a general comprehensive liability insurance policy naming as additional insured the village, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company approved by the village and in a form satisfactory to the village attorney. The policy shall protect the village, its agencies and employees, against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death or property damage occasioned by the operations of the grantee under any franchise granted under this chapter, in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death to any one person with the limit however of $2,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident, and $1,000,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. The village shall be named as an additional insured under such insurance, and a copy of the current in-force policy shall be deposited with the village administrator. 
(2)  On every third year anniversary of the granting of a cable franchise, the village shall have the power to reasonably increase the amount of liability insurance required; and the grantee shall have 60 days after notification to file proof of such increased coverage. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.15, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-23. - Bond, security fund and remedies. 
(a)  Bond. During the construction or substantial rebuild of a cable system, the grantee shall file with the village a performance bond in the amount of $50,000.00. The bond shall be released when the grantee certifies to the village that the construction or substantial rebuild is complete and the village accepts such certification as proven. 
(b)  Security fund. At the time a franchise is accepted, the grantee shall file with the village and maintain through the term of the franchise a bond in the amount of $5,000.00 as a common security fund for the faithful performance by the grantee of all the provisions of the franchise. Provision shall be made to permit the village to withdraw funds from the security fund pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. The grantee shall not use the security fund for other purposes and shall not assign, pledge or otherwise use this security fund as security for any purpose. Within ten days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn by the village from the security fund pursuant to this section, the grantee shall replenish the bond to the required amount. 
(c)  Failure to comply. Any violation by a grantee, its vendor, lessee or successor, of the provisions of a franchise or any material portion or portions thereof, or the failure promptly to perform any of the provisions thereof shall, after 30 days' written notice and opportunity to cure is given to the grantee, cause the grantee to be fined up to $100.00 a day from the security fund until proper correction is made. The village also reserves the right to forfeit the franchise and cancel all rights under this chapter. A grantee is not responsible for failure to provide adequate service when that failure is caused by acts of God, strikes, governmental or military action, or other conditions beyond its control, including the unavailability of material or parts. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.16, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-24. - Grantee rules. 
    A grantee may promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise and to assure uninterrupted service to all its subscribers. However, such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter or the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.24, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-25. - Work performed by others. 
(a)  A grantee shall give prior notice to the village specifying the names and addresses of any entity, other than the grantee, that performs substantial services pursuant to the franchise; however, all provisions of the franchise remain the responsibility of the grantee. All personnel of the grantee or its subcontractors shall carry and display if requested a photo I.D. identifying themselves as representatives of the grantee when performing services at subscriber locations in the village. 
(b)  All provisions of a franchise shall apply to any subcontractor or others performing any work or services pursuant to the provisions of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.27, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-26. - Transfer procedure. 
    The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred by the grantee without compliance with § 66.082(5), Wis. Stats., which is adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth. 
(1)  The parties to the sale or transfer of a franchise shall make a written request to the village for its approval of a sale or transfer of the franchise. 
(2)  The village shall reply in writing within 30 days of the request with a written notification of any information it needs to evaluate the request. Within 30 days of such information being provided, the village shall indicate approval of the request or its determination that a public hearing is necessary. 
(3)  Within 60 days after the public hearing, the village shall approve or deny the sale or transfer request and notify the grantee in writing of its decision. 
(4)  The parties to the sale or transfer of a franchise only, without the inclusion of a cable communications system in which at least substantial construction has commenced, shall establish that the sale or transfer of a franchise only will be in the public interest. 
(5)  The new holder of a sold or transferred franchise shall, within 30 days of the sale or transfer, file with the village a copy of the deed, agreement or other written instrument evidencing such sale, transfer of ownership or control or lease, certified and sworn to as correct by the grantee. The new holder shall within the same period file with the village any and all required bonds, proofs of insurance and certifications, and accept in writing all responsibilities relating to the cable franchise and system. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.06, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-27. - Termination or expiration. 
(a)  A franchise granted under this chapter may be terminated by the village for just cause, which may include but not be limited to a material breach of the provisions of this chapter, a franchise agreement issued under this chapter, or other violation of local, state or federal law. The village shall not terminate a franchise without notice to the grantee, reasonable opportunity to cure, and a public proceeding offering the grantee and other interested parties the opportunity to comment. 
(b)  Should a grantee's franchise be terminated or expire and there is no judicial or administrative review of the termination or expiration taking place, the grantee shall begin removal, within 90 days of termination or expiration, of all property owned by the grantee and placed on a public right-of-way unless permitted by the village to abandon the property to the village or to a purchaser. 
(c)  If a franchise has been terminated or has expired, the village shall have options, to the extent then permitted by law, to purchase the tangible assets of the grantee's cable television system previously governed by the franchise at its fair market value, which may be determined by a bona fide offer to purchase the system, to assign such rights to purchase, or to require removal of all the grantee's property located within the public ways of the village at the grantee's expense. Such an option must be exercised within one year from the date of the termination or expiration of the franchise, the entry of a final judgment by a court reviewing the question of the termination or expiration, or the entry of a final order upon appeal of the same, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.05, 4-1-96) 
Sec. 22-28. - Renewal. 
(a)  To the extent applicable, federal law shall govern the procedures and standards for renewal of any franchise awarded pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  To the extent federal law is not applicable, the village shall, in its sole judgment and discretion, have the right to grant or deny renewal, provided that, at a minimum, the grantee provides written notice of its intent to seek renewal at least 30 months but no more than 36 months prior to the expiration of the applicable franchise term. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 22.04, 4-1-96) 
Chapters 23-25 - RESERVED 
Chapter 26 - COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, ch. 58; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; traffic citations, fees and fines, § 90-61 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Municipal court and municipal judge. 
(a)  Municipal court created. There is created and established a municipal court, to be designated as the "Mid-Moraine Municipal Court," under the provisions of ch. 755, Wis. Stats., and pursuant to the agreement for the operation of a municipal court for Ozaukee and Washington Counties, a copy of which is on file with the village clerk/treasurer. 
(b)  Municipal judge. The municipal court shall be under the jurisdiction of and presided over by a municipal judge, who shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state and who resides in any of the member municipalities as defined in the agreement. The municipal judge shall be elected at large in the spring election for a term of two years commencing on May 1 of the year of his election. The governing bodies of the member municipalities shall provide for a primary election if more than two candidates file nomination papers for the position of municipal judge. 
(c)  Bond. The amount of the bond required by § 755.03(1), Wis. Stats., is established at $2,500.00. 
(d)  Hours. The municipal court shall be open at such times as determined by the municipal judge, subject to the agreement. 
(e)  Contempt. The municipal judge is authorized to impose forfeitures for contempt and jail sentences for nonpayment as provided in § 800.12, Wis. Stats. 
(f)  Jurisdiction. This section shall not be construed to limit the jurisdiction of the court granted by Wis. Stats., nor shall it be construed to limit the court's authority to impose penalties as set forth in the statutes. 
(Code 1983, § 1.11; Ord. No. 95-7, 7-17-95) 
Sec. 26-2. - Warrant and commitment order service fees. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of §§ 814.70, 814.705 and 814.71, Wis. Stats., on behalf of the Village of Kewaskum, the Mid-Moraine Municipal Court, of which the municipality is a member of, shall charge a $50.00 warrant and commitment order service fee for all warrants or orders issued. Upon the municipal court's receipt of payment, the Village of Kewaskum shall receive $25.00 of the fee and the Mid-Moraine Municipal Court shall receive $25.00 of the fee. 
(b)  If there is more than one defendant or person to be served at a given address, the warrant or commitment order service fee shall apply to each person served. If the person has warrants or commitment orders from multiple jurisdictions, the fee shall be assessed with regard to each such jurisdiction. 
(c)  All warrant or commitment order service fees that are forwarded by the municipal court to the Village of Kewaskum shall be deposited in the village's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 26-3. - Warrant and commitment order service fee when served by village police. 
(a)  Service fees. Pursuant to the provisions of §§ 814.70, 814.705 and 814.71, Wis. Stats., the Village of Kewaskum Police Department shall charge a service fee of $35.00 when the village police serve a warrant or commitment order upon a person. The person served with the warrant or commitment order shall be responsible for the payment of the warrant or commitment order service fee. The service fee may be collected as a court cost through the court. 
(b)  Multiple warrants. The Village of Kewaskum Police Department shall charge a separate fee for each warrant or commitment order served on a person. 
(c)  Disposition of fees. Upon collection by the court, all warrant or commitment order service fees shall be forwarded by the court to the village treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Chapters 27-29 - RESERVED 
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; village board, § 2-31 et seq. 
State Law reference- Village elections generally, § 61.19, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 30-1. - Poll hours. 
    The polls at all general elections in the village shall be opened at 7:00 a.m. and closed at 8:00 p.m. 
(Code 1983, § 1.08) 
Sec. 30-2. - Municipal board of absentee canvassers. 
(a)  The municipal board of absentee canvassers shall be composed of the municipal clerk, or a qualified elector of the municipality designated by the clerk, and two other qualified electors of the municipality appointed by the clerk for a term of two years commencing on January 1 of each odd-numbered year. The municipality may appoint additional inspectors under § 7.30(2)(a), Wis. Stats., to assist the absentee ballot board of canvassers in canvassing absentee ballots under this section. 
(b)  The Village of Kewaskum declares in lieu of canvassing absentee ballots at the polling place under § 6.88, Wis. Stats., the municipal board of absentee ballot canvassers may canvass all absentee ballots in the municipality at the November presidential election and any election where a large voter turnout is expected. 
(c)  The municipal clerk shall give at least 48 hours' notice of any meeting under this subsection. 
(d)  The municipal clerk no later than the closing hour of the polls, shall post at his or her office and on the Internet at a site announced by the clerk before the polls open, and shall make available to any person upon request, a statement of the number of absentee ballots that the clerk has mailed or transmitted to electors and that have been returned by the closing hour on election day. 
(Ord. No. 12-06, § 1, 5-21-12) 
Chapters 31-33 - RESERVED 
Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Emergency powers generally, § 66.325, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency government or civil defense means the preparation for and carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from a disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or by fire, flood or other natural causes. 
(Code 1983, § 6.01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-2. - Emergency government director. 
(a)  Conditions of employment. The emergency government director shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board, and shall receive such salary as may be authorized by the village board. He shall take and file an official oath. 
(b)  Duties. The director shall be the executive head of the village emergency government organization and shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of such organization, subject to the direction and control of the village president and the village board. In addition to such powers and responsibilities as may be imposed on him from time to time by the village board, he shall: 
(1)  Coordinate all activities for emergency government within the village. 
(2)  Maintain liaison and cooperate with emergency government agencies and organizations of other political subdivisions and of the state and federal governments. 
(3)  Participate in county and state emergency government activities upon request. 
(4)  Prepare a comprehensive general plan for the emergency government of the village and present such plan to the village board for its approval. 
(5)  Upon the declaration of an emergency, issue all necessary proclamations as to the existence of such state of emergency and such disaster warnings or alerts as are required by the emergency government plan. 
(c)  Assistants. Such deputy and assistant directors may be appointed by the director, subject to the approval of the emergency government commission, as may be deemed necessary. Such appointees shall receive such compensation as the village board may determine. 
(Code 1983, § 6.02) 
Sec. 34-3. - Utilization of existing services and facilities. 
    In preparing and executing the emergency government plan, the director shall utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the existing departments and agencies of the village to the maximum extent practicable. When the village board has approved the plan, all municipal agencies and departments of the village shall perform the duties and functions assigned by the approved plan. 
(Code 1983, § 6.03) 
Sec. 34-4. - Declarations of emergency. 
    The emergency government organization shall take action in accordance with the emergency government plan only after a declaration of emergency and the issuance of official disaster warnings. Declarations of emergency shall be made by the governor, the village board, the village president or, in his absence, by the director. Such state of emergency shall continue during the time during which the emergency conditions exist or are likely to exist unless sooner terminated by the issuing authority; any declaration not issued by the governor may be terminated by the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 6.04) 
Sec. 34-5. - Emergency regulations. 
    Whenever necessary to meet an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the village board, the village president or, in his absence, the emergency government director, may proclaim, promulgate and enforce orders, rules and regulations relating to the conduct of persons and the use of property necessary to protect the public peace, health and safety, to preserve lives and property, and to ensure cooperation in emergency government activities. Such proclamations shall be posted in three public places and may be rescinded by resolution of the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 6.05) 
Sec. 34-6. - Countywide recognition. 
    The emergency government director shall work in conjunction with the county emergency government committee and director. 
(Code 1983, § 6.06) 
Sec. 34-7. - Obstruction of emergency government organization; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency government organization in the enforcement of any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to this chapter or violate any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of subsection (a) shall be subject to § 66.325(2), Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 6.10) 
Chapters 35-37 - RESERVED 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Police and fire commission, § 2-281 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Burning prohibited. 
(a)  Open burning is prohibited. Outdoor fires within the corporate limits of the Village of Kewaskum are prohibited except as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  As defined in National Fire Protection Association Code 1 (Fire Code), section 10.11.7, for other than one-family and two-family dwellings, no hibachi, gas-fired grill, charcoal grill or other similar device used for cooking, heating, or any other purpose, shall be used or kindled on any balcony or under any overhanging portion or within ten feet of any structure. Commercially available electric ranges, grills, or similar electric apparatus shall be permitted. 
(c)  Recreational fires. 
(1)  No recreational fire may be started or allowed to continue burning unless such recreational fire is fully contained within an approved fire pit or outdoor fireplace. An approved fire pit is any below ground dug pit not greater than 36 inches in diameter; lined with noncombustible material, soil, metal or stone; a minimum of four inches/maximum of 12 inches deep; and ringed on the outer diameter with stone, brick or concrete. An outdoor fireplace is any commercially available appliance designed to contain a wood fire when operated according to manufacturer's instructions with all lids, screens and spark-arresting devices in place. 
(2)  No recreational fire pit shall be closer than 25 feet from [to] any dwelling, building structure, shed or garage; nor closer than ten feet from any wooden fence, deck or combustible material. Commercially available outdoor fireplace appliances shall not be within ten feet of any structure or combustible; all recreational fires are to be set back a minimum of six feet from adjoining property lines. 
(3)  No recreational fire shall be started or allowed to continue burning when the wind direction or wind speed will cause embers or other burning material to be carried onto any building or combustible material; nor any time that wind direction will carry smoke into the open windows of any building; nor any time the fire chief has deemed conditions are too hazardous for burning. Smoke from any recreational fire shall not create a nuisance for neighboring properties and fires shall be completely extinguished when police or fire department investigation determines a nuisance or danger is present. 
(4)  Fuel for outdoor recreational fires shall consist only of natural wood or manufactured fire log material only and may not include leaves, rubbish, garbage, trash, construction materials or any other like items, any materials made of or coated with rubber or plastic, leather or petroleum based materials and may not contain any flammable or combustible liquids. 
(5)  Recreational fires shall be constantly attended and supervised by a competent person at least 18 years of age until the fire has been completely extinguished. The means for extinguishing any fire must be kept immediately available at all times when a recreational fire is burning. Proper fire extinguishing equipment includes: a garden hose, shovels, water buckets or an ABC rated fire extinguisher [of] at least ten-pound capacity. 
(6)  Any party who starts or maintains a recreational fire that is allowed to burn out of control shall be held responsible for paying any costs associated with fire control efforts to extinguish the fire. 
(7)  Recreational fires shall be permitted only from 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(Code 1983, § 9.11; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1, 8-2-10) 
Secs. 38-2-38-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-126 et seq. 
State Law reference- Fire departments generally, § 61.65(2)(a), Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 38-36. - Fire department recognized. 
    The village volunteer fire department is officially recognized as the fire department of the village; and the duty of firefighting, prevention of fires, and responding to calls for emergency treatment in the village or designated areas is delegated to such department. Its organization and internal regulation shall be governed by the provisions of this article and by such bylaws adopted by the department as are approved by the village board, except as is otherwise provided by law and ordinance. 
(Code 1983, § 5.01) 
Sec. 38-37. - Bylaws. 
    The village fire department shall adopt bylaws for the control, management and government and for regulating the business and proceedings of the department, which bylaws, after adoption by a two-thirds vote of the members of the department, shall not become effective until approved by the village board. Amendments shall be adopted in the same manner. 
(Code 1983, § 5.02) 
Sec. 38-38. - Appropriations. 
    The village board shall appropriate funds to provide for operation and for such apparatus and equipment for the use of the fire department as it may deem expedient and necessary to maintain efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire. 
(Code 1983, § 5.03) 
Sec. 38-39. - Compensation. 
    The officers and members of the fire department shall receive such compensation from the village as may from time to time be fixed by the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 5.04) 
Sec. 38-40. - Organization. 
(a)  Composition. The fire department shall consist of one chief, an assistant chief, first and second captain, first and second lieutenant, rescue captain, rescue lieutenant, secretary lieutenant, treasurer lieutenant and firefighters. The members of the fire department shall reside within the village or in the sections of the townships protected by the fire department, the village and protected townships. In addition, persons residing on the roads which form the perimeter of this area are eligible to become members, provided their addresses are listed as residing on such roads. Any members residing outside of or absent from the area here specified, for a period of 90 days or longer, shall be dropped from the roster of the fire department, unless excused by the chief. 
(b)  Rescue squad. To be eligible for the rescue squad, a person must be a member of the fire department and shall reside within the village limits or in sections 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, that portion of section 14 bounded on the east by Oak Road, 15, 16, and 17. In addition, persons residing on the roads which form the perimeter of this area are eligible to become members of the rescue squad providing that their addresses are listed as residing on such roads. A person may also become a rescue squad member if he lives in the fire department boundaries, as described in subsection (1), and works within the boundaries described above and his employer allows him to leave work to respond to calls during working hours. 
(c)  Application for membership. Any person desiring to be a member of the fire department may file an application in such form as the fire department may require. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of physical fitness from such physician as the chief may designate. Any applicant shall be approved for membership by the officers of the fire department and ratified by a two-thirds vote of the members. 
(d)  Resignations. All resignations from the department shall take the same course as appointments to membership. 
(e)  Officers. 
(1)  The chief, upon the recommendation of the fire department membership, shall be appointed by the village board for a three-year term. All other officers shall be elected to one-year terms by the members of the department at the December meeting. 
(2)  The chief, assistant chief and other officers shall assume office January 1 and shall hold office until removed for cause after a hearing by action of the fire department and three-fourths of the members of the village board, unless their services be sooner terminated by resignation, change of residence to outside the village limits, or death. 
(3)  No member of the department shall be eligible for the office of chief, assistant chief or any other office who has not been a member of the department for at least two years. 
(Code 1983, § 5.05) 
Sec. 38-41. - Powers and duties of chief. 
(a)  General supervision. The chief shall have the general supervision of the department, which supervision shall be subject to and not conflict with this chapter and the bylaws of the department. He shall be responsible for the personnel and general efficiency of the department. 
(b)  Presiding officer. The captain shall preside at all meetings and, at the request of the chief, call special meetings, preserve order, decide all points of order that may arise, and enforce a rigid observance of this article and bylaws. 
(c)  Command of firefighting operations. The chief shall be present at all fires, if possible, and have complete command and entire responsibility for all firefighting operations, plan the control of the same, direct the action of the department when it arrives at the fire, observe that the department does its duty, grant leaves of absence at a fire when he may deem it proper, and see that the fire apparatus is kept in proper condition at all times. 
(d)  Disciplinary actions. The chief may demote or expel any officer or member of the department for neglect, refusal to perform his departmental duties or nonresidence, subject to an appeal from such demotion or expulsion to the village board. 
(e)  Department budget. Not later than October 1 of each year, the chief shall file with the village administrator a detailed estimate of the appropriations needed for the conduct of the department during the ensuing fiscal year. 
(f)  Reports to the board. The chief shall submit a written report to the village board not later than February 1 of each year, and at such other times as he deems desirable, relating to the condition of various pieces of apparatus and appurtenances, the number of hydrants and the condition of the same, the number of fires occurring since the previous report and the date of the same and loss occasioned thereby, the total number of active members in the department, and resignations and expulsions from the department. He shall also report upon the drill and training program of the department, together with other pertinent information, including recommendations for such improvements as he deems proper and necessary for the operation of the department. 
(g)  Enforcement of fire prevention ordinances. The chief shall enforce all fire prevention ordinances of the village and state laws and regulations pertaining to fire prevention, and shall keep citizens informed on fire prevention methods and on the activities of the department. 
(h)  Fire record book. The chief shall keep a fire record book of every fire to which the department was called and shall enter in such book the locality of the fire, time alarm was received, cause of fire, where first started, cause of delay (if any) in responding, method of extinguishment and equipment used, amount of insurance carried on buildings and contents, estimated fire loss, time fire was extinguished, names of men responding, and general remarks. 
(i)  Rescue squad record book. The chief shall keep a record book of every incident to which the rescue squad was called, and shall enter in such book the location of the incident, time the request was received, cause of delay (if any) in responding, names of men responding, names of any person treated or transported, place to which any person was transported, and general remarks. 
(j)  Apparatus inventory. The chief shall keep an inventory of all apparatus and equipment, and an inventory of all hoses, showing dates and results of tests on each length, which shall be individually numbered. 
(k)  Duties of commanding officer. The chief shall perform such other duties as are usually incumbent on the commanding officer of the fire department. 
(Code 1983, § 5.06) 
Sec. 38-42. - Control and care of apparatus. 
(a)  The chief shall have control of all apparatus used by the department and shall be responsible for its proper maintenance. Emergency repairs may be authorized by the chief. 
(b)  No apparatus shall be used for any purpose except for firefighting or responding to rescue calls within the village limits or designated areas, or in training therefor, except pursuant to an agreement approved by the village board after the chief has given his recommendations on such use. With the approval of the chief, such apparatus may be used for emergency purposes within the village or designated area. A written report of all such uses shall be made quarterly to the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 5.07) 
Sec. 38-43. - Enforcement powers. 
(a)  Control of fires. The fire chief may prescribe certain limits in the vicinity of any fire within which no persons, excepting firefighters and police officers and those admitted by order of any officer of the department, shall be permitted to come. The chief may cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from fire, to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect the adjoining property; and during the progress of any fire he may order the removal or destruction of any property necessary to prevent the further spread of the fire. He may also cause the removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all electricity or other services where the same impedes the work of the department during the progress of a fire. 
(b)  Entering premises. Any firefighter, while acting under the direction of the fire chief or other officer in command, may enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property then on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire. If any person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any firefighter in discharge of his duty, the person so offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting firefighters in the discharge of their duties as provided in § 941.37, Wis. Stats. 
(c)  Injury to equipment prohibited. No person shall willfully injure in any manner any hose, hydrant or fire apparatus belonging to the village; and no vehicle or railroad equipment shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street, private driveway, track or other place to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1983, § 5.08(2), (3), (5)) 
Sec. 38-44. - Fire inspectors. 
(a)  Fire chief to be fire inspector. The fire chief shall hold the office of fire inspector with power to appoint one or more deputy fire inspectors, who shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as the fire inspector. 
(b)  Duty of inspection. Fire inspectors shall inspect quarterly all buildings, premises and thoroughfares within the fire limits and inspect semiannually all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares within the village limits for the purpose of noting and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fires. Repairs or alterations necessary to remove the hazardous condition shall be made within a reasonable time at the expense of the owner. The inspector shall also investigate the storage and handling of explosives and inflammable liquids within the village. 
(c)  Written record of inspections. The chief shall keep a written record card of each property inspected, which shall conform to the requirements of the state department of industry, labor and human relations, and shall make the quarterly report of inspections required by the department. 
(d)  Correction of fire hazards. When any inspection by the fire chief or his deputies reveals a fire hazard, the chief or his deputies may serve a notice in writing upon the owner of the property, giving the owner a reasonable time in which to remove the hazard. If the fire hazard is not removed within the time allowed, it shall be deemed a nuisance and the fire chief or his deputy may have the same removed by the village, and the cost of such removal shall be recovered in an action by the village against the owner of the property and may also be entered in the tax roll as a special charge against the property. 
(e)  Entering on premises. No person shall deny the chief or his deputies free access to any property within the village at any reasonable time for the purpose of making fire inspections. No person shall hinder or obstruct the fire inspector in the performance of his duty or refuse to observe any lawful direction given by him. 
(Code 1983, § 5.09) 
Sec. 38-45. - Insubordination. 
    Any member or officer of the department who has been expelled or demoted for any offense or neglect of duty or insubordination at any fire or drill may appear before the village board and state why such penalty should not be confirmed. The village board may by a three-fourths vote of the members order the chief to reinstate the member or officer. The secretary shall report the name of each person expelled or demoted to the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 5.10) 
Sec. 38-46. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any order, rule or regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 5.11) 
Chapter 39 - RESERVED 
Chapter 40 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1-40-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOODPLAIN ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-05, adopted Oct. 7, 2013, repealed the former Art. II and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 09-05, 10-5-2009. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis. 

DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDING OF FACT, STATEMENT OF PURPOSE, TITLE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 40-26. - Statutory authorization. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats., for villages and cities; §§ 59.69, 59.692, and 59.694, Wis. Stats., for counties; and the requirements in § 87.30, Wis. Stats. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-27. - Finding of fact. 
    Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-28. - Statement of purpose. 
    This article is intended to regulate floodplain development to: 
(1)  Protect life, health and property; 
(2)  Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers; 
(4)  Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain; 
(6)  Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain; 
(7)  Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers; 
(8)  Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and 
(9)  Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-29. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-30. - General provisions. 
(1)  Areas to be regulated. This article regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or other maps approved by DNR. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the flood insurance study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO zones. Regional flood elevations (RFE) may be derived from other studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(2)  Official maps and revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the flood insurance study (FIS) listed below. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA the letter of map change process (see division 8, amendments) before it is effective. No changes to regional flood elevations (RFEs) on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the building inspector/zoning administrator, Village of Kewaskum. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
Official maps: Based on the FIS for the Village of Kewaskum in Washington County and Fond du Lac County, Wisconsin. 
(a)  Fond du Lac County: Flood insurance rate map (FIRM), panel number 55039C0567F, dated November 4, 2009; with corresponding profiles that are based on the flood insurance study (FIS) dated November 4, 2009, Flood Insurance Study Number 55039CV000A; 
(b)  Washington County: Flood insurance rate map (FIRM), panel number 55131C0061D, 55131C0063D, 55131C0064D, 55131C0151D, 55131C0152D, dated November 20, 2013; with corresponding profiles that are based on the flood insurance study (FIS) dated October 16, 2015, Flood Insurance Study Number 55131CV001B, 55131CV002B, 55131CV003B. 
Approved by: The DNR and FEMA. 
(3)  Establishment of floodplain zoning districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided into four districts as follows: 
(a)  The floodway district (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters and are contained within AE zones as shown on the FIRM. 
(b)  The floodfringe district (FF) is that portion between the regional flood limits and the floodway and displayed as AE zones on the FIRM. 
(c)  The general floodplain district (GFP) is those areas that may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood and does not have a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A, AH and AO zones on the FIRM. 
(d)  The flood storage district (FSD) is that area of the floodplain where storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the regional flood discharge. 
(4)  Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in subsection (a) or (b) below. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to division 8, amendments. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section. Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to section 40-110(3) and the criteria in (a) and (b) below. Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to division 8, amendments. 
(a)  If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. 
(b)  Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale. 
(5)  Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of this article shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to division 8, amendments. 
(6)  Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this article shall be in compliance with the terms of this article, and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
(7)  Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies. 
(8)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(a)  This article supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under §§ 59.69, 59.692 or 59.694, Wis. Stats., for counties; § 62.23, Wis. Stats., for cities; or § 61.35, Wis. Stats., for villages; or § 87.30, Wis. Stats., which relate to floodplains. A more restrictive ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(b)  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(9)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this article, required by ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this article or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this article. 
(10)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in this article are based on engineering experience and research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. This article does not create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this article. 
(11)  Severability. Should any portion of this article be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected. 
(12)  Annexed areas for cities and villages. The Washington County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code and the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the floodway location. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 15-06, 11-2-15) 
Secs. 40-31-40-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS 

Sec. 40-40. - Generally. 
    The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant materials; be constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of flooding. 
    Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this article and all other requirements in section 40-108(2). Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-41. - Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. 
(1)  No floodplain development shall: 
(a)  Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development causing any increase in the regional flood height; or 
(b)  Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional flood heights based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of division 8, amendments, are met. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-42. - Watercourse alterations. 
    No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the department and FEMA regional offices, and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The standards of section 40-41 must be met and the flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
    As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation and pursuant to division 8, amendments, the community shall apply for a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 15-06, 11-2-15) 
Sec. 40-43. - Chapters 30, 31, Wis. Stats., development. 
    Development which requires a permit from the department, under chs. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to division 8, amendments. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-44. - Public or private campgrounds. 
    Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions: 
(1)  The campground is approved by the department of health services; 
(2)  A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator; 
(3)  The character of the river system and the campground elevation are such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants; 
(4)  There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation; 
(5)  This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated-by the officials identified in subsection (4)-to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the state department of health services and all other applicable regulations; 
(6)  Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use are allowed; 
(7)  The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours; 
(8)  All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section; 
(9)  The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this section; 
(10)  All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either division 3, 4 or 5 for the floodplain district in which the structure is located; 
(11)  The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued; and 
(12)  All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection, electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Secs. 40-45-40-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW) 

Sec. 40-55. - Applicability. 
    This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 40-82(4). 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-56. - Permitted uses. 
    The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the floodway areas of the general floodplain district, if: 
  They are not prohibited by any other ordinance; 
  They meet the standards in sections 40-57 and 40-58; and 
  All permits or certificates have been issued according to section 40-108: 
(1)  Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips. 
(3)  Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of section 40-57(4). 
(4)  Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that comply with sections 40-57 and 40-58. 
(5)  Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with section 40-57(4). 
(6)  Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with chs. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats. 
(7)  Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with section 40-57(3). 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-57. - Standards for developments in floodway areas. 
(1)  General. 
(a)  Any development in floodway areas shall comply with division 2 and have a low flood damage potential. 
(b)  Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to section 40-41: 
1.  A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or 
2.  An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height. 
(c)  The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will cause any increase in the flood elevations upstream or downstream, based on the data submitted for subsection (b) above. 
(2)  Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria: 
(a)  Not designed for human habitation and does not have a high flood damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; 
(c)  Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
(d)  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
(e)  It must not obstruct the flow of flood waters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood. 
(3)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if: 
(a)  Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and 
(b)  Construction meets the development standards of section 40-41. 
(4)  Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if: 
(a)  The requirements of section 40-41 are met; 
(b)  No material is deposited in the navigable waters unless a permit is issued by the department pursuant to ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and a permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and the other requirements have been met; 
(c)  The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and 
(d)  The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-58. - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses not listed as permitted uses in section 40-56 are prohibited, including the following uses: 
(1)  Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with permanent open-space uses; 
(2)  Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life; 
(3)  Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts; 
(4)  Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.; 
(5)  Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code; 
(6)  Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(7)  Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code; and 
(8)  Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Secs. 40-59-40-68. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF) 

Sec. 40-69. - Applicability. 
    This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 40-82(4). 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-70. - Permitted uses. 
    Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the floodfringe district if the standards in section 40-71 are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in section 40-108 have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-71. - Standards for development in floodfringe. 
    Section 40-41 shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of division 6, nonconforming uses. 
(1)  Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be newly constructed or moved into the floodfringe, shall meet or exceed the following standards. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of division 6, nonconforming uses. 
(a)  The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill unless the requirements of section 40-41(1)(b) can be met. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. 
(b)  The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation. 
(c)  Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in subsection (d). 
(d)  In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with subsection (c) impractical, the municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements where access roads are at or below the regional flood elevation, if: 
1.  The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or 
2.  The municipality has a DNR approved emergency evacuation plan. 
(2)  Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be constructed on fill with its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation. 
(3)  Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall meet the requirements of section 40-71(1). Subject to the requirements of section 40-71(5), storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(4)  Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in section 40-112. Subject to the requirements of section 40-71(5), storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(5)  Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with section 40-112. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding. 
(6)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans; and 
(a)  When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction of and substantial improvements to such facilities may only be permitted if they are floodproofed in compliance with section 40-112 to the flood protection elevation; 
(b)  Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation. 
(7)  Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood water into the system pursuant to section 40-112, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of all local ordinances and ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(8)  Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system, pursuant to section 40-112(3), to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(9)  Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas. 
(10)  Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this article. 
(11)  Manufactured homes. 
(a)  Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities. 
(b)  In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and 
2.  Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood. 
(c)  Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in section 40-71(1). 
(12)  Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in section 40-71(11)(b) and (c). A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 15-06, 11-2-15) 
Secs. 40-72-40-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OTHER FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS 

Sec. 40-81. - Generally. 
    Other floodplain districts may be established under the article and reflected on the floodplain zoning map. These districts may include general floodplain districts and flood storage districts. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-82. - General floodplain district (GFP). 
(1)  Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains mapped as A, AO or AH zones. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Pursuant to section 40-82(4), it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or floodfringe. 
    Those uses permitted in floodway (section 40-56) and floodfringe (section 40-70) districts are allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the standards of section 40-71, provided that all permits or certificates required under section 40-108 have been issued. 
(3)  Standards for development. Division 3 applies to floodway areas, division 4 applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this article applies to either district. 
(a)  In AO/AH zones the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the conditions listed below, whichever is higher: 
1.  At or above the flood protection elevation; or 
2.  Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or 
3.  The depth as shown on the FIRM. 
(b)  In AO/AH zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters around structures. 
(4)  Determining floodway and floodfringe. Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall: 
(a)  Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM. 
(b)  Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries: 
1.  A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in section 40-108(2)(c); 
2.  Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information; 
3.  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-83. - Flood storage district. 
    The flood storage district delineates that portion of the floodplain where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account and is relied upon to reduce the regional flood discharge. The district protects the flood storage areas and assures that any development in the storage areas will not decrease the effective flood storage capacity which would cause higher flood elevations. 
(1)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all areas within the flood storage district (FSD), as shown on the official floodplain zoning maps. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Any use or development which occurs in a flood storage district must meet the applicable requirements in section 40-71. 
(3)  Standards for development in flood storage districts. 
(a)  Development in a flood storage district shall not cause an increase equal or greater than 0.00 of a foot in the height of the regional flood. 
(b)  No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage volume unless an equal volume of storage as defined by the pre-development ground surface and the regional flood elevation shall be provided in the immediate area of the proposed development to compensate for the volume of storage which is lost, (compensatory storage). Excavation below the groundwater table is not considered to provide an equal volume of storage. 
(c)  If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be developed unless the entire area zoned as flood storage district-on this waterway-is rezoned to the floodfringe district. This must include a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the waterway to revert to the higher regional flood discharge calculated without floodplain storage, as per division 8, amendments, of this article. 
(d)  No area may be removed from the flood storage district unless it can be shown that the area has been filled to the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to other lands lying outside of the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Secs. 40-84-40-93. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 40-94. - General. 
(1)  Applicability. If these standards conform with § 59.69(10), Wis. Stats., for counties or § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., for cities and villages, they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of this article or any amendment thereto. 
(2)  The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may continue subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this article. The words "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification; this includes painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not considered maintenance. 
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure. 
(b)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this article. 
(c)  The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent. 
(d)  No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 40-71(1). The costs of elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50 percent provisions of this paragraph. 
(e)  No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 40-70(1). 
(f)  If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done under subsections (d) and (e) equals or exceeds 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value the work shall not be permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 40-70(1). 
(g)  Except as provided in subsection (h), if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current article requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50 percent of the structure's present equalized assessed value. 
(h)  For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements below are met and all required permits have been granted prior to the start of construction. 
1.  Residential structures. 
a.  Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must meet the requirements of section 40-112(2). 
b.  Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy and shall be constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage. 
c.  Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
d.  In A zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data available from a federal, state or other source. 
e.  In AO zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in section 40-82(3). 
f.  In AO zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure. 
2.  Nonresidential structures. 
a.  Shall meet the requirements of section 40-94(2)(h)1.a.-f. 
b.  Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regional flood evaluation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet the standards in section 40-112(1) or (2). 
c.  In AO zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in section 40-82(3). 
(3)  A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with section 40-57(1), flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with section 40-112 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the development standards of section 40-94(2)(h)1. if it is determined that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 15-06, 11-2-15) 
Sec. 40-95. - Floodway district. 
(1)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway district, unless such modification or addition: 
(a)  Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all article requirements; 
(b)  Meets the requirements of section 40-94; 
(c)  Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height; 
(d)  Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 40-112, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation; and 
(e)  If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of flood waters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade; 
2.  The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials; 
3.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
4.  The use must be limited to parking or limited storage. 
(2)  No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in a floodway district. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, section 40-112(3) and ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(3)  No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in a floodway district. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in a floodway district shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, section 40-115(3) and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-96. - Floodfringe district. 
(1)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the municipality, and meets the requirements of section 40-71 except where section 40-96(2) is applicable. 
(2)  Where compliance with the provisions of subsection (1) would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the board of adjustment/appeals, using the procedures established in section 40-110, may grant a variance from those provisions of subsection (1) for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if: 
(a)  No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures; 
(b)  Human lives are not endangered; 
(c)  Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed; 
(d)  Flood depths will not exceed two feet; 
(e)  Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and 
(f)  The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described in section 40-71(5). 
(3)  All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances, section 40-112(3) and ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(4)  All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this article, section 40-112(3) and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-97. - Flood storage district. 
    No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure in a flood storage area unless the standards outlined in section 40-83(3) are met. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Secs. 40-98-40-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 40-107. - Generally. 
    Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under §§ 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), Wis. Stats., these officials shall also administer this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-108. - Zoning administrator. 
(1)  Duties and powers. The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this article and shall have the following duties and powers: 
(a)  Advise applicants of the article provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications. 
(b)  Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this article and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate. 
(c)  Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred. 
(d)  Keep records of all official actions such as: 
1.  All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved; 
2.  Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations; for floodplain development; 
3.  Floodproofing certificates; 
4.  Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments; 
5.  All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures; 
6.  List of nonconforming structures and uses. 
(e)  Submit copies of the following items to the department regional office: 
1.  Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments; 
2.  Copies of any case-by-case analyses and other required information including an annual summary of floodplain zoning actions taken; 
3.  Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments. 
(f)  Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this article to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the department regional office. 
(g)  Submit copies of amendments to the FEMA regional office. 
(2)  Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new development; or repair, or modification or addition to an existing structure; or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the zoning administrator shall include: 
(a)  General information. 
1.  Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor; 
2.  Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification. 
(b)  Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain: 
1.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot; 
2.  Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
3.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street centerlines; 
4.  Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
5.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads; 
6.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official floodplain zoning maps; 
7.  The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using vertical datum from the adopted study-either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD); 
8.  Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of division 3, floodway district, or division 4, floodfringe district, are met; and 
9.  Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to section 40-41. This may include any of the information noted in section 40-57(1). 
(c)  Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the state. The study contractor shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and approved by the department. 
1.  Zone A floodplains. 
a.  Hydrology. 
i.  The appropriate method shall be based on the standards in ch. NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge. 
b.  Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following: 
i.  Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model shall be based on detailed study information for downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL for the study. 
ii.  Channel sections must be surveyed. 
iii.  Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used for the development of cross section overbank and floodplain mapping. 
iv.  A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross sections is allowed in developed areas with additional intermediate cross sections required at transitions in channel bottom slope including a survey of the channel at each location. 
v.  The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used. 
vi.  A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of road is required at each structure. 
vii.  Additional cross sections are required at the downstream and upstream limits of the proposed development and any necessary intermediate locations based on the length of the reach if greater than 500 feet. 
viii.  Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used when assigning parameters for the base model such as flow, Manning's N values, expansion and contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high water marks to determine the reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data is available, adequate justification shall be provided for any parameters outside standard accepted engineering practices. 
ix.  The model must extend past the upstream limit of the difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The height difference between the proposed flood profile and the existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet. 
c.  Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be provided, showing all cross section locations, floodway/floodplain limits based on best available topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed development and whether the proposed development is located in the floodway. 
i.  If the proposed development is located outside of the floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on the regional flood elevation. 
ii.  If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it must be added to the base model to show the difference between existing and proposed conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients remain the same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification based on standard accepted engineering practices is provided. 
2.  Zone AE floodplains. 
a.  Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be based on ch. NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge. 
b.  Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following: 
i.  Duplicate effective model. The effective model shall be reproduced to ensure correct transference of the model data and to allow integration of the revised data to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and downstream of the revised reach. If data from the effective model is available, models shall be generated that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations shown in the floodway data table in the FIS report to within 0.1 foot. 
ii.  Corrected effective model. The corrected effective model shall not include any man-made physical changes since the effective model date, but shall import the model into the most current version of HEC-RAS for department review. 
iii.  Existing (pre-project conditions) model. The existing model shall be required to support conclusions about the actual impacts of the project associated with the revised (post-project) model or to establish more up-to-date models on which to base the revised (post-project) model. 
iv.  Revised (post-project conditions) model. The revised (post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the existing model and any proposed changes to the topography caused by the proposed development. This model shall reflect proposed conditions. 
v.  All changes to the duplicate effective model and subsequent models must be supported by certified topographic information, bridge plans, construction plans and survey notes. 
vi.  Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the stream reach for which the revision is being requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the effective model and result in water surface elevations and top widths computed by the revised models matching those in the effective models upstream and downstream of the revised reach as required. The effective model shall not be truncated. 
c.  Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted to the department for review which meet the following conditions: 
i.  Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles, topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or flood boundary floodway maps (FBFMs), construction plans, bridge plans. 
ii.  Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval, and a planimetric map showing the applicable items. If a digital version of the map is available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM may be more easily revised. 
iii.  Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised one percent and 0.2 percent annual chance floodplains and floodway boundaries. 
iv.  If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used then all supporting documentation or metadata must be included with the data submission along with the universal transverse mercator (UTM) projection and state plane coordinate system in accordance with FEMA mapping specifications. 
v.  The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective floodplain boundaries. 
vi.  All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled in accordance with the effective map and a cross section lookup table shall be included to relate to the model input numbering scheme. 
vii.  Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown on the map. 
viii.  The stream centerline, or profile baseline used to measure stream distances in the model shall be visible on the map. 
(d)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this article shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The permit may be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient cause. 
(3)  Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, except where no permit is required, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this article; 
(b)  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit; 
(c)  If all article provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after written notification that the permitted work is completed; 
(d)  The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the requirements of section 40-112 are met. 
(4)  Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit the applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 15-06, 11-2-15) 
Sec. 40-109. - Zoning agency. 
(1)  The village plan commission shall: 
(a)  Oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; and 
(b)  Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments to this article, maps and text. 
(2)  The village plan commission shall not: 
(a)  Grant variances to the terms of the article in place of action by the board of adjustment/appeals; or 
(b)  Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-110. - Board of adjustment/appeals. 
    The board of adjustment/appeals, created under § 59.694, Wis. Stats., for counties or § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this article. The board shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The zoning administrator may not be the secretary of the board. 
(1)  Powers and duties. The board of adjustment/appeals shall: 
(a)  Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this article; 
(b)  Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map; and 
(c)  Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the article standards. 
(2)  Appeals to the board. 
(a)  Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all records regarding the matter appealed. 
(b)  Notice and hearing for appeals including variances. 
1.  Notice. The board shall: 
a.  Fix a reasonable time for the hearing; 
b.  Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing; and 
c.  Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the department regional office at least ten days in advance of the hearing. 
2.  Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The board shall: 
a.  Resolve boundary disputes according to section 40-110(3); 
b.  Decide variance applications according to section 40-110(4); and 
c.  Decide appeals of permit denials according to section 40-111. 
(c)  Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall: 
1.  Be made within a reasonable time; 
2.  Be sent to the department regional office within ten days of the decision; 
3.  Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the board; 
4.  State the specific facts which are the basis for the board's decision; 
5.  Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application; and 
6.  Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the board proceedings. 
(3)  Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the board in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries: 
(a)  If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined; 
(b)  The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the board; and 
(c)  If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the board should inform the zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to division 8, amendments. 
(4)  Variance. 
(a)  The board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this article if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
1.  Literal enforcement of the article provisions will cause unnecessary hardship; 
2.  The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case the article or map must be amended; 
3.  The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and 
4.  The variance is consistent with the purpose of this article in section 40-28. 
(b)  In addition to the criteria in subsection (a), to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met: 
1.  The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation; 
2.  Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE; and 
3.  Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the article. 
(c)  A variance shall not: 
1.  Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district; 
2.  Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss; 
3.  Be granted for a hardship which is self-created; 
4.  Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area; 
5.  Allow actions without the amendments to this article or map(s) required in division 8, amendments; and 
6.  Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure. 
(d)  When a floodplain variance is granted the board shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and property and flood insurance premiums could increase up to $25.00 per $100.00 of coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-111. - To review appeals of permit denials. 
(1)  The zoning agency (section 40-109) or board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include: 
(a)  Permit application data listed in section 40-108(2); 
(b)  Floodway/floodfringe determination data in section 40-82(4); 
(c)  Data listed in section 40-57(1)(b) where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning administrator; and 
(d)  Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the board with the appeal. 
(2)  For appeals of all denied permits the board shall: 
(a)  Follow the procedures of section 40-110; 
(b)  Consider zoning agency recommendations; and 
(c)  Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(3)  For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the board shall: 
(a)  Uphold the denial where the board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners as per the requirements of division 8, amendments; and 
(b)  Grant the appeal where the board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase provided no other reasons for denial exist. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-112. - Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures or uses. 
(1)  No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation and submit a FEMA floodproofing certificate. 
(2)  For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either: 
(a)  Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or 
(b)  Meets or exceeds the following standards: 
1.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(3)  Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to: 
(a)  Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other regional flood factors; 
(b)  Protect structures to the flood protection elevation; 
(c)  Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; and 
(d)  Minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters; 
(e)  Minimize or eliminate discharge into flood waters. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-113. - Public information. 
(1)  Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood. 
(2)  All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed. 
(3)  Real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any real property is in. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Secs. 40-114-40-122. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 40-123. - Amendments. 
    Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 40-124. 
(1)  In AE zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 40-124. 
(2)  In A zones increases equal to or greater than one foot may only be permitted if the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 40-124. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-124. - General. 
    The governing body may change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this article in the manner outlined in section 40-125 below. Actions which require an amendment to the article and/or submittal of a letter of map change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height; 
(2)  Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations on the FIRM; 
(3)  Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in section 40-30(2)(b); 
(4)  Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain; 
(5)  Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain maps; 
(6)  Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by § NR 116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the municipality; and 
(7)  All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 40-125. - Procedures. 
    Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any party according to the provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats., for cities and villages, or § 59.69, Wis. Stats., for counties. The petitions shall include all data required by sections 40-82(4) and 40-108(2). The land use permit shall not be issued until a letter of map revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed changes. 
(1)  The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats., for cities and villages or § 59.69, Wis. Stats., for counties. 
(2)  No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the department. 
(3)  All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be approved by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Secs. 40-126-40-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 40-136. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this article by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not less than $5.00 and not more than $50.00, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to § 87.30, Wis. Stats. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13) 
Secs. 40-137-40-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 40-147. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this article shall have their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not discretionary. 
    A zones means those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A zones. The A zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
    AH zones. See "Area of shallow flooding". 
    AO zones. See "Area of shallow flooding". 
    Accessory structure or use means a facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building. 
    Alteration means an enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation, air conditioning and other systems within a structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM. 
    Basement means any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
    Building. See "Structure." 
    Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the department pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this article. 
    Campground means any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area. 
    Camping unit means any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, tent that is fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use. 
    Certificate of compliance means a certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this article. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water. 
    Crawlways or crawl space means an enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities. 
    Deck means an unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation. 
    Department means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
    Development means any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    Dryland access means a vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles. 
    Encroachment means any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or development in the floodway. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The overflow or rise of inland waters, 
(2)  The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, 
(3)  The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior, or 
(4)  The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
    Flood frequency means the probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average once in a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year. 
    Flood hazard boundary map means a map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance study and a flood insurance rate map. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means a map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood insurance study means a technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A zones. Flood insurance rate maps, that accompany the flood insurance study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river. 
    Flood protection elevation means an elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also see "Freeboard.") 
    Flood storage means those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge. 
    Floodfringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by flood waters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water. 
    Floodplain means land which has been or may be covered by flood water during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. 
    Floodplain island means a natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood. 
    Floodplain management means policy and procedures to ensure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
    Freeboard means a safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed. 
    Habitable structure means any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation. 
    Hearing notice means publication or posting meeting the requirements of ch. 985, Wis. Stats. For appeals, a class 1 notice, published once at least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums. 
    High flood damage potential means damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is either: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Increase in regional flood height means a calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
    Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see "Development.") 
    Lowest adjacent grade means elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any of the exterior walls of a building. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. 
    Maintenance means the act or process of restoring to original soundness, including redecoration, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent fixtures, systems or structures. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a "mobile recreational vehicle." 
    Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision, existing means a parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of this article. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Mobile/manufactured home park, expansion to existing means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Mobile recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles." 
    Model, corrected effective means a hydraulic engineering model that corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates more detailed topographic information than that used in the current effective model. 
    Model, duplicate effective means a copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the effective FIS and referred to as the effective model. 
    Model, effective means the hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce the current effective flood insurance study. 
    Model, existing (pre-project) means a modification of the duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any man-made modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which the revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the corrected effective model or duplicate effective model. 
    Model, revised (post-project) means a modification of the existing or pre-project conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to reflect revised or post-project conditions. 
    Municipality or municipal means the county, city or village governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing this zoning ordinance. 
    NAVD or North American Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment. 
    New construction. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    NGVD or National Geodetic Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment. 
    Nonconforming structure means an existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.) 
    Nonconforming use means an existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies (such as a residence in the floodway). 
    Obstruction to flow means any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
    Official floodplain zoning map means that map, adopted and made part of this article, as described in section 40-30(2), which has been approved by the department and FEMA. 
    Open space use means those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
    Ordinary highwater mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
    Person means an individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency. 
    Private sewage system means a sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the department of safety and professional services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure. 
    Public utilities means those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
    Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts. 
    Subdivision has the meaning given in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the work performed. The term does not, however, include either any project for the improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Unnecessary hardship means where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the article. 
    Variance means an authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface profile means a graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
    Watershed means the entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water. 
    Well means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 15-06, 11-2-15) 
Chapter 41 - RESERVED 
Chapter 42 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; health and safety nuisances, § 58-76 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any order, rule or regulation made under this chapter, shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 14.15) 
Sec. 42-2. - Abatement of health nuisances. 
    The health officer or the board of health may abate health nuisances in accordance with § 254.59, Wis. Stats., which is adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(Code 1983, § 14.04) 
Cross reference- Abatement of public nuisances generally, § 58-6; health and safety nuisances, § 58-76 et seq. 
Sec. 42-3. - Communicable diseases. 
    Ch. 252, Wis. Stats., and ch. H45, Wis. Adm. Code, are adopted by reference and made a part of this section; and the health officer shall enforce the provisions thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 14.05) 
Sec. 42-4. - Regulation of nuisance-type businesses. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall conduct within the village any business that has a tendency to create a public nuisance, except upon permit issued by the health officer and subject to such conditions as he may impose. 
(b)  Definition. A business that has a tendency to create a public nuisance is one that unless properly regulated may create conditions creating a public nuisance as defined in section 58-4. 
(c)  Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to § 66.052, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 14.06) 
Secs. 42-5-42-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-36. - Rules and regulations. 
    The health officer and the board of health may make reasonable and general rules for the enforcement of the health nuisances and the protection of the public health and welfare, and may, where appropriate, require the issuance of licenses and permits. All such requirements, when approved by the village board, shall have the same effect as ordinances; and any person violating any of such regulations and any lawful order of the board shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 14.03) 
Secs. 42-37-42-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF HEALTH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-236 et seq. 

Sec. 42-61. - Constituted. 
    The protection and public safety committee shall constitute the board of health of the village. 
(Code 1983, § 1.33) 
Sec. 42-62. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  Duties. The board of health of the village shall assume the general administration of health and sanitation laws and regulations in the village, supervise the work of the health officer, and attend to the administration and enforcement of the health laws of the state and the rules and regulations prescribed by the state department of health and social services and the ordinances of the village. 
(b)  Powers. The board shall take such measures and make such rules and regulations as shall be necessary and effectual for the preservation and promotion of the public health in the village. All orders and regulations of the board shall be published in the official newspaper, and after publication shall have the force and effect of ordinances, including penalty for violation. 
(Code 1983, § 14.01(2), (3)) 
Secs. 42-63-42-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HEALTH OFFICER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-126 et seq. 
State Law reference- Duties of local health officers generally, § 252.03, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 42-86. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  General duties. The health officer, under the supervision of the district state health officer, shall: 
(1)  Maintain continuous sanitary supervision over his territory. 
(2)  Promote the spread of information as to the causes, nature and prevention of prevalent diseases and the preservation and improvement of health. 
(3)  Enforce the health laws, rules and regulations of the state department of health and social services, the state and the village, including the laws relating to contagious diseases contained in ch. 252, Wis. Stats. 
(4)  Take steps necessary to secure prompt and full reports by physicians of communicable diseases and prompt and full registration of births and deaths. 
(5)  Keep and deliver to his successor a record of all his official acts. 
(6)  Make an annual report to the state department of health and social services and to the village board and such other reports as they may request. 
(b)  Materials and supplies. The health officer may procure at the expense of the village all record books, quarantine cards and other material needed by the board of health, except such as are furnished by the state department of health and social services. 
(Code 1983, § 14.02) 
Secs. 42-87-42-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 10-05, adopted June 21, 2010, repealed and recreated Art. III, Tobacco, to read as herein set out. Former Art. III was comprised of § 42-121, which had derived from § 9.19 of the 1983 Code. 

Sec. 42-121. - Smoking prohibited. 
(a)  Adoption of state smoking regulations. Section 101.123, Wis. Stats., (as amended by 2009 Wisconsin Act 12), and all subsequent amendments is hereby adopted by reference to define offenses against the health, welfare and peace of the village. 
(b)  Penalty. Penalties for violation of this section shall be in accordance with § 101.123(8), Wis. Stats. Statutory court costs and assessments shall be added to all forfeitures for such violations. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, 6-21-10) 
Chapters 43-45 - RESERVED 
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Police and fire commission, § 2-281 et seq.; alcohol beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-126 et seq. 

Sec. 46-61. - Personnel. 
    The police department of the village shall consist of a chief of police and as many police officers as shall be determined by the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 4.01) 
Sec. 46-62. - Police chief. 
(a)  Appointment. The chief of police shall be appointed by the police and fire commission and shall hold office during good behavior, subject to suspension or removal by the police and fire commission for cause. 
(b)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The chief of police shall possess the powers, enjoy the privileges and be subject to the liabilities conferred and imposed by law upon marshals and constables. 
(2)  He shall obey all lawful written orders of the president, administrator and commission. 
(3)  He shall cause the public peace to be preserved and see that all laws and ordinances of the village and statutes of the state are enforced. 
(4)  He shall exercise supervisory control over all the personnel of his department and may adopt, subject to the approval of the commission, rules and regulations for the government, discipline, equipment and uniforms of police officers. 
(5)  He shall be solely responsible for the care and condition of the equipment used by his department. 
(6)  He shall keep an accurate and complete record of all complaints, arrests, traffic violations, convictions and dispositions of the department. 
(Code 1983, § 4.05) 
Sec. 46-63. - Appointments. 
    The chief of police shall appoint the subordinate officers and other special officers subject to approval of the police and fire commission. Such appointment shall be made by promotion when this can be done to advantage, otherwise from an eligible list provided by the police and fire commission and kept on file with the village clerk/treasurer. The chief of police may appoint such persons for temporary emergency duty as he shall deem necessary. 
(Code 1983, § 4.03) 
Sec. 46-64. - Outside employment prohibited. 
    No regular, full-time member of the police department shall engage in other employment or business except with the consent of the chief of police, who may grant such permission if it appears to his satisfaction that such outside employment will not interfere with the performance of the officer's duties as a member of the police department of the village. 
(Code 1983, § 4.04) 
Sec. 46-65. - Police officers. 
(a)  General powers and duties. Each officer of the police department shall possess the powers conferred on marshals and constables by law, shall preserve the public peace, and enforce the laws and ordinances of the state and village subject to the orders, rules and regulations of the chief, the president, administrator and the police and fire commission. 
(b)  Power of arrest. The chief of police and any police officer shall arrest all persons in the village found in the act of violating any law or ordinance of the village or state or aiding or abetting in such violation; and they shall arrest without warrant all persons whom they have reasonable grounds to believe have violated any law or ordinance and who will not be apprehended unless immediately arrested, shall take all arrested persons in charge and confine them, and shall within the time prescribed by law bring such persons before the court having jurisdiction thereof to be dealt with according to law. 
(Code 1983, § 4.06) 
Chapters 47-49 - RESERVED 
Chapter 50 - LIBRARY 

Sec. 50-1. - Library board. 
(a)  Membership. The library board shall consist of seven members, including one trustee and six citizens. The trustee member shall be appointed for a one-year term and the six citizen members for staggered three-year terms. Members shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board. All members shall be residents of the village, except that not more than two members may be residents of other municipalities. One member of the library board may be a member of the village administration; and one member shall be a school district administrator, or the administrator's representative, to represent the public school district in which the public library is located. Not more than one member of the municipal governing body shall at any one time be a member of the library board. No person employed by a public library that is a member of a public library system may be appointed a member of the library board. 
(b)  Terms. Upon their first appointment, the members shall be divided as nearly as practicable into three equal groups to serve for one-year, two-year, and three-year terms, respectively. Thereafter, each regular appointment shall be for a term of three years from the third Tuesday of May of the year's appointment. 
(c)  Quorum. Four members of the library board shall constitute a quorum. 
(d)  Officers. The library board shall elect a chairman and such officers as it deems necessary as soon as practicable after the appointments, at a date and place affixed by the appointing officer, and annually thereafter within 30 days after the time designated in this section for the beginning of terms, the members of the library board shall organize by election, from among their number. (See § 43.54(2), Wis. Stats.) 
(e)  Powers and duties. The library board shall have the powers and duties prescribed in § 43.58, Wis. Stats. The board shall consult with the village administrator for the purpose of coordinating library personnel policies with village personnel policies. 
(f)  Cooperation agreement. The library board shall enter into an agreement with the village for assistance in the performance of its duties, including clerical, financial, budget, accounting, maintenance, personnel, appointment of a library director, assistants and employees, and purchasing of books, supplies and equipment. 
(g)  Compensation. No compensation shall be paid to the members of the library board for their services, except as follows: 
(1)  Members may be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in performing duties outside the municipality if so authorized by the library board. 
(2)  Members may receive per diem, mileage and other necessary expenses incurred in performing their duties if so authorized by the library board and the municipal governing body. 
(Code 1983, § 1.32; Ord. No. 2000-04, 5-15-00; Ord. No. 08-02, §§ 1-4, 9-8-08) 
Chapters 51-53 - RESERVED 
Chapter 54 - MOBILE HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-306 et seq. 

Sec. 54-1. - Mobile homes and mobile home parks. 
(a)  State laws adopted. The provisions of § 66.058, Wis. Stats., and the definitions therein are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth. 
(b)  Parking permit fee. There is imposed on each occupied, nonexempt mobile home located in the village a monthly parking fee as determined in accordance with § 66.058, Wis. Stats. Such fees shall be paid to the village clerk/treasurer on or before the tenth day of the month following the month for which such fees are due. 
(c)  Park license required. No person shall establish or operate upon such property owned or controlled by him within the village a mobile home park without having first secured a license therefor from the zoning administrator and the village board under § 4 of the Zoning Code. The application for such license shall be accompanied by a fee of $2.00 for each space in the existing or proposed park but not less than $25.00. The license shall expire one year from the date of issuance. Such parks shall comply with ch. H77, Wis. Adm. Code, which is adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth. 
(d)  Remittance of fees. 
(1)  Licensees of mobile home parks and owners of land on which are parked any occupied, nonexempt mobile homes shall furnish information to the village clerk/treasurer and village assessor on such homes added to their park or land within five days after arrival of such home on forms furnished by the village clerk/treasurer in accordance with § 66.058(3)(c) and (e), Wis. Stats. 
(2)  Occupants or owners of nonexempt mobile homes parked outside of a mobile home park shall remit such fees directly to the village clerk/treasurer as provided in subsection (b). It shall be the full and complete responsibility of the licensee of a mobile home park to collect such fees from each occupied, nonexempt mobile home therein and to remit such fees to the village treasurer as provided in subsection (b). 
(3)  Owners of nonexempt, occupied mobile homes, upon receipt of notice from the village clerk/treasurer of their liability for the monthly parking permit fee, shall remit to the village clerk/treasurer a cash deposit of $25.00 to guarantee payment of such fees when due to the village clerk/treasurer. The licensee of a mobile home park shall collect such cash deposits from each occupied, nonexempt mobile home therein and remit such deposits to the village clerk/treasurer. Upon receipt of a notice from the owner or licensee that the nonexempt, occupied mobile home has been or is about to be removed from the village, the village clerk/treasurer shall apply such cash deposit to reduce any monthly parking permit fees for which the owner is liable and refund the balance, if any, to the owner. 
(Code 1983, § 12.07) 
Chapters 55-57 - RESERVED 
Chapter 58 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; court, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Nuisances generally, § 823.01 et seq., Wis. Stats. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Open cisterns, wells, basements or other dangerous excavations prohibited. 
    No person shall have or permit on any premises owned or occupied by him any open cisterns, cesspools, wells, unused basements, excavations or other dangerous openings, except when authorized by building or other permit. All such places shall be filled, securely covered or fastened, in such manner as to prevent injury to any person; and any cover shall be of design, size and weight that the same cannot be removed by small children. 
(Code 1983, § 9.12) 
Sec. 58-2. - Abandoned or unattended iceboxes, similar containers prohibited. 
    No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his control in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container that has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device that may not be released from the inside, without first removing the door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from the icebox, refrigerator or container unless such container is displayed for sale on the premises of the owner or his agent and is securely locked or fastened. 
(Code 1983, § 9.13) 
Sec. 58-3. - Public nuisances prohibited. 
    No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the village. 
(Code 1983, § 10.01) 
Sec. 58-4. - Public nuisance defined. 
    A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property that shall continue for such length of time as to: 
(1)  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public. 
(2)  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property. 
(3)  Greatly offend the public morals or decency. 
(4)  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way or the use of public property. 
(Code 1983, § 10.02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-5. - Public nuisances offending morals and decency. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency; but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency within the definition of section 58-4: 
(1)  Disorderly houses. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling houses, and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse, or gambling. 
(2)  Gambling devices. All gambling devices and slot machines, except as provided by state law. 
(3)  Unlicensed sale of liquor and beer. All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by the ordinances of the village. 
(4)  Continuous violation of village ordinances. Any place or premises within the village where village ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated. 
(5)  Illegal drinking. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking alcohol beverages in violation of the laws of the state. 
(Code 1983, § 10.04) 
Sec. 58-6. - Abatement of public nuisances. 
(a)  Enforcement. The chief of police, the chief of the fire department, the building inspector and the health officer shall enforce those provisions of this chapter that come within the jurisdiction of their offices, and they shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this section to abate a public nuisance unless the officer shall have inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and has satisfied himself that a nuisance does in fact exist. 
(b)  Summary abatement. If the inspecting officer determines that a public nuisance exists within the village and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the president may direct the proper officer to cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. 
(c)  Abatement after notice. If the inspecting officer determines that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety or peace, he shall serve notice on the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the same within ten days. If such nuisance is not removed within ten days, the proper officer shall cause the nuisance to be removed as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the village or its officials in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(e)  Court order. Except when necessary under subsection (b), no officer under this section shall use force to obtain access to private property to abate a public nuisance but shall request permission to enter upon private property if such premises are occupied, and, if such permission is denied, shall apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order assisting the abatement of the public nuisance. 
(Code 1983, § 10.07) 
Cross reference- Abatement of health nuisances, § 42-2. 
Sec. 58-7. - Cost of abatement. 
    In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the village shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance; and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. 
(Code 1983, § 10.08) 
Sec. 58-8. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or permit or cause a public nuisance shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 10.12) 
Secs. 58-9-58-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS, PRINTED MATTER OR LITERATURE 

Sec. 58-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 08-01, adopted March 17, 2008, repealed § 58-41, which pertained to handbills, distribution and posting of, and derived from § 9.15 of the 1983 Code. 
Secs. 58-42-58-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HEALTH AND SAFETY NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 42; abatement of health nuisances, § 42-2. 

Sec. 58-76. - Public nuisances affecting health. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances; but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of section 58-4: 
(1)  Adulterated food. All decayed, adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public. 
(2)  Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human consumption or food which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death. 
(3)  Breeding places for vermin, etc. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed. 
(4)  Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply. 
(5)  Privy vaults and garbage cans. Privy vaults and garbage cans that are not flytight. 
(6)  Water pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances. 
(7)  Noxious odors. Any use of property, substances or things within the village emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons, which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the village. 
(8)  Street pollution. Any use of property that shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place within the village. 
(9)  Air pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash, industrial dust or other atmospheric pollutants within the village limits or within one mile therefrom in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property in the village. 
(Code 1983, § 10.03) 
Sec. 58-77. - Nuisance declared. 
(a)  No person shall permit on any lot, parcel or premises owned, leased, or occupied by him or upon any sidewalk abutting the same any unhealthy growth or noxious matter to exist. 
(b)  Any person who shall permit any filth, straw, hay, paper, trash, dry goods, boxes, building material of flammable nature or building material from any building, or any other materials that are offensive to the public health, or that are a nuisance to the public welfare, either by reason of danger by fire or otherwise, to be or remain upon the premises, shall be deemed guilty of keeping and maintaining a nuisance and shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-11. 
(c)  The zoning administrator or director of public works shall enforce the provisions of this section, and is required to notify persons who violate such provisions that unless such violations are removed within three days after the serving of notice to do so by certified mail with return receipt requested, the violator shall be prosecuted in court. Failure of any person violating such provisions to comply with the provisions of such notice within the time specified herein shall be cause for such violator to be arrested and prosecuted in court. The provisions of this section requiring the giving of notice shall not be construed as exempting from the penalties prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this section until such notice is given, but persons violating such provisions shall be amenable to prosecution as soon as the provision is violated. 
(Code 1983, § 17.19; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 8-2-10) 
Sec. 58-78. - Maintenance of property. 
(a)  Duty of owner. All owners of lots, parcels and tracts of land within the village shall keep their property in a safe, clean and presentable condition and shall remove all surplus grass, saplings, weeds and other growth and all trash and rubbish and fill in all excavations and hazardous depressions thereon. Grass clippings and other waste produced by yard maintenance shall not be deposited in the streets. Maintenance criteria is based on the following property descriptions: 
(1)  No person shall permit on any property with completed building(s) and landscaping, referred to as improved properties in this section, owned, leased or occupied by him or upon any sidewalk abutting the same, any weeds or grass to grow to a height of over six inches from the ground. Saplings, bushes, and hedges shall be maintained at a reasonable height. 
(2)  No person shall permit on any vacant infill lot owned by him or upon any sidewalk abutting the same, any weeds or grass to grow to a height of over 12 inches from the ground. Vegetation within 20 feet of a public or private street, alley, and within ten feet of adjacent improved property shall be maintained not to exceed six inches from the ground. Saplings, bushes, and hedges shall be maintained at a reasonable height. 
(3)  No person shall permit on consecutive vacant lots owned by him or upon any sidewalk abutting the same, any weeds or grass to grow to a height of over six inches from the ground within 20 feet of any public or private street, alley, and within ten feet of adjacent improved property. The areas on the property beyond the required maintenance perimeter shall be evaluated from time-to-time and maintenance may be required as deemed necessary by the zoning administrator or director of public works. Saplings, bushes, and hedges shall be maintained at a reasonable height. 
(b)  Notice; time for compliance. Whenever it shall appear to the zoning administrator or director of public works that any lot, tract or parcel of land within the village is in such condition due to overgrowth of grass, saplings, underbrush and weeds in excess of the criteria listed in this section, he shall give notice to such person who appears to be the owner of such property, according to the records of the village, at the address specified on such records. Such notice shall be given by certified mail with return receipt requested, to the effect that the lot, tract or parcel of land belonging to such person presents a condition the continuation of which is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the village, and that unless the condition is remedied within five days from the date of the notice, the village will undertake to correct the conditions by whatever means may be necessary and will charge the expense thereof against such owner. If any subsequent violation occurs within a 12-month period of first violation, no further notice is required. 
(c)  Charge for work done by village. If it becomes necessary for the village to do the work to put the property in safe and sanitary condition, the following charges shall be made: mowing, trimming shrubbery, raking, removal of debris, and other miscellaneous work shall be charged on the basis of time consumed to do the work times the hourly rate of the number of employees required plus the equipment hourly rate. In addition a 20 percent handling charge shall be included for staff time. 
(d)  Penalty for noncompliance. In addition to the other costs of having the village perform property maintenance the police shall issue a citation if the lawn is not cut when the five-day period of notice expires. If any subsequent violation occurs within a 12-month period of first citation the subsequent citations will escalate as defined in section 1-11. 
(e)  Special assessment. The administrator shall keep an itemized list of expenses and penalties of doing such work, and the costs thereof shall become a special assessment and a charge against the property payable at the same time as the general village taxes on the property become due. Upon failure of the owner to pay the amount of such a special assessment, the village may have recourse to the remedies that exist for the enforcement thereof, either by virtue of this chapter or the laws of the state, or both. The administrator shall, upon completion of the work, send a bill to the owner for the costs thereof; and if the costs be not paid within 30 days, it shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date on which the work was completed. 
(Code 1983, §§ 10.03, 17.20; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 8-2-10; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 7-21-14) 
Sec. 58-79. - Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the definition of section 58-4: 
(1)  Signs, billboards, similar structures. All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety. 
(2)  Illegal buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the village relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures within the village. 
(3)  Unauthorized traffic signs. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which because of its color, location, brilliance or manner of operation interferes with the effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal. 
(4)  Obstruction of intersections. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions that prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(5)  Tree limbs. All limbs of trees that project over and are less than ten feet above any public sidewalk, street or other public place. 
(6)  Dangerous trees. All trees that are a menace to public safety or are the cause of substantial annoyance to the general public. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Dilapidated buildings. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use. 
State Law reference- Razing buildings generally, § 66.05, Wis. Stats. 
(9)  Wires and cables over streets. All wires and cables over streets, alleys or public grounds that are strung less than 15 feet above the surface thereof. 
(10)  Obstructions of streets; excavations. All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the village or that, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished, or do not conform to the permit. 
(11)  Unlawful assemblies. Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk that causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks. 
(12)  Construction time designations. Construction time frames to be established as follows: 6:30 a.m. to dusk, Monday through Friday and 7:00 a.m. to dusk, Saturday, Sunday and holidays. 
(Code 1983, § 10.05; Ord. No. 97-1, § 10.05(13), 2-17-97; Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 6-21-10) 
Secs. 58-80-58-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DUTCH ELM DISEASE 

Sec. 58-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disease means the Dutch elm disease, a fatal disease of elms caused by the fungus Ceratostomella ulmi Buisman, as well as the causal fungus. 
    Owner means the owner of real estate or the person in possession of real estate. 
    Tree material means elm firewood, stump, log, branch or other barkbearing part of an elm tree. 
    Vector means the native elm bark beetle Mylurgopinus rufipee (Eichh.) and the smaller elm bark beetle Scolytus multistraitus (Marsh.), which transmit the fungus to elm trees and elm material. 
    Village employee means any employee of the village or any person or member of a firm with whom the village contracts for the removal of trees and/or tree material. 
(Code 1983, § 10.06(2)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-112. - Public nuisance. 
    The board declares the following to be public nuisances: 
(1)  Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected with an elm tree disease. 
(2)  Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, stumps, branches, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle destroying insecticide. 
(Code 1983, § 10.06(1)) 
Sec. 58-113. - Entry on private property. 
    Every landowner in the village shall permit employees of the village to enter upon such real estate for the purpose of examining trees. If it shall appear to any such employee that an elm tree may be diseased, such employee shall be permitted to take the necessary sample of wood from such tree to have an examination made. 
(Code 1983, § 10.06(3)) 
Sec. 58-114. - Cost of cutting and removing trees. 
(a)  Private property. If an examination made as provided in section 58-113, or made at the request of the owner, discloses that the tree has Dutch elm disease, the chief of police shall give notice to the owner, at his last known address, to have such diseased tree cut down within 15 days of such notice. If the owner does not cut down the diseased tree within 15 days after notice is given, such tree shall be cut down and destroyed on order of the chief of police. An accurate record of the expense of such cutting and disposal shall be made and a report thereof given to the village clerk/treasurer, who shall enter the amount against the respective real estate in the next and subsequent tax roll as a special tax against such real estate; and the same shall be collected as are other village taxes upon real estate, provided the village clerk/treasurer shall present a statement of such cost to the owner, who may elect to pay the same before it is placed on the tax roll. 
(b)  Tree lawns. The cost of cutting down any tree located on a tree lawn (more particularly described as the area between a sidewalk and a curb) pursuant to notice, shall be borne half by the village and half by the owner thereof. Where such a tree is located on private property, the owner shall bear the entire cost of cutting down a tree pursuant to notice. 
(c)  Stump removal. The cost of stump removal from tree lawns or on private property shall be borne 100 percent by the property owner. 
(Code 1983, § 10.06(4), (8)) 
Sec. 58-115. - Keeping of elm material prohibited. 
    No owner shall keep, store, sell, offer for sale, give away or transfer any elm material or transport the same into or within the village except for the purpose of immediately destroying the same. 
(Code 1983, § 10.06(5)) 
Sec. 58-116. - Spraying. 
    When it is found that the disease is present in the village or in adjacent communities, a spray program to protect all living elms of the village shall be initiated. Trees on public property shall be sprayed at the expense of the village. Notice of the necessity of spraying elm trees on private property shall be given by the clerk/treasurer to the owner; and unless such owner shall have such elm trees sprayed within 15 days of the time of such notice and shall have provided satisfactory evidence to the chief of police that the private spraying was done in accordance with prescribed procedure, village employees shall spray such trees. An accurate record shall be kept of the cost of such spraying and report made to the clerk/treasurer, who shall enter the amount thereof on the tax roll as provided in section 58-114. 
(Code 1983, § 10.06(6)) 
Sec. 58-117. - Removal of dead wood. 
    Each owner of real estate in the village shall cause all dead wood to be removed from every elm tree on his real estate and disposed of. If it appears to any village employee that there is dead wood in any elm tree on private property in the village, the clerk shall give notice to the owner to remove such dead wood. If such dead wood has not been removed within 15 days after such notice is given, village employees shall remove the same and dispose of it. An accurate record of the cost of removal and disposal of dead wood shall be kept and a report made to the clerk/treasurer, and the amount thereof shall be entered on the next and subsequent tax roll and collected as a special tax against such real estate as provided in section 58-114. 
(Code 1983, § 10.06(7)) 
Sec. 58-118. - Disposal of trees. 
    All trees cut down pursuant to notice shall be cut into lengths and placed, in an orderly fashion, for removal and disposal by the village at village expense. The large end of branches should be placed toward the street and at the curb, and small sticks and brush should be bundled together. The pile should not be over two feet in height, and no longer than eight feet in length, with a gap of at least four feet between stacks of brush. 
(Code 1983, § 10.06(9)) 
Chapters 59-61 - RESERVED 
Chapter 62 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Enforcement of certain offenses by citations, § 1-11; alcohol beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; court, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 46; conduct in village parks, § 66-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture Wisconsin Statutes Chapters 23 through all of Chapter 968. 
    Offenses against state law subject to forfeiture. The following state statutes following the prefix "62-1" (Chapters 62-1.23 through all of Chapter 62-1.968) are adopted by reference to describe and define offenses against the peace and good order of the village provided the penalty for commission of such offenses hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under section 1-11. Any amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this Code in order to secure uniform regulations. 
(Code 1983, §§ 9.29.9-9.951.16; Ord. No. 96-8, 8-19-96; Ord. No. 2002-02, 2-4-02; Ord. No. 2003-15, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 62-2. - Use of firearms or throwing or shooting of arrows, stones and other missiles prohibited. 
(a)  To further public health and safety, and to the extent not otherwise specifically permitted by Wisconsin Statutes: 
    No person, except a peace or law enforcement officer or member of the military in the line of duty as defined in Wisconsin Statutes, shall throw, fire or discharge any firearm, rifle, spring gun, air gun (whether a missile is expelled by compressed air, gas or chemical), electric weapon, bow and arrow, crossbow, sling shot, blow gun, stones or any other object within the village except: 
(1)  When lawfully hunting with a bow and arrow or crossbow at a distance greater than 100 yards, from a building located on another person's land, as described in § 29.038(3)(b)1.a., Wis. Stats. This restriction does not apply if the person who owns the land on which the building is located allows the hunter to hunt within 100 yards of the building. 
a.  A person who hunts with a bow and arrow or crossbow within the village is required to discharge the arrow or bolt from the respective weapon toward the ground. 
b.  Hunting or trapping will not be allowed on any land owned or leased by the village. 
(Code 1983, § 9.02; Ord. No. 09-09, § 1, 11-16-09; Ord. No. 14-06, § 1, 8-4-14) 
Sec. 62-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-06, § 2, adopted Aug. 4, 2014, repealed § 62-3, which pertained to throwing or shooting of arrows, stones, and other missiles prohibited, and derived from Code 1983, § 9.03. 
Sec. 62-4. - Discharge of fireworks restricted and sale of fireworks prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. "Fireworks" are defined as set forth in § 167.10(1), Wis. Stats., which is adopted here by reference. 
(b)  Possession and use. The possession and use of fireworks is prohibited in the Village of Kewaskum except as permitted in § 167.10(3)(b)(1), Wis. Stats., which is adopted here by reference. 
(c)  Sale. Sale of fireworks is prohibited in the Village of Kewaskum. 
(d)  [Exceptions.] This section shall not apply to the possession of fireworks by persons transporting fireworks to a city, town, village or county where the possession of the fireworks is authorized by permit or ordinance, providing such person does not remain in the Village of Kewaskum for a period exceeding 12 hours. 
(Code 1983, § 9.04; Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 2, 3, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 62-5. - Unauthorized presence on public school property. 
(a)  Prohibited. No unauthorized person shall enter into, congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or in any other way create a disturbance in any public school building in the village or in or about any school grounds under the jurisdiction of any school in the village. 
(b)  Applicability. Unauthorized persons shall include but not be limited to any of the following: 
(1)  Any student who is under suspension, expulsion or other discipline, excluding him from attending any class or school function. 
(2)  Nonstudents, which shall include students from schools other than the school which has jurisdiction over the property in question. 
(3)  Any person not an employee of such school. 
(4)  Any person not a parent or guardian of a student presently enrolled in such school. 
(5)  Any other person who is present within any school building or upon any school grounds under the jurisdiction of such school without first having obtained authorization to be there from the administrative staff of that school or their designated representative, excluding persons while on direct route to secure such authorization. 
(c)  Authorization. Authorization will have been presumed for persons not listed in subsection (b) attending school authorized functions. 
(Code 1983, § 9.20) 
Sec. 62-6. - Misuse of E 911 system prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency means a situation in which property or human life is in jeopardy and the prompt summoning of aid is essential. 
(b)  Penalties. Whoever intentionally uses or causes to be used the E 911 emergency telephone system knowing that no emergency exists is subject to section 1-11. 
(c)  Violation of parental responsibility. Any parent or legal guardian of a minor person who allows such minor person to misuse the E 911 system as described in this section shall be notified by the police department of the violation. 
(Code 1983, § 9.21) 
Sec. 62-7. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. In addition to any penalty imposed for violation of § 943.01(1), Wis. Stats., regarding criminal damage to property, any person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable for the costs of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property. The parent or parents of any unemancipated minor child who violates § 943.01(1), Wis. Stats., may also be held liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property in accordance with § 895.035, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 9.30) 
Secs. 62-8-62-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 62-41. - Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited. 
(a)  Creating excessive noise prohibited. No person shall create excessive noise. 
(b)  Owner permitting excessive noise prohibited. The owner, tenant or other person in charge or a premises shall not permit excessive noise to emanate from the premises. 
(c)  Definitions. 
(1)  Excessive noise. Such noise as disturbs the peace and quiet of another person and includes, but not by way of limitations, loud playing of compact disc's, tapes, records on audio equipment, radios, television sets, music machines or musical instruments. 
(2)  Excessive noise [levels]. No person shall operate a light motor vehicle such as to cause excessive noise levels as a result of defective or modified exhaust system, or as a result of unnecessary rapid acceleration, deceleration, revving or tire squealing, or as result of the operation of audio devices such as, but not limited to radios, phonographs, compact disc players and tape players. 
(3)  Signaling devices. No person shall operate any horn or other audible signaling device on any motor vehicle except in an emergency or when required by law. Burglar alarms on light motor vehicles shall only be of the electronic signaling type which transmit a nonaudible signal to a receiver which may be carried by the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
(Code 1983, § 9.05; Ord. No. 2003-02, 1-20-03) 
Sec. 62-42. - Loitering prohibited. 
(a)  Loitering or prowling. No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances that may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police or peace officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a police or peace officer shall prior to any arrest for an offense under this section afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm that would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this subsection if the police or peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if believed by the police or peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
(b)  Obstruction of highway by loitering. No person shall obstruct any street, bridge, sidewalk or crossing by lounging or loitering in or upon the same after being requested to move on by any police officer. 
(c)  Obstruction of traffic by loitering. No person shall loaf or loiter in groups or crowds upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street crossings or bridges or in any other public places within the village in such manner as to prevent, interfere with or obstruct the ordinary free use of such public streets, sidewalks, streets, street crossings and bridges or other public places by persons passing along and over the same. 
(d)  Loitering on private property. No person shall loaf or loiter in groups or crowds upon any private premises without invitation from the owner or occupant, after being requested to move by such owner or occupant or any police officer. 
(e)  Loitering in public places. No person shall loiter, lounge or loaf in or about any depot, theater, dance hall, restaurant, store, public sidewalk, public parking lot or other place of assembly or public use after being requested to move by any police officer. Upon being requested to move, a person must immediately comply with such request by leaving the premises or area thereof at the time of the request. 
(Code 1983, § 9.06) 
Secs. 62-43-62-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINORS 

Sec. 62-76. - Curfew. 
(a)  Loitering after certain hours prohibited. No person under 16 years of age shall be or remain upon any street or alley or other public place in the village between 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays and 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on other days of the week, unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian or an adult person having custody of such person or unless such person is required by his employment to be in or about the places mentioned in this subsection within the hours above stated, as shown by written evidence from his employer then in such person's possession or such person is then proceeding to or from his home or place of employment. Upon request the chief of police may grant permission to such person to be on the streets, alleys or other public places in the village during prohibited hours. 
(b)  Detaining child. The chief of police or other village police officer while on duty may detain any person violating this section until the parent or guardian of the child shall take him into custody, but such officer shall immediately upon taking custody of the child communicate with the parent or guardian. 
(c)  Permitting minors to violate curfew. No person having care and custody of any person as described above shall allow or permit such person to go or be upon any public street, alley or other public place in the village in violation of this section. 
(d)  Duties of operators of places of business. No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business shall permit any minor under the age of 16 years to loiter, loaf or idle in such place during the hours prohibited by this section. Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business shall find persons under the age of 16 years loitering, loafing or idling in such place of business, he shall immediately order such person to leave; and if such person refuses to leave, the operator shall immediately notify the police department and inform them of the violation. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person under 16 years violating the provisions of this section for the first time shall be given a warning by the chief of police; and the parent, guardian or person having custody, if known, shall be personally notified of such violation by the chief of police or by registered mail. 
(2)  For a second and each subsequent offense, a person under 16 years of age violating this section shall be dealt with pursuant to ch. 948, Wis. Stats. 
(3)  Any parent, guardian or person having the custody of a person under the age of 16 years, and who has been notified of a first violation by such person of this section, shall, on a second violation of this section by such person, be subject to a penalty of not less than $5.00 nor more than $10.00 and costs, and in default of payment of such penalty, shall be confined in the county jail not to exceed ten days; and for subsequent violations shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $25.00 and costs and, in default of payment of such penalty and costs, shall be confined in the county jail not to exceed 15 days. 
(Code 1983, § 9.14) 
Sec. 62-77. - Truancy, contributing to truancy, and habitual truancy prohibited. 
(a)  No person under 18 years of age shall be truant or habitual truant as herein defined. No person, regardless of age shall perform any act of commission or omission which contributes to a child's truancy from school. 
(b)  This section as prohibiting contributiong to truancy does not apply to a person who has under his or her control a child who has been sanctioned under the provisions of § 118.116, Wis. Stats. 
(c)  Definitions. 
    Acceptable excuse shall mean an acceptable excuse as defined in §§ 118.15 and 118.64(4), Wis. Stats. 
    Truant means any pupil under the age of 18 who is absent part or all of one or more days from school during which the school attendance officer, principal, or teacher has not been notified of the legal cause of such absence by the parent or guardian of the absent pupil, and also means intermittent attendance as such is required under § 118.15, Wis. Stats. 
    Habitual truant means a pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part or all of five or more days on which school is held during a school semester. 
(d)  Act of "commission" or "omission" means anything that contributes to the truancy of the child, whether or not the child is adjudged to be in need of protection or services, if the natural and probable consequences of that act would be to cause the child to be truant. 
(e)  Penalties. If a person is found to have violated this section, all of the dispositions as set forth in § 118.163, Wis. Stats., are available to the court. 
(Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-16-04) 
Secs. 62-78-62-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 

Sec. 62-111. - Violation of state law. 
    Any person violating ch. 961, Wis. Stats., in the village shall be subject to punishment as provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 9.17) 
Secs. 62-112-62-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 62-150. - Purpose and intent. 
    The village finds and declares that sex offenders are a serious threat to public safety. Given the high rate of recidivism for sex offenders, the village believes that reducing the opportunity and temptation is appropriate to minimizing the risk of re-offence to better protect the children in these public places. This article is a regulatory measure aimed at protecting the health and safety of children in the village from the risk that convicted sex offenders may re-offend in locations close to their residences where children tend to congregate or be regularly present. 
    It is the intent of this article not to impose a criminal penalty but rather to serve the village's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the village by creating safety zones around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence and wherein access by certain sexual offenders shall be restricted. 
(Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 4-4-16) 
Sec. 62-151. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article and unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Child means a person under the age of 18. 
    Facility for children means a public or private school, a group home, as defined in § 48.02(7), Wis. Stats., a residential care center for children and youth, as defined in § 48.02(15d), Wis. Stats., a shelter care facility, as defined in § 48.02(17), Wis. Stats., a daycare center licensed under § 48.65, Wis. Stats., a daycare provider certified under § 48.651, Wis. Stats., or a youth center, as defined in § 961.01(22), Wis. Stats. 
    Loitering means, whether in a group, crowd, or as an individual, to stand idly about, loaf, prowl, congregate, wander, stand, linger aimlessly, proceed slowly or with many stops, to delay or dawdle. 
    Offender shall mean: 
(1)  Any person who is required to register under § 301.45, Wis. Stats., for any offense against a child or any person who is required to register under § 301.45, Wis. Stats., and who is subject to the special bulletin notification process set forth in § 301.46(2) and (2m), Wis. Stats.; 
(2)  Any person subject to the sex crimes commitment provisions of § 975.06, Wis. Stats. 
(3)  Any person found not guilty by reason of disease or mental defect placed on lifetime supervision under § 971.17(1j), Wis. Stats. 
    Permanent residence means the place where a person sleeps, abides, lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days or which qualifies as a residence under the holdings of the Wisconsin Supreme Court and which may include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory. 
    Recreational trail means all parts and segments of the Eisenbahn Trail within the village. 
    Sexual violent offense shall have the meaning as set forth in § 980.01(6), Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time. 
    Temporary residence means residence or premises meeting any of the following criteria: 
(1)  A place where the person sleeps, abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not that person's permanent residence as defined in this section; 
(2)  A place where the person routinely sleeps, abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not that person's permanent residence as defined in this section; or 
(3)  A place where a person sleeps, or which qualifies as a temporary residence under the holdings of the Wisconsin Supreme Court, and which may include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory. 
(Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 4-4-16) 
Sec. 62-152. - Sex offender residency, loitering and other activities, prohibitions; exceptions. 
(a)  Residency requirement. No offender shall reside within 750 feet of real property that supports or upon which there exists any of the following uses: 
(1)  Public parks, parkways, parkland, park facilities; 
(2)  Public swimming pools; 
(3)  Public libraries; 
(4)  Recreational trails; 
(5)  Public playgrounds; 
(6)  Schools for children; 
(7)  Athletic fields used by children; 
(8)  Daycare facilities; 
(9)  Specialized schools for children, including, but not limited to a gymnastics academy, dance academy or music school; 
(10)  Aquatic facilities open to the public; 
(11)  Facilities for children's clubs, e.g., Boy Scout and Girl Scout club houses; 
(12)  Any facility for children. 
(b)  Measurement of distance . The distance shall be measured from the closest boundary line of the real property supporting the residence of an offender to the closest boundary line of the real property that supports or upon which there exists any of the uses enumerated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Residency restriction exceptions . An offender residing within 750 feet of real property that supports or upon which there exists any of the uses enumerated in subsection (a) of this section does not commit a violation of this article if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The offender is required to serve a sentence or is otherwise involuntarily required to reside in a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or other correctional institution or mental facility. 
(2)  The offender has established a residence prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article. 
(3)  The use enumerated in subsection (a) of this section began after the offender established a residence. 
(4)  The offender is a minor or ward under guardianship. 
(d)  Original domicile restriction . In addition to and notwithstanding the foregoing, but subject to subsection (c) of this section, no offender shall be permitted to reside in the village unless such person was domiciled in the village at the time of the offense resulting in the person's most recent conviction for committing the sexually violent offense and/or crime against children. 
(e)  Prohibited activity . 
(1)  Loitering . It is unlawful for any person defined as an offender to loiter or prowl in the locations enumerated under residential restrictions herein, in a place, at a time, or a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(2)  Holiday parties . It is unlawful for any offender to participate in a holiday event involving children less than 18 years of age, such as but not limited to, distributing candy or other items to children on Halloween, wearing a Santa Claus costume or wearing an Easter Bunny costume. Holiday events in which the offender is the parent or guardian of the children involved, and no non-familial children are present, are exempt from this paragraph. Participation is to be defined as actively taking part in an event. This paragraph applies to any location within the village. 
(f)  Property owners prohibited from renting real property to sexual offenders. 
(1)  No person shall knowingly sell or rent a residential property to an offender if the property is located in such a manner that the offender, by residing at the property, will be in violation of subsection (a) above. 
(2)  A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this section, and shall subject the property owner to the penalties provided in section 62-153. 
(Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 4-4-16) 
Sec. 62-153. - Penalties. 
(a)  Forfeitures . Any person found guilty of violating this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Injunction-Violation of residency restrictions . If an offender establishes a permanent or temporary residence in violation of the residency restrictions contained herein, the chief of police may refer the matter to the village attorney. The referral shall include a written determination by the chief of police that, upon all of the facts and circumstances and the purpose and intent of this article, such violation interferes substantially with the comfortable enjoyment of life, health, safety of another or others. Upon such referral, the village attorney shall bring an action in the name of the village in circuit court to permanently enjoin such residency as a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 4-4-16) 
Chapters 63-65 - RESERVED 
Chapter 66 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Village parks generally, § 61.36, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 66-1. - Conduct in village parks. 
    No person shall in any village park: 
(1)  Allow any animal, leashed or otherwise, to be in a village park. 
a.  Dogs are allowed in one designated area of the Riverhill Park; specifically: on the east side of the Milwaukee River, south of Main Street in the parking lot area. 
(2)  Engage in the trapping of animals. 
(3)  Violate any rule or regulation adopted by the officer, board or committee having jurisdiction of the village parks. 
(Code 1983, § 9.10; Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 10-12-15) 
Cross reference- Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62. 
Sec. 66-2. - Park use fees. 
    The fees charged for the use of any park facility are set out in the most current park reservation policy (rules) as adopted by the village board. Such park reservation policy (rules) are saved from repeal. 
(Code 1983, § 12.01(12)) 
Chapters 67-69 - RESERVED 
Chapter 70 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Finance and tax, § 2-451 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCASIONAL SALES 

Sec. 70-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Occasional sale means and include all general sales open to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises in any residential zone as defined in the village zoning ordinance for the purpose of disposing of personal property, including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "flea market," "rummage" or other similar sales advertised for the public to attend. This definition shall not include a situation where no more than six specific items are held out for sale and all advertisements of such sale specifically names those items to be sold. 
    Person means and include individuals, partnerships, corporations, voluntary associations or members of a family residing in a household conducting the sale. 
    Personal property means property owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or occupant of his residence. This shall not include farm equipment, motor vehicles, lumber, fruit and vegetables being sold and displayed in commercially zoned areas of the village. 
(Code 1983, § 9.18(1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-32. - Conditions of sale. 
    No person shall operate, conduct, manage or permit an occasional sale upon his premises or other property under his control more often than twice per year, and such sale shall not be continued for a period of more than three consecutive days and shall be conducted from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(Code 1983, § 9.18(2)) 
Sec. 70-33. - Advertisement of sale. 
    Any cards, placards or signs advertising an occasional sale are not to exceed eight square feet in area and may be placed on the premises of the sale not to exceed seven days twice in any calendar year. Off-premises sale signs are prohibited, except where the sign and location have been approved by the police department. No sign shall be placed on private property without the consent of the owner of such land. Sale signs shall be removed within 24 hours following the sale. The persons holding the sale must place their names and addresses on the reverse side of any cards, placards or signs. 
(Code 1983, § 9.18(3)) 
Sec. 70-34. - Hazard. 
    No occasional sale shall be allowed if, in the opinion of the village police and fire departments, it may constitute a traffic or fire hazard. 
(Code 1983, § 9.18(4)) 
Sec. 70-35. - Permit of sale. 
    The village board may by resolution deem it necessary to have each person conducting an occasional sale submit an application to hold such sale and to establish a fee for such permit. 
(Code 1983, § 9.18(5)) 
Chapters 71-73 - RESERVED 
Chapter 74 - RESERVED[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-07, § 4, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed Ch. 74, §§ 74-1-74-5, 74-41-74-46, and 74-81-74-84, which pertained to Shoreland-Wetland Zoning and derived from Code 1983, §§ 16.01-16.12. 

Chapter 75 - WELL HEAD PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 75-1. - Statement of purpose and authority. 
(a)  The residents of the Village of Kewaskum depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose of this well head protection chapter is to institute land use regulations and restrictions to protect the Village of Kewaskum municipal water supply and well fields, and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Village of Kewaskum. 
(b)  Statutory authority of the Village of Kewaskum to enact these regulations was established by the Wisconsin Legislature in 1983, Wisconsin Act 410 (effective May 11, 1984), which specifically added groundwater protection to the statutory authorization for municipal planning and zoning to protect public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, 1-21-02) 
Sec. 75-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms, and phases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Facility means something created, built, installed, or established to serve a particular purpose. 
    Nonconforming use means an existing legal use of land, structure, building or accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, 1-21-02) 
Secs. 75-3-75-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREAS 

Sec. 75-11. - Well No. 5 well head protection area. 
(a)  Lands surrounding Well No. 5 will be subject to the following required minimum horizontal separation distances between the well and the following land uses and facilities: 
(1)  Fifty feet between Well No. 5 and a storm sewer main. 
(2)  Two hundred feet between Well No. 5 and any sanitary sewer main, sanitary sewer manhole, lift station or single-family residential fuel oil tank. A lesser separation distance may be allowed for sanitary sewer mains where the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main materials and joints and pressure tested in place to meet current American Water Works Association C600 specifications. In no case may the separation distance between the well and a sanitary sewer main be less than 50 feet. 
(3)  Four hundred feet between Well No. 5 and a septic tank or soil adsorption unit receiving less than 8,000 gallons per day, a cemetery or a stormwater drainage pond. 
(4)  Six hundred feet between Well No. 5 and any gasoline or fuel oil storage tank installation that has received written approval from the Wisconsin Department of Commerce or its designated agent under § Comm 10.10. 
(5)  One thousand feet between Well No. 5 and land application of municipal, commercial or industrial waste; the boundaries of a landspreading facility for spreading of petroleum-contaminated soil regulated under Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources ch. NR 718 while that facility is in operation; industrial, commercial or municipal waste water lagoons or storage structures; manure stacks or storage structures; and septic tanks or soil adsorption units receiving 8,000 gallons per day or more. 
(6)  Twelve hundred feet between Well No. 5 and any solid waste storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor, processing, wood burning, one time disposal or small demolition facility; sanitary landfill; any property with residual groundwater contamination that exceeds Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources ch. NR 140 enforcement standards that is shown on the department's geographic information system registry of closed remediation sites; coal storage area; salt or deicing material storage area; gasoline or fuel oil storage tanks that have not received written approval from the Wisconsin Department of Commerce or its designated agent under § Comm 10.10; bulk fuel storage facilities; and pesticide or fertilizer handling or storage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, 1-21-02) 
Secs. 75-12-75-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 75-21. - Nonconforming uses; general. 
    Insofar as standards in this section are not inconsistent with the provisions of Village of Kewaskum zoning code, they shall apply to all nonconforming uses. The existing legal use of the structure or building or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use shall be permitted unless they are made in conformity with the provisions of this section. For the purposes of this section, the words "modification" and "addition" shall include, but not be limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing structure or accessory use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications or additions; such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components. 
(2)  If a nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the lands structure or building shall conform with the appropriate provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, 1-21-02) 
Secs. 75-22-75-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 75-31. - Requirements for existing facilities. 
(a)  Facilities shall provide copies of all federal, state and local facility operation approvals or certificate and on-going environmental monitoring results to the Village of Kewaskum. 
(b)  Facilities shall provide additional environmental or safety structures/monitoring as deemed necessary by the Village of Kewaskum, which may include, but is not limited to, stormwater runoff management and monitoring. 
(c)  Facilities shall replace equipment or expand in a manner that improves the existing environmental and safety technologies already in existence. 
(d)  Facilities shall have the responsibility of devising and filing with the Village of Kewaskum a method for the immediate notification of Village of Kewaskum officials in the event of an emergency. 
(e)  In the event the individual and/or facility causes the release of any contaminants which endanger Well No. 5, the activity causing said release shall immediately cease and a cleanup satisfactory to the Village of Kewaskum shall occur. 
(f)  The individual/facility shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup, Village of Kewaskum consultant fees at the invoice amount, plus administrative costs for oversight, review and documentation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, 1-21-02) 
Secs. 75-32-75-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 75-41. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful to construct or use any structure, land or water in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance. In case of any violation, the Village of Kewaskum Village Board may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this ordinance. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00 plus the costs of prosecution of reach violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall have such costs added to their real property as a lien against the property. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, 1-21-02) 
Chapters 76, 77 - RESERVED 
Chapter 78 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; health and sanitation, ch. 42; utilities, ch. 94. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Storage of junk, etc., discarded property regulated. 
(a)  No person shall store junked or discarded property, including, without limitation, automobiles, automobile parts, trucks, tractors, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or machinery parts, wood, bricks, cement blocks, or other unsightly debris, except in an enclosure/building which houses such property from public view, or upon permit issued by the village board. 
(b)  No vehicle which is disassembled, dismantled, inoperable, wrecked, or unregistered, and any parts thereof, may be stored or allowed to remain on any private property unless permitted by a conditional use permit or completely enclosed in a building. Any such vehicle is declared to be a public nuisance and may be removed and disposed of as provided in this Code. 
(c)  The village administrator, the police chief or their designee may require by written order any premises violating this section to be put in compliance within the time specified in such an order and if the order is not complied with, the police department may issue a citation for such violation of this section or proceed to abate the nuisance pursuant to sections 58-6-58-8 or both. 
(Code 1983, § 9.08; Ord. No. 98-4, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 14-09, § 1, 12-1-14; Ord. No. 15-08, § 1, 10-12-15) 
Sec. 78-2. - Littering prohibited. 
    No person shall throw any glass, refuse or waste, filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the village or upon any private property or upon the surface of any body of water within the village. 
(Code 1983, § 9.09) 
State Law reference- Littering generally, § 159.81, Wis. Stats. 
Secs. 78-3-78-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION, DISPOSAL AND RECYCLING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Recycling or resource recovery facilities, § 61.345, Wis. Stats. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-35. - Title; collection service. 
(a)  Title. This article shall be known as the solid waste and recycling management ordinance. 
(b)  Garbage and refuse collection service. Residential and commercial garbage and recycling collection service will be provided by the village personnel or private firms under contract with the village provided that solid waste guidelines are met as spelled out in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 17.01) 
Sec. 78-36. - Administration, enforcement of article. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the director of public works to administer and enforce this article. Items not specifically covered in this article shall be handled by the director of public works based on common municipal practices. If the director of public works' decision is not acceptable to the property owner, the public works committee shall review complaints as requested and make a determination. 
(Code 1983, § 17.23(4)) 
Sec. 78-37. - Declaration of policy. 
    Whereas the village is serving as its own responsible unit, pursuant to ch. 159, Wis. Stats., and NR 544, "The Recycling Laws," which require timely compliance with various requirements relating to landfill and incineration, it is declared to be the purpose and intent of this article to enhance and improve the environment and promote the health, safety and welfare of the village by establishing minimum standards for the storage, collection, transport, processing, separation, recovery and disposal of solid waste and recycling materials in compliance with state law. 
(Code 1983, § 17.02) 
Sec. 78-38. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural establishment means an establishment engaged in the rearing and slaughtering of animals and the processing of animal products or orchard and field crops. 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material. 
    Bulky waste means items whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by normal collection, processing or disposal methods. 
    Collector/vendor means the person specifically authorized by the village board to collect garbage, rubbish and recyclable materials and dispose of the same. 
    Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment house, rooming house or tourist court which contains three or more service units and any other building, business or establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a residential unit. Apartment house shall mean any residential building containing four or more full living units, including condominiums and elderly housing. 
    Curb means the back edge or curb and gutter along a paved street or where one would be if the street was fully improved and had a curb and gutter. 
    Demolition waste means that portion of solid wastes consisting of waste from the repair, remodeling or reconstruction of buildings, such as lumber, roofing and sheathing scraps, rubble, broken concrete, asphalt and plaster, conduit, pipe, wire, insulation and any other materials resulting from the demolition of buildings and repair, remodeling or reconstruction of buildings, such as lumber, routine and sheathing scraps, rubble, broken concrete, asphalt and plaster, conduit, pipe, wire, insulation and any other materials resulting from the demolition of buildings and improvements. 
    Director means the director of public works of the village. 
    Disposal means the orderly process of discarding useless or unwanted material. 
    DNR means the state department of natural resources. 
    Dump means a land site where solid waste is disposed of in a manner that does not protect the environment. 
    Dwelling unit means a place of habitation occupied by a normal single-family unit or combination of persons who may be considered as equivalent to a single-family unit for the purposes of this article. 
    Garbage means every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking and dealing in or storage of edibles and any other matter of any nature whatsoever, which is subject to decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies or other germ-carrying insects. 
    Garbage can means a plastic or galvanized metal container of the type commonly sold as a garbage can of a capacity not less than 20 gallons and not to exceed 30 gallons, having two handles upon the sides thereof or bail by which it may be lifted and a tightfitting metal or plastic top with a handle and so constructed as to permit the free discharge of its contents. No garbage can shall weigh more than 60 pounds when filled. 
    Garden trash. Refer to "yard waste." 
    Hazardous waste means any substance or combination of substances, including any waste of a solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous form, that may cause or significantly contribute to any increase in mortality or increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or which may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment because of its quality, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics. This term includes but is not limited to substances which are toxic, corrosive, flammable, irritants, strong sensitizers or explosives as determined by the DNR. 
    Industrial waste means liquid or other wastes resulting from any process or industry, manufacture, trade or business in the development of any natural resource. 
    Landfill means a land site where solid waste is disposed of in a manner to provide protection for the environment, in accordance with state regulations. 
    Litter means solid waste scattered about in a careless manner, usually rubbish. 
    Mobile container means a metal 14 gauge steel garbage and waste container with the following minimum specifications: 77 3/8 inches long, 30 inches wide and 46 inches high at the back edge and shall be mounted on four rubber wheels with roller bearings and/or metal slides. Such mobile containers shall be capable of fitting the village's/contractor's garbage truck, hydraulic attachments for unloading. Such container shall be flyproof, ratproof and leakproof and shall be fitted with a metal or plastic top. The minimum size for a mobile container shall be 1.5 cubic yards and the maximum shall be 2.0 cubic yards. 
    Noncombustible refuse means refuse materials that are unburnable at ordinary incinerator temperatures (800 degrees to 1,800 degrees F.), such as metals, mineral matter, large quantities of glass or crockery, metal furniture, auto bodies or parts, and other similar material or refuse not usual to housekeeping or to the operation of stores and offices. 
    Nonrecyclable material means all Pyrex glass, window glass, light bulbs, mirrors, broken glass and china, all styrofoam and melamine type plastics, all waxed paper, waxed corrugated cardboard, envelopes with gummed labels, and envelopes with plastic windows and all other paper, garbage and rubbish, and similar materials not defined as recyclable materials. 
    Nonresidential solid waste means solid waste from agricultural, commercial, industrial and institutional activities or a building or group of buildings consisting of four or more dwelling units. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, executor, administrator, trustee or other legal entity, whether singular or plural, masculine or feminine, as the context may require. 
    Plastic or polyethylene disposal bags means a container other than a garbage can, which is used for garbage disposal. Such bag shall meet the same criteria as a garbage can and shall withstand a drop of five feet onto smooth concrete when filled to a total weight of 30 pounds with a material having a weight density of 15 pounds per cubic foot. The bags shall be securely closed with a twist tie or equivalent. 
    Blue recyclable plastic or polyethylene bag means a blue bag used for the disposal of recyclable materials and is available in either 17.5-gallon or 35-gallon sized bags. 
    Private collection services means collection of services provided by a person licensed to do same by the DNR. 
    Recyclable plastic bin means a dark green village 18-gallon plastic bin for the sole purpose of placing recyclable waste out for curbside disposal. 
    Recyclable waste means: 
(1)  Aluminum containers made entirely of aluminum. 
(2)  Glass: clear, brown, green rinsed empty with covers and bands removed. 
(3)  Tin: steel containers rinsed empty. 
(4)  Plastic bottles: P.E.T.E.-1, H.D.P.E.-2 rinsed clean with caps and rings removed. 
(5)  Newspaper: tied in bundles. 
(6)  Corrugated cardboard: tied in three-foot by three-foot bundles. 
(7)  Batteries: car, truck, motorcycle and snowmobile. 
(8)  Appliances (white goods): stoves, refrigerators, washers, dryers, residential and commercial furnaces, boilers, dehumidifiers, water heaters and etc. 
(9)  Magazines: tied in bundles. 
    Refuse includes all waste material, including garbage, rubbish and industrial waste and shall, by way of enumeration but not by way of limitation, include grass, leaves, sticks, tree branches, vines and logs, stumps, stones, cement, boards, furniture or household appliances, and garden debris. 
    Residential solid waste means all solid waste that normally originates in a residential environment from residential units. 
    Residential unit means an individual household capable of independent habitation by a family unit. A single-family dwelling shall be considered to be one residential unit; a multifamily dwelling shall be considered to be multiple residential units, the number of residential units to equal the number of family units to be housed therein. Residential units shall not include boardinghouses, hotels, motels or resorts. 
    Rubbish means all matter produced from residential or community life, subject to decomposition, not defined as sewage and excluding hazardous waste. Included is furniture, plastic and metal objects that are not food containers or recyclable, carpeting fixtures, and plumbing items. 
    Scavenging means the uncontrolled removal of materials at any point in solid waste management. 
    Solid waste means discarded materials resulting from the handling, processing, storage and consumption of food. 
    Storage means the interim containment of solid waste in an approved manner after generation and prior to collection and ultimate disposal. 
    Storage area means areas where persons place containers during noncollection days as well as areas where containers are set out for collection day. 
    Tax-exempt property means that property exempt from paying local property tax, such as schools, churches and charitable organizations. 
    White goods means stoves, refrigerators, washers, dryers, residential and commercial furnaces, boilers, dehumidifiers, water heaters, freezers, microwave ovens, ovens, air conditioners and similar materials as provided under the definition of "major appliances" in § 159.01(3), Wis. Stats., by 1993 Wis. Act 245, effective April 23, 1994. 
    Yard waste means grass trimmings, grass rakings, leaves, garden debris, vines, shrubbery cuttings less than 18 inches long, and fruits and vegetables. 
(Code 1983, § 17.03) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-39. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or any order, rule regulation made under this article, shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in section 1-11 of this Code and §§ 159.95 and 159.97, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 17.29) 
Sec. 78-40. - Refuse from outside the village. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or cause to be deposited for collection, any waste, recyclable or refuse not generated within the village. 
(Code 1983, § 17.28) 
Sec. 78-41. - Placing dangerous materials in waste containers prohibited. 
    No person shall place or cause to be placed in a garbage can or refuse container for collection any acid, explosive material, flammable liquids, or any dangerous or highly corrosive material of any kind. 
(Code 1983, § 17.13) 
Sec. 78-42. - Prima facie evidence of accumulation of waste. 
    The fact that any residential unit or any commercial establishment located in the village is occupied shall be prima facie evidence that garbage or other refuse is being produced or accumulated upon such premises. This would indicate that proper steps should be taken to dispose of such garbage or refuse or the occupant shall be in violation of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 17.08) 
Sec. 78-43. - Prohibited activities and noncollectable materials. 
(a)  Dead animals. It shall be unlawful to place any dead animal, or parts thereof, in a container for collection; however, this subsection shall not apply to animal parts from food preparation for human consumption. 
(b)  Undrained food waste. It shall be unlawful to place any garbage or other food wastes in a container for collection unless it is first drained and wrapped. 
(c)  Ashes. It shall be unlawful to place hot ashes for collection. Ashes are to be cold and completely extinguished. Ashes that have been stored in metal containers and wet down may be left for collection in an approved container. 
(d)  Improper placement. It shall be unlawful to place or allow to be placed any solid waste upon the roads, streets, public or private property within the village contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Compliance with article. It shall be unlawful to store, collect, transport, transfer, recover, incinerate or dispose of any solid waste within the boundaries of the village contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Improper transportation. It shall be unlawful to transport any solid waste in any vehicle that permits the contents to blow, sift, leak or fall from the vehicle. If spillage does occur, the collection crew shall immediately return spilled materials to the collection vehicle and shall properly clean or have cleaned the area. All vehicles used for the transportation of solid waste shall be durable, easily cleanable and leakproof, if necessary, considering the type of waste and its moisture content. Collection vehicles shall be cleaned frequently to prevent nuisances and insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(g)  Interference with authorized collector. No person other than an authorized collector shall collect or interfere with any garbage after it shall have been put into a garbage receptacle and deposited in the proper place for the collector; nor shall any unauthorized person molest, hinder, delay or in any manner interfere with an authorized garbage collector in the discharge of his duties. 
(h)  Scavenging. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any solid waste placed for collection. 
(i)  Private dumps. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a dump. 
(j)  Burning of waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste in any manner, except as provided elsewhere in this Code. 
(k)  Noncollectible materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any of the following waste unless placed in compliance with division 4 of this article or special arrangements have been made pursuant to section 78-95(3) and (4): 
(1)  Hazardous waste. 
(2)  Toxic waste. 
(3)  Chemicals. 
(4)  Explosives or ammunition. 
(5)  Drain or waste oil or flammable liquids. 
(6)  Large quantities of paint. 
(7)  Tires. 
(8)  White goods. 
(9)  Yard waste. 
(l)  Animal or human waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to place waste for collection, except animal waste or kitty litter waste may be disposed of in plastic bags for collection. 
(m)  Hospital or medical waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any pathogenic hospital wastes. 
(n)  Building waste. All waste resulting from remodeling, construction or removal of a building, roadway or sidewalk shall be disposed of by the owner, builder or contractor. 
(o)  Waste motor oil recycling. No person shall dispose of any waste motor oil by placing it with refuse for regular collection by the village/contractor, by pouring it on the ground, into the storm sewer, ditches or waterways, or into gutters or village streets. Any person wishing to dispose of waste motor oil shall utilize the designated village recycling waste oil disposal station or at any other legal waste oil site. It shall be unlawful to dispose of waste oil containing foreign matter. 
(p)  Unlawful disposal. It will be unlawful to dump or dispose of garbage on private or public property, public parks or along public roadways. 
(Code 1983, § 17.05(3)) 
Sec. 78-44. - Prohibited storage, accumulation and deposit of refuse. 
(a)  Public places. No person shall store any refuse in any street, alleyway or other public place at any time, except as provided in this section, or upon any private property other than property owned and occupied by such person. 
(b)  Bodies of water. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any storm sewer, stream, river or other body of water. 
(c)  Unauthorized accumulation. Any accumulation of refuse on any premises is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse within ten days after due notice, served by certified mail with return receipt requested, shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 17.10) 
Sec. 78-45. - Plan for storage required before issuance of certain building permits. 
(a)  Before building permits may be issued for construction of shopping centers, multifamily dwellings of three or more dwelling units and supermarkets, a plan for storage of garbage/waste and recyclables must be approved by the director of public works as to location, accessibility and adequacy. 
(b)  Multifamily dwellings consisting of five or more dwelling units shall be responsible for providing and paying for the disposal of their own refuse through a private contractor. The owner of any commercial multiple dwelling shall furnish, or require the tenant of the dwelling to furnish, proper solid waste and recycling bags and/or a dumpster where applicable. 
(Code 1983, § 17.09) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Secs. 78-46-78-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS, FEES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 78-66. - Owner's or occupant's permit. 
    In all cases in which garbage or waste is removed and disposed of by persons other than employees of the public works department, the owner or occupant of the premises from which such removal is made shall secure a written permit for such removal from the director of public works. The application for such permit shall show the name and address of the person or persons by whom such removal is to be made, the nature of the vehicle or vehicles in which it is to be transported, and the location at which and the manner in which the ultimate disposition of the garbage and waste is to be accomplished. 
(Code 1983, § 17.15) 
Sec. 78-67. - Hauler's permit. 
    No person shall remove garbage or waste from any premises in the village or transport garbage or waste through the streets, alleys or public ways of the village or dump, incinerate or in any other manner dispose of garbage or waste originating within the limits of the village or contract for or permit himself to be employed or engaged for any such removal, transportation or disposal without first having secured a permit for such services as provided by section 78-66. 
(Code 1983, § 17.16) 
Sec. 78-68. - Permit to operate business. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of garbage or waste disposal and collection without having first made application upon a form provided by the public works department and obtained a permit from such department to carry on such a business. The director of public works shall determine the adequacy of the equipment to be used, financial responsibility and business character and reputation of the applicant, method and location of collection and disposal, need for such private service, and other pertinent information pertaining to the applicant, and may deny a permit if not satisfied with the adequacy of and need for such proposed operation and the financial responsibility and moral character of the applicant. Permits shall be issued for one year and may be canceled at any time by the village board on recommendation of the director of public works for inadequacy of service, inadequate precautions in collection or disposal, unsanitary conditions of the disposal equipment, littering of the streets, alleys or roads or interfering or hindering village garbage and waste collection. The village reserves the right to refuse to renew permits at the expiration date and to provide such collection service with village equipment and employees. Such application shall be submitted to and approved by the director as a prerequisite to the issuance of an occupational license to engage in the business of private waste collection and disposal. 
(b)  Upon the cancellation of a garbage and waste collection permit, the person so engaged in such service shall immediately dispose of any accumulation of garbage and waste accumulated prior to the cancellation of the permit, and shall within 24 hours of the cancellation remove any and all garbage cans and mobile containers owned or leased by such person conducting the garbage and waste service. 
(c)  License fees shall be as stated within the refuse/recycling disposal and collection policy as adopted and published by the village board, for a one-year permit from January 1 to December 31, or any portion of the year. 
(Code 1983, § 17.17) 
Sec. 78-69. - Collection fee from tax-exempt property. 
(a)  How determined. Collection of garbage and refuse from tax-exempt property will be billed for such service on a quarterly basis. The fee to be billed will be determined by the type and size of container used in connection with the collection process. Special exemption of such a fee may be granted by the village board. 
(b)  Fee schedule. The charge to each tax-exempt property shall be equal to the yardage/tipping fee the village is currently being charged for their disposal, plus a ten percent handling/billing charge. The yardage amount shall be determined by the size and number of containers being utilized. (Refer to the fee schedule policy used for billing purposes, which shall be updated appropriately for proper fee calculations.) 
(Code 1983, § 17.21) 
Sec. 78-70. - Special collection fees; extra charges. 
    Special collections outside the regular hours of operation of the public works department or a contractor not covered by this division may be performed for such fee and under such conditions as may be specified by the director of public works and/or contractor. Interference with waste collection or unreasonable delay in waste collection may be subject to an extra charge. 
(Code 1983, § 17.14) 
Secs. 78-71-78-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 78-91. - Number, condition of containers. 
(a)  Generally. Each commercial establishment located in the village shall have a maximum number of three garbage cans or a maximum of one mobile container to accommodate all garbage and waste to be removed by the village/contractor, and each residential unit in the village shall have a minimum of one garbage can or a maximum of three garbage cans for such purpose. Collection service may be discontinued where containers have been condemned as unfit for garbage receptacles until proper containers are provided and the owners or users thereof may be subject to the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. Garbage cans and mobile containers shall be kept tightly covered at all times and shall be capable of being closed so that water, flies and other insects cannot enter and shall be easily accessible to the refuse collectors on the property from which the refuse originated. 
(b)  Refuse storage area. Storage areas shall be kept in a nuisance- and odor-free condition. Litter shall not be allowed to accumulate. Collection crews will not be responsible for cleaning up loose materials from any containers that have become ruptured or broken due to wet conditions, animals, vandalism or other cause. The occupant and/or owner shall be responsible for cleaning up this litter. Litter not collected shall not be allowed to accumulate. Violation will result in the occupant's and/or owner's being notified to clean up the area, with continued violation resulting in the owner's being prosecuted under the provisions of this division and the general penalty provisions in section 1-11. 
(c)  Illegal containers. Containers not approved consist of metal barrels and drums, wooden or cardboard barrels, wheelbarrows and other such containers (oversized without handles) not approved by this article. These containers will not be emptied regardless of contents or weight. The collector shall not be obligated to pick up any garbage, recyclable, rubbish or trash in nonapproved containers. 
(Code 1983, § 17.04) 
Sec. 78-92. - Deposit of garbage and refuse for collection. 
(a)  Separation of refuse. Garbage and refuse shall be placed in standard garbage cans or bags. 
(b)  Preparation of refuse. All garbage and refuse shall be drained of liquid before being deposited in the container for collection. All garbage shall be wrapped in paper before being placed in garbage cans or bags. 
(Code 1983, § 17.05(1), (2)) 
Sec. 78-93. - Location of garbage cans/containers. 
(a)  Where an alley exists and is normally used for the collection of garbage, garbage cans or mobile containers shall be placed on the owner's property as near to such alley as practical. If no alley exists or is not practical by reason of the existence of physical obstacles to placing the garbage can or mobile container on the edge of the alley, such garbage can or mobile container shall be placed at a point to be designated by the director of public works. 
(b)  If a property owner erects a fence, wall or hedge bordering on any alley, the property owner shall provide an offset in the fence, wall or hedge of not less than four feet by ten feet for the placement of garbage cans or mobile containers. 
(c)  Multifamily/condos, even though under normal conditions will be contracting for and paying for the collection of their disposal of garbage/refuse and recyclables, are responsible for the fencing (privacy screen) around their garbage cans or mobile containers. 
(Code 1983, § 17.06) 
Sec. 78-94. - Placing of materials for collection. 
    No garbage can or trash container shall be kept upon or adjacent to any street, sidewalk, parkway, front yard, side yard or other place within the view of persons using the village streets and sidewalks; except that: 
(1)  Placing for collection. Not earlier than noon on the day preceding that upon which garbage and refuse collection are customarily made from such premises, such garbage cans and trash containers shall be placed within six feet of the street or just inside the curb for the purpose of permitting the collection of garbage and refuse from such containers, and such garbage cans and trash containers shall be removed from such place on the same day collection is made. 
(2)  Erection of bins for accumulation. The owner or occupant of any premises may, while the owner of a multifamily/condo will, erect or construct and maintain upon any portion of their own premises, on a parkway or public walk, a permanent bin, pit or other structure in which garbage cans or trash containers may be kept; however, such bin, pit or other structure shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and sightly condition. Commercial trash bins for large boxes or similar trash and other accumulation of a nature other than garbage shall have four sides, screened roof and access door and be constructed on the owner's property, accessible for direct loading into a private hauler's vehicles. All boxes shall be flattened before depositing in a container. 
(3)  Restriction of tire collection. No businessman, resident or nonresident shall place for disposal any tires. The department of public works and contractor are instructed to leave all tires placed for collection day. 
(4)  Items not picked up. The following items will not be picked up by the village or contractor in connection with its regular weekly garbage collection, but will be accepted for disposition by the contractor at the West Bend transfer station or possibly picked up if called in arrangements and payment for pickup is made. Certain conditions for the following preparations are made by the owner or resident generating such items of waste: 
a.  Miscellaneous metal. Sort by content, if possible. Remove all nonmetal attached. 
b.  Major appliances. Place in the designated area for arranged pickup. 
c.  Waste oil. Transport waste oil to the deposit station, free from any foreign substance. 
d.  Tires. Refer to subsection (3) of this section. (Make arrangements with a tire retailer or West Bend transfer station for disposal.) 
e.  Grass clippings and leaves. Place in the designated area at the village garage, free from foreign debris. 
f.  Nonrecyclable materials (furniture, carpeting, etc.). Check with contractor or West Bend transfer station for disposal. 
g.  Batteries. Place adjacent to recycling bin at the curb for pickup. 
(Code 1983, § 17.07) 
Sec. 78-95. - Dumping or burying waste. 
    No person shall dump or bury any waste on public or private property unless written permission has been obtained from the respective property owner or owners and such disposal has been authorized by the director of public works. The provisions of this section do not apply to dumping on private property with the owner's permission of sand, dirt, broken bricks, block, broken pavement or other material suitable for use as fill matter to raise the elevation of the land. 
(Code 1983, § 17.11) 
Sec. 78-96. - Method of transporting waste. 
    No person shall haul, convey or cause to be hauled or conveyed any waste, including discarded building material or discarded furniture, upon or along public streets, roads or alleys except when material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent the material from falling or being blown from the transporting vehicles. It shall be a violation of this section to haul any garbage or rubbish within any area of the village in which waste collection service is maintained by the village or its contractors. 
(Code 1983, § 17.12) 
Sec. 78-97. - Location of garden trash and rubbish. 
(a)  No person shall place garden trash and rubbish on public or private property except as provided for in section 78-95(4). 
(b)  Whenever in the discretion of the director of public works it is necessary in the interest of the public health or safety to correct an unsightly condition as a result of the unusual accumulation of trash, and it is necessary to collect the same more often than once every seven days, the appropriate contracting of services and payment of charges shall be made. 
(Code 1983, § 17.18) 
Secs. 78-98-78-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RECYCLING AND RECYCLABLES [3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Effective recycling programs generally, § 159.11, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 78-121. - Recyclable materials enumerated. 
(a)  The following recyclable materials are to be saved and placed for curbside recycling service in the stated condition: 
(1)  Plastic milk, soda and detergent bottles as well as other bottles marked #1 P.E.T.E. and #2 H.D.P.E., also those #2 H.D.P.E. wide-mouth containers such as ice cream pails (remove metal handles), butter and other type storage containers. These containers are to be rinsed clean, lids removed and discarded, bottles/containers crushed, and metal handles removed. The village shall require the separation and collection of plastic containers labeled #3, #4, #5, #6, and #7 and foam polystyrene packaging. 
(2)  Aluminum cans only. Rinsing and flattening is optional. 
(3)  Tin and steel cans that were food cans. These cans are to be rinsed and have labels removed, and flattening is optional. 
(4)  Glass bottles and jars clear, brown and green. These bottles are to have their lids and rings removed and be rinsed clean. 
Note: Items (1)-(4) shall be commingled and placed in the recycling bin for disposal. 
(5)  Newspapers. Newspapers are to be tied with string or twine in both directions in bundles no larger than eight inches in height. 
a.  Shredded office paper is acceptable and may be placed adjacent to the recycling bin in a plastic bag. 
b.  Office paper is acceptable and may be tied in bundles in the same manner as newspapers. 
(6)  Magazines. Magazines are to be tied with string or twine in both directions in bundles no larger than eight inches in height. 
(7)  Corrugated cardboard. Boxes are to be flattened and cut into three-feet by three-feet pieces and tied into bundles with string or twine. 
(8)  Lead acid batteries. 
Note: Recyclables listed in subsections (5)-(8) are all to be placed curbside adjacent to the recyclable materials that have been placed in the bin. 
(9)  Waste oil. Waste oil is to be transported to the deposit station, free from any foreign substance. 
(Code 1983, § 17.25) 
Sec. 78-122. - Separation of recyclable materials required. 
(a)  The village, being the responsible unit of government regarding recycling and those persons in the responsible unit, pursuant to DNR rule - Wis. Act 355, NR 542 and 544, ch. 159, Wis. Stats., and this chapter, that are one of the following: 
(1)  The owners or occupants of single-family residences, including seasonal residences; 
(2)  Persons that are owners or occupants of properties in the responsible unit containing two or more dwelling units; 
(3)  Persons that are owners or occupants of nonresident facilities and properties; 
shall separate for recycling all recyclable materials prior to the placement in the responsible unit by these persons of recyclable materials for collection as provided in this division. 
(b)  Recyclable items are prohibited from being commingled in regular garbage cans or bags and/or mobile containers (solid waste dumpsters), and must be handled separately and in compliance with this article. 
(Code 1983, §§ 17.22, 17.27) 
Sec. 78-123. - Bins for single-family residences and multifamily residences of five or fewer units. 
    Each single-family and residential dwelling unit of five or fewer units or less will receive one 18-gallon, dark green, village recycling bin free of charge. Any replacement bin will be provided by the village at a cost to the resident. Any commercial establishments where garbage collection service is provided by the village/contractor three 18-gallon, dark green, village recycling bins will be provided free of charge. Any replacement bins will be provided by the village at a cost to the commercial establishments. The price of such bin shall be as established in the refuse/recycling disposal and collection policy as adopted by the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 17.24) 
Sec. 78-124. - Blue bags for multifamily dwellings of six or more units. 
    The multifamily dwellings of six or more units shall provide for mandatory recycling. The village will provide that service using the bimonthly, blue bag curbside collection method billing back the owner of the complex on a quarterly basis at five percent above the actual amount being billed to the village by the contractor. The tenant/occupant will be required to provide and pay for the recycling blue bag and place it at the curb the first and third week of each month for pickup. 
(Code 1983, § 17.24(1)) 
Sec. 78-125. - Notification of tenants and occupants of recycling program. 
(a)  Owners or designated agents of multifamily dwellings are required to notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling, and at least semiannually thereafter, about the recycling program. 
(b)  Owners or designated agents of businesses and other nonresidential facilities are required to notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants and occupants of the properties about the recycling program. 
(Code 1983, § 17.24(2), (3)) 
Sec. 78-126. - Preparation of collection of recyclables. 
    All recyclable containers are to be rinsed clean and all caps, covers and rings removed. Items in section 78-147(a)(1-4) shall be placed in a designated recycling bin with a maximum capacity of 18 gallons or a blue plastic recyclable bag with a maximum capacity of 30 gallons. Bins to be acquired through the village and bags shall be purchased by the homeowner and will be available at retail outlets in the village. Items in section 78-147(a)(5-8) shall be placed alongside the recycling bin or bags at the curb. 
(1)  For white goods (appliances), property owners shall call the contractor ahead to schedule pickup, and payment of a user's fee. 
(2)  For bulky items, property owners shall call the contractor ahead to schedule pickup, and payment of a user's fee. 
(3)  For yard waste, the property owners shall process the material themselves or provision will be made for a drop-off at the department of public works garage. 
(Code 1983, § 17.26) 
Sec. 78-127. - Collection and disposal. 
(a)  Collection and processing of recyclables will be provided to all residential properties of five units and less and to commercial establishments (currently receiving garbage pickup) where weekly garbage volume is less than one mobile container per week. All other users must contract through the village when applicable or contract privately for required recycling of recyclable materials. 
(b)  All other commercial and industrial users shall dispose of recyclables, batteries, major appliances and waste oil by private contract or agreement with waste haulers in compliance with Wis. Act 355 when applicable. 
(c)  Any waste hauler or landfill operator providing service to the village shall comply with Wis. Act 355 when applicable, or be subject to statutory and municipal penalties for any violations. 
(Code 1983, § 17.23) 
Secs. 78-128-78-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY LANDFILL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Per letter dated December 16, 1993 from the Department of Natural Resources, State of Wisconsin, to the village, the former landfill site of the village, as described in § 14.08 of the Village Code of 1982, after inspection by the department, the status of the landfill site was changed by the department from transitional to inactive. The letter advised that the site should be inspected annually to determine that the vegetative cover, any settlement and erosion remain in good condition. The village was reminded that agricultural activity, construction of buildings and excavation of the final cover or any waste materials was prohibited. Thus no provisions were retained in this article under the circumstance as they existed at the time of this recodification. 

Secs. 78-181-78-210. - Reserved. 
Chapters 79-81 - RESERVED 
Chapter 82 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Moving buildings, § 14-121 et seq. 
State Law reference- Powers regarding streets generally, § 61.34, Wis. Stats.; curbs and sidewalks generally, § 66.615 et seq., Wis. Stats. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any order, rule or regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 8.14) 
Sec. 82-2. - Street grades. 
(a)  Established. The grade or elevation of the centerline, curbs and gutters, and sidewalks of village streets is fixed and permanently established as proposed on maps on file with the village clerk/treasurer. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is established. 
(b)  Altering grade prohibited. No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground, or any part thereof, unless authorized or instructed to do so by the village board. 
(Code 1983, § 8.02) 
Sec. 82-3. - Street barricades. 
    When a street barricade shall have been placed to bar use of or access to a street by the village or a contractor or person employed by the village, no person shall pass such barricade or damage or interfere with such barricade. 
(Code 1983, § 8.08) 
Sec. 82-4. - Prohibited uses of streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  Permitting vehicles on sidewalks. No person shall operate a motor vehicle, bicycle, minibike or motorcycle on any sidewalk within the village. 
(b)  Playing in streets prohibited. No person shall play in or participate in any athletic contest within a public right-of-way. 
(Code 1983, § 8.07) 
Sec. 82-5. - Street improvements. 
(a)  Specifications. All street improvements shall be done according to specifications prepared by the village engineer. 
(b)  Cost of construction. 
(1)  Street surfacing. The cost of surfacing all new streets shall be borne by the abutting property owner under the procedures of section 86-132. 
(2)  Curb and gutter. The cost of constructing curb and gutter on all new streets dedicated shall be borne by the subdivider. The cost of constructing curb and gutter on streets annexed to the village shall be charged to the existing property. 
(3)  Sidewalks. The cost of construction of new sidewalks shall be borne by the subdivider, except that the cost of repair or replacement shall be assigned as provided by subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Repairs. 
(1)  The cost of repair to or replacement of sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be the obligation of the abutting property owner, unless otherwise stated in this subsection (c). 
(2)  The cost for replacement or repair of sidewalks or curbs and gutters necessitated by municipal utility construction or repair shall be the obligation of the municipal utility. 
(3)  The cost for replacement or repair of sidewalks or curbs and gutters necessitated by nonmunicipal utility construction or repair shall be the obligation of the nonmunicipal utility or the property owner. 
(4)  The cost for replacement or repair of sidewalks or curbs and gutters necessitated because of shrub or tree roots shall be the obligation of the property owner. 
(5)  The cost for replacement or repair of sidewalks or curbs and gutters necessitated because of faulty or inferior workmanship contracted by the property owner shall be the obligation of the property owner. 
(6)  The cost for replacement or repair of sidewalks or curbs and gutters necessitated because of inferior workmanship by the village shall be the obligation of the village and the property owner on a negotiated percentage basis. 
(d)  Utilities, installation of. No street shall be surfaced until the abutting property owners on the portion of the street to be surfaced shall have installed sanitary sewer mains and laterals, water service mains and laterals, storm sewers, and curbs and gutters where required by the village board. If the property is unplatted and no acceptable plan of development is presented to the village board and accepted, there shall be sanitary sewer laterals and water service laterals placed therein at 60-foot intervals where such lots are not fronting on another street; and the costs shall be borne by the abutting property owners. 
(Code 1983, § 8.03) 
Sec. 82-6. - Snow and ice removal. 
(a)  Sidewalks to be kept clear. The owner or occupant of any lot or lands within the village abutting upon a public street along the line of which a sidewalk shall have been constructed shall, whenever such sidewalk shall be encumbered with snow or ice, clear the same therefrom within 24 hours after cessation of each storm. If it is impossible or impractical to remove the ice therefrom, he shall treat the same with sand, cinders, ashes, salt or some other substance continuously until removed so that such sidewalk will not be slippery or dangerous to pedestrians. If any such owner or occupant fails to remove such snow or ice from such sidewalk or to treat such ice, the director of public works, zoning administrator or a designee from the village administrator may do so; and the expense of such removal or treatment shall become a special tax or charge against the property to be collected in the manner specified in subsection (c). The charges for such snow or ice removal shall be periodically established by the village board. 
(b)  Snow not to be deposited in streets. No person shall cause to be deposited snow from his premises on the sidewalk abutting thereon onto any street in the village without a permit from the director of public works, who may require to be paid a fee sufficient to reimburse the village for the cost of removal of the snow. The expense of such removal or treatment shall become a special tax or charge against the property to be collected in the manner specified in subsection (c). 
(c)  Assessment of cost. After clearing or treating any such sidewalk as provided in this section, the director of public works, zoning administrator, or a designee from the village administrator shall file with the village clerk/treasurer a written report or electronic communication containing the address or lot number of such lot or tract charged and the amount of the expense chargeable to the same. The clerk/treasurer shall thereupon make out and mail to the owner of such lot or tract at his last known address an itemized statement of the cost; and, when paid, the amount so paid shall be credited to the village general fund. If the same is not paid within 30 days, it shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date on which the work was completed. If any such bill shall remain unpaid on October 1 following the clearing or treating of the sidewalk, the village clerk/treasurer shall insert such charge in the general tax roll of the village. 
(Code 1983, § 8.09; Ord. No. 12-01, § 1, 1-9-12) 
Sec. 82-7. - Tree care. 
(a)  Section 27.09, Wis. Stats., shall apply and the village board shall have the powers and duties conferred upon the director of public works. 
(b)  No person shall plant a tree in any greenway of the village without a permit therefor from the village. Such permit shall state the type, size and placement of such tree in the greenway to prevent planting of nuisance or otherwise undesirable trees and obstruction of vision at intersections and other vehicle ways. 
(Code 1983, § 8.10) 
Secs. 82-8-82-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICIAL MAP 

Sec. 82-41. - Purpose. 
    To conserve and promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, there is adopted and established the official map of the village in accordance with § 62.23(6), Wis. Stats. It is the further purpose of the official map to show the width and location of the streets, highways and parkways in order to promote the efficient and economical development of the village. 
(Code 1983, § 8.01(1)) 
Sec. 82-42. - Village board may change. 
    The village board, whenever and as often as it may deem it for the public interest, may change or add to the official map of the village in conformity with § 62.23(6)(b), Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 8.01(5)) 
Sec. 82-43. - Certificate to be filed with the register of deeds. 
    The village clerk shall file with the register of deeds of Washington County and the register of deeds of Fond du Lac County a certificate showing that the village has established the official map as described in subsection (a) above, and shall do likewise as to any changes or additions. 
(Code 1983, § 8.01(2)) 
Sec. 82-44. - Authority of the village plan commission. 
    The village plan commission, when passing upon a land subdivision plat referred to it by the village board, shall not recommend such plat for approval unless it conforms with the official map. 
(Code 1983, § 8.01(3)) 
Sec. 82-45. - Building permits, plot plan. 
    For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the official map, no permit shall be issued for any building in the bed of any street, highway or parkway shown or laid out in such map except as provided in § 62.23(6)(d), (g), Wis. Stats. The building inspector shall require each applicant to submit a plot plan, certified by a qualified surveyor, for approval. Such plot plan shall show accurately the location of any proposed building with reference to any street as shown on the official map. 
(Code 1983, § 8.01(4)) 
Secs. 82-46-82-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 

Sec. 82-76. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. No person, his agents or employees, or contractors shall excavate in or disturb the surface of any public street, public alley, public way, public ground, public sidewalk or village-owned easement within the village without first obtaining a permit from the village. 
(b)  Application The application for a permit shall be in writing and signed by the applicant or his agent. The applicant shall submit to the director of public works, at the time the permit is applied for, sufficient information relating to the work to be done including the general location and nature of the work and the method the applicant proposes to use in doing the work. The director of public works shall determine if sufficient information is submitted. 
(c)  Validity. Permits shall be valid for a period of 30 days from the date of approval. Any person or utility who has been granted a permit to excavate in the public right-of-way or to disturb the same shall perform such work in such a manner and in such time as the director of public works shall direct and shall restore the surface of the public right-of-way pursuant to the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Fee and deposit. 
(1)  The following fees shall be submitted with applications for permits under this section: 
a.  Opening street, $60.00. 
b.  Opening curb, alleyway or parkway, $40.00. 
c.  Perform work or labor or deposit excavation or construction materials within a public right-of-way, $30.00. 
(2)  If the work is not accomplished in a manner as prescribed and acceptable by the director of public works within the 30-day permit period, the work will be completed and the person opening the street or public way will be billed for all labor, materials and equipment used, plus 20 percent for administration. 
(Code 1983, § 8.04(1)(a), (b), (d), (g)) 
Sec. 82-77. - Insurance required. 
    A permit required by section 82-76 shall be issued only upon condition that the applicant submit to the village administrator a certificate of insurance, indicating that the applicant has in force the following kinds of insurance, with an insurance company or insurance companies rated "A" or better by A. M. Best & Company: commercial general liability with limits, minimum, $500,000.00 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage liability, $1,000,000.00 general aggregate limit, policy to include completed operations liability; automobile liability policy with limits, minimum, of $250,000.00 per person and $500,000.00 per accident for bodily injury liability and $100,000.00 property damage liability, to include hired automobiles and employers nonownership auto liability; and workers' compensation with limits, minimum, as required by the state. Certificates shall indicate that the insurance company or companies will provide 30 days' written notice to the village in the event of reduction of limits/coverage or cancellation of any policy or policies. 
(Code 1983, § 8.04(1)(h)) 
Sec. 82-78. - Bond. 
    Before a permit is granted, a bond shall be filed by the applicant for such permit with the village administrator in the amount of $5,000.00, which bond shall be executed by a licensed surety company as a guarantee that the applicant for such permit will comply with all village ordinances relating to such permit and will maintain and restore the street, alley, sidewalk, or public grounds as required by this Code and will maintain the same for a period of one year and that he will pay all fines or forfeitures imposed upon him for any violation of any rules, regulations or ordinances governing street openings or drain laying adopted by the village board. Such statement shall also guarantee that, if the village shall elect to make the street repair, the person opening the street/public way will pay all cost of making such repair and of maintaining the same for one year, plus 20 percent. If the director of public works determines that the nature and extent of the excavation or opening requires a bond in excess of $5,000.00 to guarantee restoration of the excavated area as required by this Code, the bond shall be established in an amount so determined by the director of public works. 
(Code 1983, § 8.04(1)(i)) 
Sec. 82-79. - Building code. 
    Section 14-237 which pertains to excavations for buildings, structures and parts thereof shall apply to excavations regulated by this article. 
(Code 1983, § 8.04(1)(j)) 
Sec. 82-80. - Regulations governing excavations and openings. 
(a)  Frozen ground. No person, his agents or employees, or contractors shall make or cause to be made any excavation or openings in the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public way within the village between November 15 and April 1 except where it is determined by the director of public works to be an emergency excavation/opening. 
(b)  Protection of public. 
(1)  Every excavation and opening shall be enclosed with sufficient barriers, signing, and such other traffic control devices as may be required by the director of public works, and in accordance with section VI of the manual of uniform traffic control devices. Sufficient warning lights shall be kept on from sunset to sunrise. No open flame warning devices shall be used. Except by special permission from the director of public works, no trench shall be excavated more than 250 feet in advance of pipe or conduit laying nor left unfilled more than 500 feet from where pipe or conduit has been laid. 
(2)  All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public effectively from accidents or damage to persons or property through the period of the work. Each person making such opening shall be held liable for all damages, including the cost incurred by the village in defending any action brought against it for damages, as well as cost of any appeal, that may result from the neglect by such persons, vehicles or property of any kind. 
(3)  Unless otherwise approved by the director of public works, a minimum of one lane of traffic in each direction shall be provided. Every effort shall be made on the part of the permittee to provide reasonable access to all properties adjacent to his project. If traffic is limited to less than one lane in each direction, a flagman or temporary traffic control signal shall be provided by the contractor so as to safely cycle traffic in each direction past the work area. 
(4)  The permittee shall perform the work in such a manner so as not to disrupt the flow of traffic in the area or endanger the safety of workmen or passersby. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to prevent traffic backup during construction operation. The permittee shall notify the director of public works or village administrator 24 hours prior to commencement of excavation unless the excavation is an emergency excavation as identified in subsection (h). 
(5)  When the operations will result in the loss of any utility service to private properties, the private properties shall be notified in writing or by personal contact at least 24 hours prior to the loss of service unless the operations are part of an emergency excavation as defined in subsection (h) below. 
(c)  Pavement removal. 
(1)  Removal of existing pavement shall be in neat, straight lines. The permittee shall make a final saw cut in the existing pavement after backfilling. Excavations shall be kept to the minimum possible and acceptable for the convenience and safe performance of the work and in accordance with all applicable codes and regulations. 
(2)  If the pavement is damaged during excavation beyond the original saw cut lines, it shall be saw cut again along neat, straight lines. The finished saw cut shall leave a regular rectangular section for pavement replacement. Should the street opening occur within, adjacent or close to an existing patch or require more than one opening within a short distance, the permittee shall identify and locate the existing patches or additional openings on the permit application form. The director of public works shall, on the basis of an on-site inspection, approximate the boundaries of the pavement replacement area. 
(3)  Pavement replacement areas with the long dimension in the direction of travel shall have the long portion parallel with the curbline or the direction of travel. Pavement replacement areas in concrete pavements shall be parallel with or at right angles to the direction of travel. 
(4)  The director of public works may order the permittee to remove and replace up to one full lane width of pavement along the patched or excavated area. Special care shall be taken with concrete pavement to produce a vertical face on the existing concrete at the point of the saw cut to ensure a full depth of concrete at the joint. 
(d)  Excavated material. 
(1)  All excavated material shall be piled in a manner such that pedestrian and motor traffic is not unnecessarily disrupted. Gutters shall be kept clear or other satisfactory provisions made for street drainage, and natural watercourses shall not be obstructed. 
(2)  Excavated material to be used for backfilling of the trench must be so handled and placed as to be of as little inconvenience as practical to public travel and adjoining tenants. 
(e)  Backfilling. 
(1)  All backfill material shall be free from cinders, ashes, refuse, vegetable or organic matter, boulders, rock or stones greater than eight inches in their greatest dimension, frozen lumps or other material that in the opinion of the director of public works is unsuitable. 
(2)  In refilling the excavation, if there is not sufficient material excavated suitable for refilling, the deficiency shall be made up with material, approved prior to use by the director of public works, hauled in. 
(3)  Wherever an excavation crosses an existing utility, pipe or other structure, backfill shall be carefully compacted in stages from the bottom of the excavation. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, telephone, natural gas or other service shall not be interrupted by the permittee. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to have the various utilities locate and mark their facilities prior to excavation. 
(4)  Mechanical compaction shall be used on all materials used for trench backfill. Each layer (12 inches maximum) shall be uniformly compacted to a dry density of at least 95 percent of the maximum dry density as determined by the Modified Proctor Test (ASTM-1557). Compaction or consolidation by flooding shall not be permitted. 
(5)  All excavations shall be subject to testing by the village. Backfilled material not achieving the compaction requirements of subsection (4) of this subsection (e) shall be removed and recompacted by the permittee. The cost of any retesting shall be paid by the permittee. 
(6)  When the sides of the trench will not stand perpendicular, sheathing and braces shall be used to prevent caving. No timbers, bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench. At no time shall any street pavements be permitted to overhang the excavation. 
(7)  When so ordered by the director of public works, slurry backfill shall be used. The material used shall conform to § 6.43.8 state standards and specifications for sewer and water construction in Wisconsin. 
(f)  Notice. It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the director of public works and all public and private individuals, firms and corporations affected by the work to be done at least one business day before such work is to commence. The director of public works shall also be notified at least one business day prior to backfilling or repairs and/or restoring the surface on Saturday when notice is on Friday. 
(g)  Pavement replacement. 
(1)  Backfill material shall be left below the original surface to allow for four inches of three-inch crushed stone and four inches of three-fourths-inch crushed stone, plus the thickness of the required pavement structure. If paving will not occur as part of the initial street restoration operation, the balance of the opening to the original surface elevation shall be backfilled with compacted three-fourths-inch crushed stone. 
(2)  Bituminous pavement shall be placed the full depth of the existing pavement or 21/2 inches, whichever is greater. Bituminous pavement shall be placed in a maximum of a 11/2-inch base layer and a one-inch top layer, with each layer compacted to maximum density and shall consist of state department of transportation gradation No. 1 for the binder course and state department of transportation No. 3 for the surface course. The finished surface shall be smooth and free of surface irregularities and shall match the existing pavement and any castings or street appurtenances. Allowable deviations shall be no more than one-fourth inch as measured with a ten-foot straight edge. 
(3)  Concrete pavement shall be placed to the full depth of the existing pavement or seven inches, whichever is greater. Concrete used shall not contain calcium chloride. The surface shall be given a light broom finish. The edges shall be tooled to prevent spalling at the saw cut edge. The surface shall be evenly and completely sealed with a white pigmented curing compound. The surface shall be protected from traffic for a minimum of three days. Tie bars shall be installed as directed by the director of public works. 
(4)  In emergency excavations during winter months when it is not possible to replace the removed pavement with a like material, the excavation shall be temporarily resurfaced with a minimum of three inches of cold mix bituminous material. This temporary wearing surface shall be compacted and rolled smooth. These temporary wearing surfaces shall be removed and replaced with material as specified in this paragraph (g) by not later than the following June 1, except as provided above. Permanent pavements shall be replaced within 60 days of the date of the permit. 
(h)  Emergency excavation. In the event of an emergency, any person owning or controlling any sewer, gas main, water main, conduit or other utility in or under any public street, alley, easement, way or ground, his agents and employees, may take immediate proper emergency measures to remedy dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health or safety without obtaining an excavation permit, provided that such person shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the next business day and shall notify the police department immediately. 
(i)  Excavation in improved or repaved streets limited. Whenever the village board determines to provide for permanent improvement or repaving of any street, such determination shall be made not less than 30 days before the work of improvement or repaving shall begin. After such permanent improvement or repaving, no permit shall be issued to open or excavate the street for a period of five years after the date of improvement or repaving unless, in the opinion of the director of public works, conditions exist that make it absolutely essential that the permit be issued. Every effort shall be made to place gas, electric, telephone and television cable lines in street terraces. 
(j)  Street condition. Whenever a contractor, utility or property owner leaves debris (mud, dirt, soil, gravel or waste) of any type on the street, alley or public way it is his obligation to remove and clean such debris immediately. If such debris is not removed within 24 hours, the director of public works shall order the work to be accomplished and the party responsible will be charged a minimum of $100.00 or the actual cost of the cleaning, plus 20 percent for administration, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1983, § 8.04(2)) 
Sec. 82-81. - Excavations by public utilities. 
    Any public utility having a franchise to lay pipe, cable, conduit, etc., in or near the public way shall, before excavation or disturbing any portion of the right-of-way, give written notice and present plans thereof to the director of public works in such form as the director of public works may prescribe. 
(Code 1983, § 8.04(1)(e)) 
Sec. 82-82. - Village standards. 
(a)  All street work shall be performed in accordance with the current standard specifications for street openings. Any damaged curb and gutter, sidewalk or grass-covered area shall be restored to the condition prior to damage. 
(b)  All excavated openings on Fond du Lac Avenue and Main Street require the director of public works or his designee to inspect each opening to view the streetlight cables and conduit for their integrity. 
(1)  Hand digging is required in these locations unless otherwise authorized by the director of public works. 
(2)  When boring underneath the pavement the integrity of the cables and conduit are also to be checked. 
(c)  When utilities run parallel to each other, it is required that four feet of clearance be maintained from all utilities: electric cables, gas, communication cables, etc., from sewer and water utility pipes, valve boxes, manholes, hydrants, etc., or as otherwise authorized by the director of public works. 
(d)  When utilities cross each other, a minimum of 12 inches of clearance is required, or as otherwise allowed by the director of public works. 
(Code 1983, § 8.04(1)(f)) 
Sec. 82-83. - Exception. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the village excavation work done under the direction of the director of public works. 
(Code 1983, § 8.04(1)(c)) 
Secs. 82-84-82-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS 

Sec. 82-111. - Prohibited. 
    No person shall encroach upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public ground or land dedicated to public use, or any part thereof, or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which he is owner or occupant, except as provided in section 82-112. 
(Code 1983, § 8.05(1)) 
Sec. 82-112. - Exceptions. 
    The prohibition of section 82-111 shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Signs and clocks attached to buildings that project not more than four feet from the face of such building and that do not extend below any point ten feet above the sidewalk, street or alley. 
(2)  Awnings which do not extend below any point ten feet above the sidewalk, street or alley. 
(3)  Public utility encroachments authorized by the village. 
(4)  Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded that do not extend more than three feet on a sidewalk, provided such goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures do not remain thereon for more than three hours. 
(5)  Prior to any building materials being placed upon the sidewalk a written permit must be obtained from the department of public works. The permit fee is one to five days $15.00 and six to 30 days $30.00. Flashing barricades will be required. A $100.00 refundable deposit is required for the flashing barricades which shall be placed in the front and back. 
(6)  Prior to any dumpster or building material being placed in or upon any street, alley or public ground, a written permit must be obtained from the department of public works. The permit fee is one to five days $15.00 and six to 30 days $30.00. Flashing barricades will be required. A $100.00 refundable deposit is required for the flashing barricades which shall be placed in the front and back. 
(Code 1983, § 8.05; Ord. No. 10-12, § 1, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 82-113. - Obstruction of crossings by trains. 
    No person in charge of the operation of a railroad train or car shall allow the same to obstruct any street crossing in the village for longer than five consecutive minutes. 
(Code 1983, § 8.06) 
Secs. 82-114-82-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STREET NAMES 

Sec. 82-146. - Original plats; renamed streets; specific streets. 
(a)  Original plats. The streets in the village shall have the names shown on the original plats of the village on file in the office of the register of deeds for the county, and as they appear in the respective atlas issued by the county. 
(b)  Renamed streets. The following streets are renamed as indicated: 
(1)  Center Avenue and Forest Avenue shall be known as Forest Avenue. 
(2)  South Street shall be known as Roseland Drive. 
(3)  Park Street shall be known as Prospect Street. 
(4)  West Water Street shall be known as Park View Drive. 
(5)  East Water Street shall be known as River View Drive. 
(6)  Tower Street shall be known as Reigle Drive. 
(c)  Wildlife Drive. Wildlife Drive is the street lying within the village-owned property in the north central portion of the village that was referred to as Extension Road; the street located between Reigle Drive and Old Fond du Lac Avenue. 
(Code 1983, § 8.11) 
Sec. 82-147. - East Water Street. 
    East Water Street north of Main Street in the village shall be described as shown on exhibits A and B attached to Ordinance No. 5-24. 
(Code 1983, § 8.12) 
Secs. 82-148-82-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MAILBOXES 

Sec. 82-181. - Cluster mailboxes. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall install or erect a "cluster mailbox" in the village without a permit issued by the director of public works for a cluster mailbox. The director of public works shall approve the location of such cluster mailbox before the permit shall be issued. The term "cluster mailbox" shall not be construed to mean "a cluster of mailboxes." If the permit is for other than a formal cluster mailbox unit(s), a detailed drawing reflecting the size, type of construction and location needs to be submitted for village board approval, as well as any other information requested by the village board. No individual mailboxes shall be allowed in the village. The existing individual mailboxes need to be maintained in a pleasing and safe manner adjacent to the specific address served by such mailbox. Only "cluster mailboxes" or approved alternatives shall be allowed in the village. 
(b)  Cluster mailbox permit fee. The fee for a permit for locating a cluster mailbox shall be $10.00, payable in advance of the permit's being issued. 
(c)  An approved alternative to the aforementioned "cluster mailbox" shall be door to door delivery of mail by the U.S. Postal Service. This delivery would be to the structure at which a residence and/or business resides. 
(Code 1983, § 8.13; Ord. No. 95-10, § 8-13, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 97-4, § 8.13, 11-17-97) 
Secs. 82-182-82-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 82-200. - Program goal. 
    The objectives of the sidewalk/driveway approach/curb maintenance program are to: 
(a)  Protect the general public from injury by identifying defects and ensuring their timely repair. 
(b)  Protect the general taxpayer from the expense of liability claims due to personal injury. 
(c)  Protect individual property owners by notifying them that a hazardous condition exists and assisting with correction of that hazard. 
(d)  Protect the general public's investment in the transportation system, which includes sidewalks, driveways, corners, and curbs. 
(e)  Manage the maintenance of sidewalks, driveways, and curbs in a way that protects street trees and other desirable vegetation whenever possible. 
(Ord. No. 16-11, § 1, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 82-201. - Inspection program. 
    The goal of the sidewalk maintenance program is to identify sidewalk defects and assist the property owner with the repair process. Public works representatives are primarily looking for things that cause people to trip and fall, such as "stub toes" where the sidewalk is raised. Other defects may include holes, spalled or chipped areas, wide cracks, areas that are damaged by tree roots or any area where the quality of concrete has become a safety hazard. The graphics shown on the following page provide examples of these types of damage. 
    Identification of defects (hazardous conditions), guidelines have been established when inspecting sidewalks/driveway approaches/curbs in the village right-of-way. The inspection guidelines apply to the village street right-of-way where there are sidewalks/driveway approaches/curbs in the village right-of-way. The inspector will identify the hazard and the area needing to be replaced to ensure a good and substantial repair. 
(Ord. No. 16-11, § 1, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 82-202. - Inspection criteria and guidelines. 
    The following conditions are considered hazardous and shall be identified for repair. 
(a)  Stub toes (step separation-elevated guide). All "stub toes" latitudinal as well as longitudinal in the village right-of-way. A guideline of one-half-inch rise for all sidewalk and driveway areas will be used in determining if a stub toe is hazardous. 

(b)  Openings (holes, wide cracks, concrete separations) . All openings in the village right-of-way. A guideline of one-half-inch width and one-half-inch depth will be used in determining if an opening is hazardous. 

(c)  Spalled/chipped concrete . Spalled sidewalks/driveway approaches/curbs, where the concrete is chipped to the point of creating a trip hazard. A guideline of one-half-inch width and one-half-inch depth will be used in determining if a spalled area is hazardous. 

(d)  Raised areas. Raised sidewalk/driveway approaches/curb. A guideline, that the uppermost point of the raised area being greater than four inches from grade shall be used in determining when a raised area is considered hazardous. 

(e)  Sunken areas. Sunken sidewalk/driveway approaches/curb shall be identified when it causes a trip hazard or has sunken four inches below original grade. 

(f)  Damage at adjoining properties. Where the sidewalk or driveway approach or curb at the property line is lifted or otherwise hazardous, both properties will be notified to maintain grade. Both properties are notified because repairing only one property would create a stub toe at the property line. Each notice would have a notation about the adjoining property. To maintain quality and consistency of work, the properties should be repaired together but could be repaired separately by installing a transition area. 
(g)  Corners. Guidelines for identifying and replacement of corners shall be the same as the guidelines used for sidewalks and driveway approaches and curb. Village corners will comply with ADA specifications. 
(h)  Curbs. Sidewalk inspections will identify curbs that need replacement during routine inspections. Curbs will be identified when they present a hazard, are generally in a deteriorated state, or no longer will facilitate or control drainage. Curbs are the property owner's responsibility to repair unless the replaced curb is part of a road reconstruction project. In the case of a project the village will pay at its discretion. 
(Ord. No. 16-11, § 1, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 82-203. - Complaints. 
    Information received regarding hazardous sidewalk conditions in the village right-of-way at a specific location will be transferred to the public works department. 
    A sidewalk inspection will be performed within five working days of the complaint, and the property owner(s) for the address(es) in which the hazard is at will be notified and given 60 days to repair the sidewalk. If the complaint is based upon someone having tripped and fallen, the property owner will be given 20 working days to begin repairs. In addition, a sidewalk inspection will be performed in the general area for defects and notification sent accordingly. A guideline for the "general area" is the block face involved with the initial complaint. 
    Following the inspection of a property, if defects are found, a sidewalk repair notice will be created, stating the date of inspection, legal property description, a photo from the inspection and a description of the hazardous condition. Property owners will be given a maximum of 60 days, with a possible 30-day extension by the public works foreman upon property owner request, to make repairs. If the property owner does not make the repairs village contracted crews will perform the repair work. 
(Ord. No. 16-11, § 1, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 82-204. - Notification. 
    Property owners will be provided with the original copy of the sidewalk repair notice from the public works foreman and an outline or the sidewalk maintenance program. This information will be mailed to owners of identified properties as shown on current tax records. 
    Public works representatives are available to schedule appointments and meet with property owners to identify and explain the specific reasons for the identified hazard(s). Using the established guidelines, the public works representative can assist the property owner by outlining repair alternatives so that the hazard may be corrected in the most economical method. 
(Ord. No. 16-11, § 1, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 82-205. - Sidewalk/driveway approach/curb repairs. 
    Property owners who have received a sidewalk repair notice have the following options: 
(a)  Property owner repair. The property owner can do the repair if the village specifications are followed. The property owner may eliminate identified defects in the following manner: 
(1)  Remove whole squares to full depth and replace with concrete. Skin patching is not an acceptable repair method, as it does not provide a good and substantial repair. 
(2)  Grinding of stub toes raised one inch or less with the approval and guidance of the public works representative. 
(b)  Contractor repair. A contractor hired by the property owner may eliminate posted defects in the following manner: 
(1)  Remove whole squares to full depth and replace with concrete. Skin patching is not an acceptable repair method, as it does not provide a good and substantial repair. 
(2)  Grinding of stub toes raised one inch or less with the approval and guidance of the public works representative. 
(c)  Village repair . If the work is not performed in a satisfactory manner with the time allotted the village will repair at owner expense. 
(1)  All identified defects in the area to be repaired will be re-checked. If upon re-checking, it is found that the defects have been repaired satisfactorily, crews will not be scheduled for that area and the sidewalk information will be updated accordingly. 
(2)  Properties where the hazard has not been satisfactorily repaired will be marked out and scheduled for repair by private companies working on contract with the village (village contractor). Additional defects found may be marked out for repair as well. 
(3)  The village will repair identified defects of one inch or less by grinding, and if grinding will not repair the hazard or the hazard is in excess of one inch the village will repair by removing and replacing whole squares to the proper depth per Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-11, § 1, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 82-206. - Time extensions. 
    Requests for 30 day time extensions will be granted by the public works foreman if reasonable cause exists. The following conditions may cause the public works foreman to grant extended time, more than 30 days, to property owners to make sidewalk repairs: 
(a)  New property owner. When the previous owner did not disclose the initial sidewalk inspection report stating there was a hazardous sidewalk to repair/replace to the new property owner who acquired the property. These extensions are usually 60 days in length, with an additional 30-day extension per property owner request, but no more than a total of 90 days. 
(b)  Legal questions. When there are legal questions/matters concerning ownership, responsibility, property lines, etc., extensions may be granted until legal questions have been answered. 
(c)  Plans for construction/remodeling. When the village right-of-way area of posted properties will be affected by construction and/or remodeling plans. In some cases, temporary repairs may be required before the extension is granted. 
(Ord. No. 16-11, § 1, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 82-207. - Inspection requirements. 
(a)  Form inspections. A form inspection is required when hazardous sidewalk areas have been excavated to proper depth, forms have been set, barricades or saw horses are in place, and all debris has been removed from the village right-of-way. The inspection ensures that necessary lines and grades are correct, and that repair work is prepared and formed to meet village specifications and plans. Inspections will be made the following day after the request, excluding weekends and legal holidays. Once an inspection has been completed, a copy of the inspection report will be left on site, with either the contractor or the property owner stating if the forms have passed inspection and if it is okay to begin pouring concrete. If corrections are needed to be made, another form inspection will be required before concrete can be poured. The same inspection time requirements as described above apply. 
(b)  Final inspection . A final inspection is required when the repair work has been completed, all forms are removed, and voids are backfilled with dirt or like material and compacted to grade, and the job site has been cleaned up. A minimum of two days must elapse between the time the concrete is poured and the final inspection is requested. This prevents possible spalling of green/uncured concrete when forms are removed. Final inspections will be made the day after the request has been made, excluding weekends and legal holidays. If repair work is found satisfactory, it will be noted on the inspection form and left with the property owner. If work is found unsatisfactory, it will be noted on the inspection report and left with the property owner. Another final inspection will have to be requested. The same inspection time requirements as described above apply. 
(Ord. No. 16-11, § 1, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 82-208. - Village repair. 
(a)  The goal of the sidewalk maintenance program is to repair sidewalks, driveway approaches, corners, and curbs in the village right-of-way. The village is responsible for sidewalk repair and replacement of hazardous sidewalks abutting to property owned and/or maintained by the village. 
(b)  The village shall repair/replace hazardous sidewalks when a property owner has not taken the appropriate steps to remedy the hazard within the time limits set in this document, or when a property owner has requested the village to make the repairs and bill them. 
(c)  When the original notices for sidewalk defects have been sent to the property owners, they have 60 days to repair/replace the hazardous sidewalks (unless someone has already tripped, when they shall have only 20 days). If the property owner fails to repair/replace the sidewalk within those 60 days, unless a 30-day extension has been issued, the village will then begin the process of having the hazardous sidewalks repaired/replaced. A minimum of two weeks before the village contractor crew is to begin repairing the sidewalks, a letter will be sent to each property owner stating the village's intent to repair, approximate repair date, and estimated cost for the sidewalk repairs. 
(d)  The repair charges are calculated to recover all direct costs, and applicable overheads. When repairs have been completed the village will prepare and mail an invoice to the registered property owner. If the same is not paid within 30 days, it shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date on which the work was completed. If any such bill shall remain unpaid on October 1 following the work being completed, the village clerk/treasurer shall insert such charge in the general tax roll of the village. 
(Ord. No. 16-11, § 1, 12-12-16) 
Secs. 82-209-82-230. - Reserved. 
Chapters 83-85 - RESERVED 
Chapter 86 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-306 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, § 2-331 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the village and its environs. To this end, it is the general intent of the chapter to regulate the division of land so as to: 
(1)  Obtain the wise use, conservation, protection and proper development of the village's soil, water, wetland, woodland and wildlife resources and attain a proper adjustment of land use and development to the supporting and sustaining natural resource base. 
(2)  Lessen congestion in the streets and highways. 
(3)  Further the orderly layout and appropriate use of land. 
(4)  Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers. 
(5)  Provide adequate light and air. 
(6)  Secure safety from flooding, water pollution, disease and other hazards. 
(7)  Prevent flood damage to persons and properties and minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects. 
(8)  Facilitate the further division of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. 
(9)  Ensure adequate legal description and proper survey monumentation of subdivided land. 
(10)  Provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(11)  Facilitate adequate provision for housing, transportation, water supply, storm sewer, wastewater, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public facilities and services. 
(12)  Provide penalties for the violation of this chapter. 
(13)  Implement those municipal, county, watershed or regional comprehensive plans or their components adopted by the village, and in general to facilitate enforcement of village development standards as set forth in the adopted regional, county and local comprehensive plans, adopted plan components, village zoning ordinance, and village building code. 
(Code 1983, § 18.01) 
Sec. 86-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction means the unincorporated area within 11/2 miles of the corporate limits of the village. 
    Person includes associations, copartnerships or corporations. 
    Plat refers to the map prepared, as required by either section 86-5 or section 86-6 for the purpose of recording subdivisions or other divisions of land as provided in this chapter. 
    Street means a public way for vehicular traffic other than an alley. 
(1)  Major streets and highways are those which serve as the principal arteries of through traffic movement. 
(2)  Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the system of major streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
(3)  Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(4)  Marginal-access streets or frontage streets are minor streets that are parallel to and adjacent to major streets and highways, and provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
    Subdivider means the owner of land being divided pursuant to section 86-4 or section 86-5. 
    Subdivision means the division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owner thereof or his agent for the purpose of sale or of building development, where: 
(1)  The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of 11/2 acres each or less in area; or 
(2)  Five or more parcels or building sites of 11/2 acres each or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of five years. 
(Code 1983, §§ 18.06, 18.07) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-3. - Penalties. 
(a)  Recordation improperly made shall be penalized as provided in § 236.30, Wis. Stats. 
(b)  Conveyance of lots in unrecorded plats shall be penalized as provided in § 236.31, Wis. Stats. 
(c)  Monuments disturbed or not placed shall be penalized as provided in § 236.32, Wis. Stats. 
(d)  Assessor's plat made under § 70.27, Wis. Stats., may be ordered by the village at the expense of the subdivider when a subdivision is created by successive divisions. 
(Code 1983, § 18.48) 
Sec. 86-4. - Jurisdiction. 
    Jurisdiction of these regulations shall include all lands within the corporate limits of the village as well as the unincorporated area within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of Kewaskum. The Village of Kewaskum has elected to approve plats, minor land divisions and condominium developments under its extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction as provided in ch. 236, and §§ 66.0105 and 703.27(1), Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 18.02; Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, 1-19-09) 
Sec. 86-5. - Subdivisions, other divisions, and condominiums. 
(a)  Subdivision. Any division of land that results in a subdivision shall be, and any other division may be, surveyed and a plat thereof approved and recorded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and ch. 236, Wis. Stats. 
(b)  Other divisions. Any division of land other than a subdivision, of which a plat has not been approved and recorded, pursuant to section 86-4, shall be surveyed and a certified survey map of such division approved and recorded as required by section 86-11. 
(c)  Applicability to condominiums. This chapter is expressly applicable to condominium developments within the village's jurisdiction, pursuant to § 703.27(1), Wis. Stats. For purposes of this chapter, a condominium unit and any associated limited common elements shall be deemed to be equivalent to a lot or parcel created by the act of subdivision. 
(Code 1983, § 18.03; Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 1-19-09) 
Sec. 86-6. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Transfers of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order. 
(2)  Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages or easements. 
(3)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances. 
(Code 1983, § 18.04) 
Sec. 86-7. - Land suitability. 
(a)  No land shall be subdivided for residential use that is held unsuitable for such use by the village plan commission for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community. The village plan commission, in applying the provisions of this section, shall, in writing, recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for residential use and afford the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such unsuitability, if he so desires. Thereafter, the village plan commission may affirm, modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability. 
(b)  No lot served by public sanitary sewer facilities shall have less than 50 percent of its required lot area at or above an elevation at least two feet above the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood or, where such data is available, five feet above the maximum flood of record. No lot one acre or less in area served by an on-site sanitary sewage disposal system, septic tank, shall include floodlands. All lots more than one acre in area served by a septic tank system shall contain not less than 40,000 square feet of land that is at an elevation at least two feet above the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood or, where such data is not available, five feet above the maximum flood of record. 
(Code 1983, § 18.05) 
Sec. 86-8. - Compliance. 
    No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for a new building on a lot that did not exist as a described and recorded parcel prior to the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or was not created by a recorded subdivision pursuant to state statute, or by a recorded plat pursuant to provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 18.45) 
Sec. 86-9. - Variances. 
    When in the judgment of the plan commission or the village board it would be inappropriate to apply literally a provision of this chapter because the subdivision is located outside the limits or because extraordinary hardship would result, it may waive or vary such provisions so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that in no event shall the requirement of filing and recording the plat or survey be waived. 
(Code 1983, § 18.46) 
Sec. 86-10. - Violations. 
    No person shall build upon, divide, convey, record or monument any land in violation of this chapter or state statutes; and no person shall be issued a building permit by the village authorizing the building on, or improvement of, any subdivision, minor subdivision or replat within the jurisdiction of this chapter not of record until the provisions and requirements of this chapter have been fully met. The village may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin violations of this chapter or the applicable state statutes. 
(Code 1983, § 18.47) 
Sec. 86-11. - Land divisions other than subdivisions. 
(a)  Definition. A lot division shall be the division of any parcel of land within the village for purpose of sale or building development. It shall not include: 
(1)  Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order. 
(2)  Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages or easements. 
(3)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and if the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum size required by this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Certified survey map. Any person desiring to accomplish a lot division shall file with the plan commission a certified survey map and five acceptable copies thereof, together with a written application for approval and an executed subdivider's agreement as required by the village, at least seven days prior to the meeting of the plan commission at which action is desired. 
(c)  Public hearing. The plan commission may schedule a public hearing on the proposed lot division before taking action. In such case, the village clerk/treasurer shall give such notice of the proposed lot division to property owners within the area in which the lot division is proposed as shall be deemed necessary. 
(d)  Review of division. The proposed lot division shall be reviewed by the plan commission for conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the zoning code and the official map and the master street plan of the village. 
(e)  Access to streets required. No proposed lot division shall be approved unless the resulting lots front on a dedicated street at least 66 feet wide, as shown on the official map. 
(f)  Action on application. The plan commission and the village board shall within 90 days of application approve, approve conditionally or reject the proposed lot division. The applicant shall be notified in writing of any conditions of approval or of the reasons for rejection. 
(g)  Compliance with statutes. The certified survey map shall comply with § 236.34, Wis. Stats., which is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. 
(h)  Utilities. All utilities necessary, to the extent reasonably practicable, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to general requirements and design standards and required improvements and shall be installed by the subdivider. 
(i)  Park fee. Prior to the issuance of a building permit on lands described on a certified survey map, the owner of such land shall pay $200.00 per residential unit to be erected for park, recreation or open space use or development. Such fees shall be used in accordance with the provisions of section 86-11. 
(Code 1983, § 18.09) 
Sec. 86-12. - Existing substandard lots-Procedure for determination of status. 
    In the case of a lot of record at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived that does not conform to the zoning regulations of the village, and that adjoins, along a side lot line, property held in the same ownership, no such lot shall be conveyed to another owner; nor shall a building permit be issued for a structure on such lot except in conformity with the following: 
(1)  Petition. The owner of such substandard lot may at any time prior to the proposed conveyance of such lot or request for building permit petition the village for determination as to the status of such lot. 
(2)  Referral. Such petition shall be referred to the plan commission for a study to determine the practical possibility of a redivision of such ownership to provide lots that will be in conformity to the zoning regulations of the village. 
(3)  Plan commission recommendation. The plan commission shall make its recommendation to the village board within 40 days of the date the petition was received, and the village board shall act within 20 days to give the petitioner a determination. 
(4)  Factors to be considered. The plan commission in making its recommendation and the village board in making its determination shall give consideration, among others, to the following facts: 
a.  The size, quality and character of existing lots and building development in the immediate area with a view to maintaining compatibility and protecting existing values. 
b.  Where a public sewer is not available, the lot size necessary to ensure safe sewage disposal. 
c.  The economic and engineering practicability of any possible redivision. 
d.  The degree of practical hardship that may be imposed upon the owner. 
(5)  Redivision of lots. Such redivision may be accomplished as is most appropriate by: 
a.  Vacation and replatting of all or a part of a recorded plat. 
b.  Combining of lots or parts of lots. 
c.  Redefining of lot lines by a plat of "other divisions" as provided by section 86-11. 
(Code 1983, § 18.40) 
Sec. 86-13. - Same-When lots in same ownership. 
    For the purposes of this section, lots and property shall be considered in the same ownership when owned by: 
(1)  The same individual or corporation, an individual and another in joint tenancy, or as tenants in common, and either of such joint or common tenants owns other lots individually or as joint tenant or tenant in common with another. 
(2)  An individual and his spouse, parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren or the spouse of any child or grandchild, or a brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister of such person. 
(3)  An individual and a corporation in which such individual is an officer or director or controlling stockholder. 
(Code 1983, § 18.41) 
Sec. 86-14. - Impact fees. 
(1)  Introduction and purpose. Pursuant to the authority of § 66.0617, Wis. Stats., the local impact fees enabling legislation, the purpose of this section is to establish the mechanism for the imposition of impact fees upon new development to finance the capital costs of acquiring, establishing, upgrading, expanding, and constructing public facilities which are necessary to accommodate land development. This section is intended to assure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide public facilities within the Village of Kewaskum and its service areas, as they are required to serve the needs arising out of land development. 
(2)  Definitions. 
    Capital costs. The capital costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering and design costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, except that not more than ten percent of capital costs may consist of legal, engineering and design costs unless such costs which relate directly to the public improvement for which the impact fees were imposed actually exceed ten percent of capital costs. Capital costs does not include other noncapital costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities or the costs of equipment to construct, expand or improve public facilities. 
    Developer. A person that constructs or creates a land development. 
    Impact fees. Cash contributions, contributions of land or interest in land or any other items of value that are imposed on a developer under this chapter. 
    Land development. The construction or modification of improvements to real property that creates additional residential dwelling units within the village or its service areas or that results in nonresidential uses that create a need for new, expanded or improved public facilities within the village or its service areas. 
    Public facilities. Highways, as defined in § 340.01(22), Wis. Stats., and other transportation facilities, traffic control devices, facilities for collecting and treating sewage, facilities for collecting and treating storm and surface waters, facilities for pumping, storing and distributing water, parks, playgrounds and other recreation facilities, solid waste and recycling facilities, fire protection facilities, law enforcement facilities, emergency medical facilities and libraries. Public facilities, does not include facilities owned by a school district. 
    Residential equivalent connection (REC). A unit of measure for sewer or water related impact fees equivalent to the amount of sewer or water capacity needed to supply one residential dwelling unit. For the purposes of the impact fees established under this section, a REC shall be defined as a sewer or water connection of either 5/8 inch or 3/4 inch in diameter. 
    Service area. A geographic area delineated by the village board within which the village provides public facilities. 
    Service standard. A certain quantity or quality of public facilities relative to a certain number of persons, parcels of land or other appropriate measure, as specified by the village. 
(3)  Public facilities needs assessment. New public facilities, or improvements or expansions of existing public facilities that are required because of land development for which impact fees will be imposed are those which are identified in this chapter and in facilities needs assessment reports prepared prior to the adoption of this chapter and any amendments hereto. All facilities needs reports that form the basis of any impact fee imposed by the village shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk at least 20 days prior to any public hearing to be held on the creation of this chapter and any amendments. A class 1 notice is required prior to any required hearing. All facilities needs assessment reports shall remain on file in the office of the village clerk for the entire period during which impact fees arising out of a specific report and this chapter are collected prior to expenditure, and such report shall, after expenditure of all impact fees, be maintained as a public record for such time period as required by law. 
(4)  Impact fee revenue administration. 
(a)  Revenues from impact fees shall be placed in one or more segregated, interest-bearing accounts and shall be accounted for separately from other village general and utility funds. Impact fee revenues and interest earned thereon may be expended only for capital costs for which the impact fees were imposed. 
(b)  Impact fee revenues imposed and collected but not used within a specified reasonable period of time after collection to pay the capital costs for which they were imposed shall be refunded on a prorated proportional basis, as determined by the village board, to the current record owner or owners of the property with respect to which the impact fees were imposed. Reasonable time periods for expenditure of impact fee revenues shall be within 20 years after the recommended time for commencement of construction, expansion or improvement of a specific public facility identified in a facilities needs assessment report, or within five years after the projected loan obligations undertaken for a project should be satisfied. 
(5)  Use of impact fees. Funds collected from impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of paying the proportionate costs of providing public facilities that become necessary due to land development. These costs may include the costs of debt service on bonds or similar debt instruments when the debt has been incurred for the purpose of proceeding with designated public facilities projects prior to the collection of all anticipated impact fees for that project. 
(6)  Payment of impact fee. 
(a)  All required impact fees, are hereby imposed on all developments and land divisions within the Village of Kewaskum or any development subarea thereof. 
(b)  For all unplatted lands, no final plat or certified survey map approval shall be given unless the impact fees set forth in subsections (8) and (9) are imposed and calculated pursuant to this section. Fees may be payable at the time of final plat or certified survey map approval in full or in installments pursuant to a developer's agreement. 
(c)  For all developments not subject to subsection (6)(b), no plumbing or building permit shall be issued for a development unless the impact fees set forth in subsections (8) and (9) are imposed and calculated pursuant to this section. Fee shall be payable at the time plumbing or building permits are issued. 
(7)  Appeals. 
(a)  The developer or property owner upon whom an impact fee is imposed may contest the amount, collection, or use of an impact fee as specified herein. An appeal to contest the amount, collection or use of an impact fee may be commenced within 30 days of application for a building or plumbing permit, if applicable to the particular impact fee. An appeal to contest the use of an impact fee shall be commenced not later than 30 days prior to the award of any public contract for expenditure of the collected fee revenues. 
(b)  It shall be a condition to the commencement of such an appeal that the impact fee from which the developer or property owner appeals shall be paid as and when the fee becomes due and payable, and upon default in making any such payment, such appeal may be dismissed. 
(c)  The appellant shall pay a filing fee of $200.00 at the time of filing of the appeal. 
(d)  An appeal is commenced by filing a complaint with the village clerk. The complaint shall specify the impact fee amount or collection objected to and the basis for the objection. The appeal shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the planning commission at its next regular meeting. The plan commission shall take additional evidence and testimony on the matter, including reports from village staff, and shall make its recommendation to the village board based upon the standards set forth in § 66.0617, Wis. Stats. The village board shall consider the appeal, review the record made before the planning commission and the recommendation of the commission and decide the appeal, based upon the standards for impact fees in § 66.0617, Wis. Stats. If the village board determines that the appeal has merit, it shall determine appropriate remedies. These may include reallocation of the proceeds of the challenged impact fee to accomplish the purposes for which the fee was collected, refunding the impact fee in full or in part, along with interest collected by the village thereon, or granting the appellant the opportunity to make the impact fee payment in installments, or such other remedies as it deems appropriate in a particular case. The decision of the village board is final. 
(8)  Sewer impact fees. The basis for the imposition of sewer impact fees is the facilities needs assessment report and its attachments, "Sewer Facilities Needs Assessment" which is on file in the office of the village clerk. The sewer impact fees to be paid prior to the issuance of applicable subdivision approval or building or plumbing permits (or other approvals) are as follows: 
(a)  For unplatted land; for undeveloped, platted land, the fee per residential REC will increase by three percent each year as shown in the following schedule: 
Year Fee Year Fee Year Fee 2004 $1,750 2011 $2,152 2018 $2,647 2005  1,803 2012  2,217 2019  2,726 2006  1,857 2013  2,283 2020  2,808 2007  1,912 2014  2,352 2021  2,892 2008  1,970 2015  2,422 2022  2,979 2009  2,029 2016  2,495 2023  3,069 2010  2,090 2017  2,570  
(b)  Determination of RECs: 
1.  The property owner shall be charged an impact fee based on the size of the connection to the sanitary sewer system. 
2.  The fee shall be calculated by multiplying the equivalent meter size ratio (as determined by the Wisconsin Public Service Commission, PSC) by the current year's REC fee to determine a fee for each meter size. The calculations for the 2006 nonresidential development are shown below: 
Meter 
Size Equivalent 
Meter Size 2006 Fee 
Per REC Fee Per 
Meter Size 5/8 " & 3/4" 1.00 X $1,857 = $1,857.00 1" 2.50 X $1,857 = $4,642.50 11/4" 3.75 X $1,857 = $6,963.75 11/2" 5.00 X $1,857 = $9,285.00 2" 8.00 X $1,857 = $14,856.00 21/2" 12.50 X $1,857 = $22,212.50 3" 15.00 X $1,857 = $27,855.00 4" 25.00 X $1,857 = $46,425.00 6" 50.00 X $1,857 = $92,850.00 8" 80.00 X $1,857 = $148,560.00 10" 120.00 X $1,857 = $222,840.00 12" 160.00 X $1,857 = $297,120.00  
(c)  For redevelopment of previously developed land that results in a larger connection to the sanitary sewer system an impact fee will be imposed for the incremental increase in meter size. 
(9)  Water impact fees. The basis for the imposition of water impact fees is the facilities needs assessment report and its attachments, "Water Facilities Needs Assessment" which is on file in the office of the village clerk. The water impact fees to be paid prior to the issuance of applicable subdivision approval or building or plumbing permits (or other approvals) are as follows: 
(a)  For unplatted land; for undeveloped, platted land, the fee per residential REC will increase by three percent each year as shown in the following schedule: 
Year Fee Year Fee Year Fee 2006 $2,986.13 2013 $3,672.56 2020 $4,516.79 2007  3,075.71 2014  3,782.74 2021  4,652.29 2008  3,167.99 2015  3,896.22 2022  4,791.86 2009  3,263.02 2016  4,013.11 2023  4,935.62 2010  3,360.92 2017  4,133.50 2024  5,083.69 2011  3,461.74 2018  4,257.51 2025  5,236.20 2012  3,565.60 2019  4,385.23  
(b)  Determination of RECs. 
1.  The property owner shall be charged an impact fee based on the size of the connection to the water system. 
2.  The fee shall be calculated by multiplying the equivalent meter size ratio (as determined by the Wisconsin Public Service Commission, PSC) by the current year's REC fee to determine a fee for each meter size. The calculations for the 2006 nonresidential development are shown below: 
Meter 
Size Equivalent 
Meter Size 2006 Fee 
Per REC Fee Per 
Meter Size 5/8 " & 3/4" 1.00 X $2,986.13 = $2,986.13 1" 2.50 X $2,986.13 = $7,465.33 11/4" 3.75 X $2,986.13 = $11,197.99 11/2" 5.00 X $2,986.13 = $14,930.65 2" 8.00 X $2,986.13 = $23,889.04 21/2" 12.50 X $2,986.13 = $37,326.63 3" 15.00 X $2,986.13 = $44,791.95 4" 25.00 X $2,986.13 = $74,653.25 6" 50.00 X $2,986.13 = $14,9306.50 8" 80.00 X $2,986.13 = $23,8890.40 10" 120.00 X $2,986.13 = $35,8335.60 12" 160.00 X $2,986.13 = $47,7780.80  
(c)  For redevelopment of previously developed land that results in a larger connection to the water system an impact fee will be imposed for the incremental increase in meter size. 
(10)  Park facilities impact fees. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the village to impose land dedication requirements, contained elsewhere in the Code, on developers as part of plat and certified survey map approvals under ch. 236, Wis. Stats., and the ordinances of the village. 
    The basis for the imposition of park facilities impact fees is the facilities needs assessment report and its attachments, "Public Facilities Needs Assessment and Impact Fee Study", September 2004, which is on file in the office of the village clerk. The park facilities impact fees are to be paid in full prior to the issuance of applicable building permits, and are as follows: 
(a)  Residential development, per single-family unit: $1,025.00 impact fee. 
(b)  Each dwelling unit in a multifamily structure shall be regarded as a single-family unit. 
(c)  Any residential property with expansion, remodeling, rehabilitating, or rebuilding that results in the creation of additional dwelling units shall be subject to impact fees. 
(d)  The park facilities impact fee must be reduced by any other fees or charges imposed for the purpose of improving or expanding park and recreation facilities, such as any park fee in-lieu of land dedication. 
(e)  These impact fees shall be increased on January 1 of each year by three percent as shown in the following schedule: 
Year Fee Year Fee Year Fee 2004 $1,025 2011 $1,261 2018 $1,550 2005  1,056 2012  1,298 2019  1,597 2006  1,087 2013  1,337 2020  1,645 2007  1,120 2014  1,378 2021  1,694 2008  1,154 2015  1,419 2022  1,745 2009  1,188 2016  1,461 2023  1,797 2010  1,222 2017  1,505  
(f)  These impact fees shall be collected until all capital costs associated with specified projects in the related "Facilities Needs Assessment and Impact Fee Study", have been incurred and satisfied, unless such time period exceeds 20 years beyond the projected commencement of projects or five years beyond projected satisfaction of indebtedness for the specified projects for which these park facilities impact fees are imposed. 
(11)  Severability. If any section, phrase, sentence, or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portions shall be deemed separate, distinct, and independent provisions, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 4-17-06) 
Secs. 86-15-86-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS 

Sec. 86-45. - Submittal procedure. 
(a)  Any request for development in the form of a subdivision requiring action by the village plan commission for conceptual, preliminary or final actions must be filed with the necessary application forms and relevant information with the village administrator/clerk on Monday, four weeks prior to the village plan commission meeting at which action is required by the petitioner. (An exception may be made in reference for conceptual review, but shall not be less than 11 days before the next plan commission meeting.) 
(b)  The village staff, village attorney and village engineer then have until 15 working days prior to the day of the plan commission meeting to evaluate the proposal and make preliminary comments and recommendations. The village staff, village attorney and/or the village engineer will notify the developer or agent, concerning the items for any changes and/or additional information necessary for the village plan commission review. 
(c)  The applicant has until ten working days prior to the village plan commission meeting, to submit to the village administrator/clerk, village attorney and village engineer any additional information or corrections so as to be placed on the village plan commission agenda for that month. If the additional information requested is not submitted, it will be denied or removed from that months agenda if a written extension is received by the village administrator/clerk and will then be placed on a future agenda. 
(d)  The applicant has until six working days prior to the day of the village plan commission meeting, to submit 16 copies of the final request for development in the final form of a subdivision or certified survey map required for conceptual, preliminary or final action to the village administrator/clerk or designee. 
(e)  The final request for development in final form, plus village staffs, village attorneys and village engineers and all pertinent review information will then be forwarded to the administrator/clerk or designee who will then forward the information to the village plan commission members. 
(f)  The action of the village plan commission will determine the course of action and the timeframe the village board will be using for their approval process as well as the need for the appropriate agreements and zoning adjustments needed. 
(g)  Any request for development in the form of a subdivision requiring action by the village board for conceptual, preliminary or final actions must be filed with the necessary application forms and relevant information with the village administrator/clerk on Monday, four weeks prior to the village board meeting at which action is required by the petitioner. (An exception may be made in reference for conceptual review, but shall not be less than 11 days before the next plan commission meeting.) 
(h)  The village staff, village attorney and village engineer then have until 15 working days prior to the day of the village board meeting to evaluate the proposal and make preliminary comments and recommendations. The village staff, village attorney and/or the village engineer will notify the developer or agent, concerning the items for any changes and/or additional information necessary for the village board review. 
(i)  The application has until ten working days prior to the village board meeting, to submit to the village administrator/clerk, village attorney and village engineer any additional information or corrections so as to be placed on the village board agenda for that month. If the additional information requested is not submitted, it will be denied or removed from that months agenda if a written extension is received by the village administrator/clerk and will then be placed on a future agenda. 
(j)  The applicant has until six working days prior to the day of the village board meeting, to submit 16 copies of the final request for development in the final form of a subdivision or certified survey map required for conceptual, preliminary or final action to the village administrator/clerk or designee. 
(k)  The final request for development in final form, plus village staffs, village attorneys and village engineers and all pertinent review information will then be forwarded to the administrator/clerk or designee who will then forward the information to the village board members. 
(l)  Items subsections (g) and (h) may have the number of days adjusted if the village staff, village attorney and village engineer concur with such an adjustment. 
(m)  It is noted that the village follow the turn around time frame as provided by state law and that if the village can not meet the 60 days or so because of not having the appropriate information/documentation the submittal would be rejected verses having an automatic approval forced upon the village. 
(n)  It is understood that if all pertinent/necessary information is not submitted in the specified time action will be tabled or the approvals rejected (denied). 
(o)  It is also understood that if some information or other aspect of the review can not be met by the applicant or the village by mutual agreement the timeframe may be extended/adjusted. 
(p)  The fee schedule as set from time to time by the village board. 
NOTE: Meeting information. The village plan commission meets the fourth Tuesday of each month routinely, however some months the meeting may get canceled or adjusted by the plan commission. The Village of Kewaskum Village Board meets the first and third Monday of each month routinely, however some months the meetings may get canceled or adjusted by the village board. (Note: The possibility may permit the scheduling of special meeting of both the plan commission and village board if actual cost are paid by the developer/applicant.) 
(Ord. No. 2003-13, 8-4-03) 
Sec. 86-46. - Preliminary consultation. 
    The subdivider shall, before submitting a plat for official filing, meet with the plan commission for preliminary consultation to ensure that the plat is acceptable for processing. 
(Code 1983, § 18.08(1)(b)) 
Sec. 86-47. - Preliminary consultation data. 
    The following information shall be provided at the time of the preliminary consultation: 
(1)  Information, including data on existing covenants, land characteristics and available community facilities and utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, business areas, playgrounds, park area and other public areas, tree planting, proposed protective covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements. 
(2)  A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities that serve or would be influenced by it, and including the development name and location; main traffic arteries; title; scale; north arrow and date. 
(3)  A sketch plan showing in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a free hand pencil sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey. 
(Code 1983, § 18.30) 
Sec. 86-48. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  Required. Before submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall enter into a preliminary plat review agreement with the village and submit a preliminary plat to the plan commission in order that general agreement may be reached on layout and arrangement of streets and lots before a final plat is prepared. The form and data required for plat submittal shall be as designated under sections 86-47 and 86-49. 
(b)  What to be shown. The preliminary plat shall be drawn with waterproof nonfading black ink or legibly with pencil on tracing cloth or tracing paper of good quality to a scale of 200 feet to an inch and shall show correctly on its face: 
(1)  The date, scale and northpoint. 
(2)  The proposed subdivision name, which shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in the county. 
(3)  The name and address of the owner, the subdivider and the engineer or surveyor preparing the plat. 
(4)  The location of the subdivision by government lot, recorded private claim, quarter-quarter section, section, township, range and county noted immediately under the name given the subdivision. 
(5)  The location of the subdivision shall be indicated by bearing and distance from a boundary line of a quarter section, recorded private claim or federal reservation in which the subdivision is located. The monumentation at the ends of the boundary line shall be described and the bearing and distance between them shown. 
(6)  A small drawing of the section or governmental subdivision of the section in which the subdivision lies with the location of the subdivision indicated thereon or, if approved by the department, a location sketch showing the relationship of the subdivision to existing streets. The drawing or sketch shall be oriented on the sheet in the same direction as the main drawing. 
(7)  The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision. 
(8)  Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of the adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land. 
(9)  Zoning on and adjacent to the subdivision. 
(10)  Location, widths and names of all existing and platted streets, alleys or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings, bridges and other pertinent data as determined by the plan commission. 
(11)  The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey and the approximate high and low water elevations of such lakes or streams. 
(12)  If the subdivision borders a lake or stream, the distances and bearing of a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary high water mark of the lake or stream. 
(13)  Layout, width and approximate grades of all new streets and rights-of-way, such as alleys, highways, easements for sewers, water mains and other public utilities. 
(14)  Direction and distance to nearest water and sewer mains. 
(15)  Approximate dimensions of and areas of lots. 
(16)  Proposed building lines. 
(17)  Approximate radii of all curves and length of tangents. 
(18)  Approximate location and area of property proposed to be dedicated for public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision with the conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservation. 
(19)  Contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet, or at more frequent intervals if required by the plan commission for land of unusual terrain characteristics. All pertinent elevations should be shown and shall be based on village datum. 
(20)  Type, slope and boundaries of soils shown on the operational soil survey maps prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Survey. 
(21)  Plats containing floodplain shall show the limits of the floodplain and the contour line lying a vertical distance of two feet above the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood or, where such data is not available, five feet above the elevation of the maximum flood of record. 
(c)  Area to be shown. The area for which such data is to be shown shall extend beyond the boundaries of the actual property being platted a distance that will adequately relate the plat to its surroundings. 
(d)  Official filing. Following the preliminary consultation, the plat, and such copies as may be required, shall be officially filed with the village clerk, who shall forthwith forward the necessary copies thereof to the department of development and where necessary to the county park and planning commission, as required by § 236.12, Wis. Stats., retain one copy in the official file, and return two copies to the village engineer, along with pertinent data applicable thereto. 
(Code 1983, §§ 18.08(1)(a), (d), 18.31) 
Sec. 86-49. - Final plat. 
(a)  A final plat of subdivided land shall comply with the requirements of § 236.20, Wis. Stats., which is adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth. 
(b)  The affidavits and certificates required by ch. 236, Wis. Stats., shall be lettered or printed legibly with black durable ink or typed legibly with black ribbon in the final plat. 
(c)  A duplicate tracing of the final plat shall be submitted initially to the village engineer in order to ensure that the plat is acceptable for processing, together with copies of such number and size as may be required by the village engineer from time to time. 
(d)  The final plat and such copies thereof as shall be required shall be submitted to the village clerk/treasurer within 36 months of the approval of the preliminary plat. However, if approval of the preliminary plat must be obtained from another approving authority subsequent to approval by the plan commission, the final plat shall be submitted within 36 months of such approval. The plan commission may waive failure to comply with this requirement. Submission of the final plat must be accompanied by an executed subdivider's final plat agreement with the village. 
(e)  Upon official filing, the village clerk/treasurer shall immediately forward the plat to the plan commission and shall forward copies of the plat to the department of development as required by § 236.12, Wis. Stats. The plan commission shall refer the final plat with its recommendation to the village board within 30 days of its submission unless the time is extended by the board. The board shall approve or reject the final plat within 60 days of its submission to the village clerk/treasurer unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. Reasons for rejections shall be stated in the minutes of the board meeting, and a copy thereof or a written statement of such reasons shall be supplied the subdivider. 
(f)  If the original of the final plat has been filed with another approving authority, the subdivider may file a true copy of such plat in lieu of the original. However, before approval of the village board will be inscribed on the original of the final plat, the surveyor or the subdivider shall certify the respects in which the original of the final plat differs from the true copy, and all modifications must first be approved. 
(Code 1983, §§ 18.08(4), 18.32; Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 4-4-11) 
Sec. 86-50. - Public sites and open spaces. 
    In the design of the plat, due consideration shall be given to the reservation of suitable sites of adequate area for future schools, parks, playgrounds, drainageways and other public purposes. If designated on the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan component, official map, or component neighborhood development plan, such areas shall be made a part of the plat. If not so designated, consideration shall be given in the location of such sites to the preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of fine trees, marshes, lakes and ponds, watercourses, watersheds and ravines. 
(Code 1983, § 18.35) 
Sec. 86-51. - Plan commission action. 
    If a plat is satisfactory, the plan commission may recommend its official filing and act to grant preliminary approval of the plat subject to and effective upon certification of no objection from agencies authorized to object. 
(Code 1983, § 18.08(1)(c)) 
Sec. 86-52. - Official approval. 
    The plan commission shall within 90 days of the official filing approve, conditionally approve or reject the plat. The subdivider shall be notified in writing of any conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection. Pursuant to § 236.12, Wis. Stats., no approval shall be granted until it has been certified that there is no objection to the plat by any agency authorized to object. 
(Code 1983, § 18.08(1)(e)) 
Sec. 86-53. - Effect of approval. 
    Approval of the preliminary plat shall entitle the subdivider to approval of the final plat if the final plat conforms substantially to such preliminary plat and conditions of approval have been met. 
(Code 1983, § 18.08(1)(f)) 
Sec. 86-54. - Engineering data. 
(a)  Following approval of the preliminary plat and prior to submittal of a final plat the subdivider shall furnish to the village engineer the following engineering data pertaining to utilities and improvements in the plat as is pertinent and as requested by the engineer: 
(1)  Plan and profiles showing existing and established grades for all streets, alleys, public rights-of-way and proposed buildings. 
(2)  Plan and profiles of all storm sewers, culverts and surface water drainage facilities. 
(3)  Plan and profiles of all sanitary sewers, including one sanitary sewer lateral per lot to run to lot lines. 
(4)  Plan and profiles of all water distribution lines, including stop boxes and appurtenances, including one water lateral per lot to run to lot line. 
(5)  Complete subdivision grading plan showing contour lines of existing land at two-foot intervals, proposed grades of all buildings and all lot corners, and design of waterways to properly drain the lots. 
(b)  All such plans and profiles shall be approved by the village engineer before the final plat shall be deemed acceptable for filing. 
(Code 1983, § 18.08(2)) 
Sec. 86-55. - Ownership data. 
    Following approval of the preliminary plat and at the time of filing the final plat, the subdivider shall submit a certificate from a recognized title company showing the legal interest anyone may have in the land being subdivided. 
(Code 1983, § 18.08(3)) 
Sec. 86-56. - Optional processing procedure. 
    Where the developer chooses to follow the optional procedure in processing the plat as provided by § 236.12, Wis. Stats., the village clerk/treasurer and plan commission shall modify their procedure and the wording of the necessary certificate and approval accordingly. 
(Code 1983, § 18.08(5)) 
Sec. 86-57. - Successive divisions. 
(a)  Assessor's plat. Where it is not practicable to require that a final plat of a subdivision created by successive divisions be filed in accordance with this article, the village board may in lieu thereof order an assessor's plat to be made under § 70.27, Wis. Stats., and may assess the cost thereof as provided in such section or to the subdivider. 
(b)  Compliance required. Regardless of the type of plat filed, any such subdivision shall comply with all provisions of this article to the extent that they may reasonably be applied. 
(Code 1983, § 18.38) 
Secs. 86-58-86-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 86-91. - Conformance required. 
    The proposed subdivision or land division under section 86-11 shall conform to: 
(1)  The provisions of ch. 236, Wis. Stats. 
(2)  All applicable ordinances of the village. 
(3)  Design and construction standards as established by the village. 
(4)  The master plan. 
(5)  The official map. 
(6)  The rules of the state department of industry, labor and human relations relating to lot size and lot elevation if the subdivision is not served by public sewer and provision for such service has not been made. 
(7)  The rules of the state department of transportation relating to safety of access and the preservation of the public interest and investment in the streets if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts on a state trunk highway or connecting street. 
(Code 1983, § 18.15) 
Sec. 86-92. - Streets. 
(a)  General considerations. The streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions and natural terrain features such as streams and existing tree growth, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  Conform to official map. The arrangement, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the official map and to the street and highway widths established by ordinance. 
(c)  Arrangement. 
(1)  Major streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of major streets and highways. 
(2)  Collector streets shall be properly related to mass transit routes, to special traffic generating from facilities such as schools, churches and shopping centers, to population densities, and to the major streets into which they feed. 
(3)  Minor streets shall be laid out to conform, as much as possible, to topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and sewer systems, to require the minimum amount of street necessary to provide convenient, safe access to property. 
(d)  Railroad right-of-way or limited-access highway. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access-highway right-of-way, the plan commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land as for park purposes in residential districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in other districts. 
(e)  Major streets. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed major street, the plan commission may require that marginal-access streets be provided, that the backs of lots abut the major streets and be provided with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, that deep lots with rear service alleys be provided, or that other provisions be made for the adequate protection of residential properties and the separation of through and local traffic. 
(f)  Width. The right-of-way of all streets shall be of the width specified on the official map or master plan or, if no width is specified there, they shall be not less than the width specified below: 
Type of Street Right-of-Way 
(feet) (1) Major ..... 80 (2) Collector ..... 66 (3) Local access ..... 66 (4) Frontage ..... 66  
(g)  Grades. The grade of major and collector streets shall not exceed six percent, and the grade of all other streets shall not exceed ten percent unless necessitated by exceptional topography and approved by the plan commission. The minimum grade of all streets shall be no less than one-half of one percent, and such minimum shall not be permitted for long sustained distances. 
(h)  Horizontal curves. A minimum sight distance with clear visibility, measured along the centerline, shall be provided of at least 300 feet on major streets, 200 feet for collector streets and 100 feet on minor streets. 
(i)  Vertical curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to 15 times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade for major streets and collector streets and half this minimum length for all other streets. 
(j)  Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on major and collector streets. 
(k)  Street names. New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets, but streets that are continuations of others already in existence and named shall bear the name of the existing streets. 
(l)  Cul-de-sac or dead-end streets. Streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall not normally exceed 500 feet in length and shall terminate with a turnaround not less than 140 feet in diameter of right-of-way and a roadway not less than 118 feet in diameter. 
(m)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the village under conditions approved by the plan commission. 
(n)  Existing half streets. Where a half street exists adjacent to the subdivision, the other half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. Platting of new half streets along property lines shall not be permitted except by approval of the plan commission. 
(Code 1983, § 18.16) 
Sec. 86-93. - Intersections. 
(a)  Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and not more than two streets shall intersect at one point unless approved by the plan commission. 
(b)  Property lines at street intersections should intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. When the plan commission, village board or village engineers determines it to be necessary, property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of 15 feet or of greater radius when determined by the plan commission, village board or village engineer. 
(1)  The Village of Kewaskum Plan Commission and/or Village Board will be the requesting bodies. 
(c)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. 
(Code 1983, § 18.17; Ord. No. 2002-10, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 86-94. - Alleys. 
(a)  Alleys shall be provided in all commercial and industrial districts, except that the plan commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access such as off-street loading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(b)  Alleys shall not be approved in residential areas unless necessary because of topography or other exceptional circumstances. 
(c)  The width of alleys shall not be less than 20 feet. 
(d)  Dead-end alleys are prohibited except under very unusual circumstances, and crooked and "T" alleys shall be discouraged. Where dead-end alleys are unavoidable they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end. 
(Code 1983, § 18.18) 
Sec. 86-95. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where required by the plan commission and shall be at least ten feet wide. 
(b)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
(Code 1983, § 18.19) 
Sec. 86-96. - Blocks. 
(a)  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated. 
(b)  Pedestrian crosswalks not less than 15 feet wide may be required by the plan commission where deemed desirable to provide convenient pedestrian circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(Code 1983, § 18.20) 
Sec. 86-97. - Lots. 
(a)  Sign, shape, orientation. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
(b)  Lot dimensions. 
(1)  Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Residential lots to be served by private sewage disposal facilities shall comply with the rules of the state department of natural resources as well as with any local ordinance appropriate thereto. 
(3)  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
(4)  Residential lots abutting on major streets and highways shall be platted with sufficient depth to permit adequate separation between the buildings and such traffic ways. 
(5)  Lots should be designed with a suitable proportion between width and depth. Neither long and narrow nor wide and shallow lots are normally desirable. For noncluster developments normal depth should not exceed 21/2 times the width nor be less than 100 feet where served by sewer or 150 feet where individual sewage disposal facilities are provided. Minimum lot depths for cluster developments shall be determined by the plan commission. 
(c)  Corner lots. Corner lots should be designed to permit full setback on both streets as required by the applicable zoning district requirements. 
(d)  Access to public streets. Every lot shall front or abut on a public street. Lots with an access only to private drives or streets shall be permitted only with plan commission approval. 
(e)  Lots at right angles. Lots at right angles to each other should be avoided wherever possible, especially in residential areas. 
(f)  Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(g)  Large lots. Where lots are created of a size larger than normal for the area, the plan commission may require that the plat be so designed as to allow for the possible future resubdivision of such lots into normal sizes compatible with the area. 
(h)  Municipal boundaries. Lots shall follow municipal boundary lines whenever practicable, rather than cross them. 
(i)  Double-frontage. Double-frontage and reversed-frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(Code 1983, § 18.21) 
Sec. 86-98. - Dedication and reservation of lands. 
(a)  Public sites and open spaces. The purpose of this section is to ensure that adequate land is set aside and preserved for development of public parks, recreation and open spaces; proper location of such sites is provided as the village develops; and the cost of providing public park, recreation and open space sites necessary to serve the additional persons brought into the village by a division of land may be most equitably apportioned on the basis of additional need created by the individual development. 
(b)  Reservation of sites. 
(1)  Where the area proposed to be divided contains a park, playground or other public area shown upon the master plan for the village, such area shall either be dedicated to the proper public agency or it shall be reserved for acquisition thereby within a three-year period by purchase or other means. If the land is not acquired during this period, it shall be released to the divider. 
(2)  Whenever any river, stream or important surface drainage course is located in the area being divided, the divider of land shall provide an easement along each side of the river, stream or drainage course for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating, improving or protecting the river, stream or drainage course for drainage or recreational use. 
(3)  Whenever a tract of land to be subdivided embraces all or any part of an arterial street or other public way which has been designated in the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan component or on the official map of the village, such public way shall be made a part of the plat and dedicated or reserved by the subdivider in the locations and dimensions indicated on such plan or map and as set forth in sections 86-91-86-97. 
(c)  Dedication of sites. Where feasible and compatible with the comprehensive plan of the village, the divider shall provide and dedicate to the public adequate land to provide for park, recreation and open space needs of the division of land within the limits of the village, the location of such land to be determined by the plan commission on the following basis: 
(1)  The amount of land to be dedicated shall be equal in value to $200.00 per residential lot created by the divider of land. Land dedicated for parks should not differ greatly from the surrounding territory and the rest of the subdivision of land. Where dedicated park land borders a street, the subdivider shall cause improvements to be installed as required by this article. 
(2)  The village assessor shall determine the value of the land to be dedicated, and such value shall be based on the full and fair market value. 
(3)  The owner may appeal such determination to the village board if he is dissatisfied. In such case, an appraisal board shall be formed consisting of one appraiser selected by the village at its expense, one selected by the owner at his expense, and the third selected by these two appraisers at the village's expense. Such appraisal board shall determine the value of the land to be dedicated. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Two-family, multifamily and combination commercial-residential districts. The developer of two-family, multifamily and combination commercial-residential projects shall pay to the village the sum of $200.00 per residential unit created by the development. Payment shall be made at the time of the application for the first building permit. 
(f)  Planned unit development. 
(1)  The developer of a planned unit development shall pay to the village a fee equivalent to the value for other divisions of land as required in this article. 
(2)  The fee required shall be determined by the plan commission and the developer of the planned unit development based on an evaluation of the individual development. The developer shall pay 50 percent of the fee before final approval of the planned unit development plan presented to the village and sign a contract agreeing to pay a proportionate amount of the balance of the fee before the issuance of each building permit. Such proportion of the proportionate balance of the fee shall be based upon the total number of buildings included in the project. 
(g)  Deposit of fees. All fees received by the village as a result of this section shall be deposited in a nonlapsing special fund. 
(h)  Lands in extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction. Proposed public lands lying outside the limits of the village but within the jurisdictional area of the village shall be reserved for acquisition by the town or county. 
(Code 1983, § 18.36; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 4-17-06) 
Editor's note- The special fund referred to in section 86-98(g) is a nonlapsing special fund, separate from the general fund of the village; such special fund shall be used exclusively for parks and recreation area development, including site acquisition and related improvements. Disbursements from such special fund are to be made only upon specific approval of the village board. 
Secs. 86-99-86-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 86-130. - Special assessments. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions of Chapter 66, Municipal Law Subchapter VII. Special Assessments, §§ 66.0701-66.0733, describing and defining regulation as special assessment, are adopted and are by reference mad part of this section as if fully set forth in this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of statutes incorporated in this section are intended to be made part of this section in order secure statewide authority. 
(Ord. No. 2003-14, 8-18-03) 
Sec. 86-131. - Monuments. 
    The subdivider shall cause survey monuments to be installed as required by § 236.15, Wis. Stats., which is adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth, and as may be required by the village engineer. 
(Code 1983, §§ 18.25, 18.26(12)) 
Sec. 86-132. - Facilities and improvements. 
(a)  Required to be installed. Before final approval of a plat or a certified survey map, the subdivider shall install street and utility improvements. If such improvements are not installed as required at the time the final plat or map is submitted for approval, the subdivider shall, before approval of the plat or map, enter into a contract with the village agreeing to install the required improvements and shall file with the contract a bond meeting the approval of legal counsel for the village or a certified check, cash or securities, approved by the village board, to be escrowed, in an amount equal to 120 percent of the estimated cost of the improvements, as estimated by the village engineer, as a guarantee that such improvements will be completed by the subdivider or his subcontractors not later than one year from the date of recording of the plat or approval of the final plat or certified survey map by the village board, and as a further guarantee, that all obligations to subcontractors for the work on the development are satisfied. 
(1)  Contractors and subcontractors who are to be engaged in the construction of street and/or utility improvements on dedicated street rights-of-way or easements shall be subject to the approval of the village engineer. 
(2)  Government units to which these bonds and contract provisions apply may file in lieu of the contract and bond a letter from officers authorized to act on their behalf agreeing to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Interest on any escrowed money and earnings of escrowed securities shall inure to the person or firm posting the collateral. 
(4)  All funds shall be released upon completion of the improvements, proof of payment for the improvements, and upon the approval of the village engineer and village board. 
(5)  The subdivider shall reimburse the village for all costs for work performed by the village engineer in carrying out his duties set forth in this section, attributable to the subdivider's development. 
(b)  Surfacing of streets. After the installation of all utilities, the subdivider shall surface all roadways and streets proposed to be dedicated to the widths prescribed by this article and the comprehensive plan or comprehensive plan components. Surfacing shall include both base material and wearing course and shall be done in accordance with the following plans and specifications: 
(1)  Soils. Prior to any surfacing operations, the soil conditions of the roadway and/or street shall be approved by the village engineer. If at any point during the course of construction the existing base is deemed insufficient, the existing gravel shall be removed, along with whatever undercut is necessary to remove unacceptable material. These undercut areas shall be filled and compacted with crushed road gravel approved by the village engineer. 
(2)  Base course. The base course shall be placed in two layers, the first being five inches of one and one-half-inch crushed limestone traffic bound and the second an upper layer to consist the five inches of one and one-half-inch crushed limestone traffic bound or three-quarter-inch crushed limestone traffic bound. The maximum thickness of each lift shall be five inches, with each lift being compacted. 
(3)  Testing required. Prior to surfacing, the subdivider shall submit to the village engineer a report prepared by an independent testing laboratory, which shall include: 
a.  A proposed mix design utilizing bituminous material and mineral aggregate material contractor intends to use in surfacing. Separate test designs shall apply to base course and wearing course mixtures. This design shall conform to state highway specifications. 
b.  A complete sieve analysis of aggregate to be employed in the execution of the contract. 
c.  Test information indicating performance of the design mix, including specific gravity compaction data. This data shall be presented to the village engineer for approval not less than one week prior to beginning work. 
(4)  Mix. The subdivider shall strictly adhere to the approved design mix while carrying out the surfacing. The mix for surface or binder course shall not be altered from the approved design without written approval of the village engineer. 
(5)  Testing samples. 
a.  Compacted samples of each type of asphalt material placed may be cored from the pavement for determination of density, thickness and other characteristics at the direction of the village engineer. 
b.  All samples of materials required for tests shall be furnished by the subdivider without cost to the village. Samples taken of pavement before acceptance of the work shall be replaced by the subdivider without charge or cost to the village. 
(6)  Equipment. The subdivider shall furnish to the village engineer a list of all equipment to be used for surfacing, stating name, year of manufacture, capacity and location. He shall, at the village engineer's request, furnish a certificate of inspection from the manufacturer of the mixing machine, laying machine and rollers to be used that will guarantee that such equipment is in good operating order and will conform to § 405.4 of the Wisconsin State Highway Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Current Edition. 
(7)  Bituminous concrete. Streets and roadways shall be paved with a four-inch bituminous concrete pavement as follows: 
a.  The aggregates for bituminous pavements, including mineral filler, shall conform to the following gradation requirements as set forth in subsection 401.2.5 of the State of Wisconsin, Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Current Edition. 
b.  Asphaltic concrete binder course 21/2 inches, gradation No. 2, 4.5 percent to 5.0 percent A.C. 
c.  Asphaltic concrete surface course 11/2 inches, gradation No. 3 or No. 4, 5.2 percent to 6.0 percent A.C. 
d.  The bituminous material for the bituminous concrete shall be asphalt cement type A.C. in the penetration range 85-100. 
(8)  Base. Prior to placing the bituminous binder course, the existing gravel base shall be regraded and shaped to a cross-section having a centerline crown of 51/2 inches. 
(9)  Base grade. Before the asphalt pavement is to be placed, the base course shall be stringlined to check the crown of the road. 
(10)  Finished grade. Prior to paving, all street structure shall be adjusted to finished pavement grade by the use of cast iron rings or masonry blocks and mortar. 
(11)  Streets above standard. The cost of surfacing roadways in excess of 46 feet in width, curbface to curbface, and to standards over and above those which would be required for local streets that are not required to serve the needs of the developer shall be borne by the village. 
(c)  Central sanitary sewage system. 
(1)  The subdivider shall construct sanitary sewers and lift stations in such a manner as to make adequate sanitary sewage service available to each lot within the development. The subdivider shall install sewer laterals to the street lot line. The size, type and installation of all sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the village engineer. All sanitary sewer facilities shall be floodproofed. 
(2)  Subdividers shall assume the cost of installing all sanitary sewers. 
(d)  Central water supply facilities. 
(1)  The subdivider shall construct water mains in such a manner as to make adequate water service available to each lot within the subdivision. The subdivider shall install water laterals to the street lot line. The size, type and installation of all public water mains proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the village engineer. 
(2)  The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all water mains. 
(e)  Stormwater drainage facility. The subdivider shall construct stormwater drainage facilities, which may include curbs and gutters. Catchbasins and inlets, storm sewers, road ditches and open channels shall be installed as may be required by the village engineer. The type of facility required, the design criteria and the sizes and grades are to be approved by the village engineer. Storm drainage facilities shall be so designed as to present no hazard to life or property, minimize shore land erosion and siltation of surface waters, and shall prevent excess runoff on adjacent property. The size, type and installation of all stormwater drains and sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with the plans and standard specifications approved by the village engineer. Curbs and gutters shall be installed on all streets and roadways prior to paving as required by subsection (b) of this section. Plans for such installation must be approved by the village engineer, and installation shall be in accordance with specifications of the village engineer. The storm sewers shall be designed utilizing a ten-year design storm. The design rainfall event shall be in accordance with guidelines set forth by the southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission. 
(f)  Underground service for streetlighting. The subdivider shall install or cause to be installed, at his expense, all underground wiring for streetlighting as may be required to service the development, in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the village engineer. 
(g)  Other utilities. No electrical, cable television or other telephone transmission or service or streetlighting service shall be located on overhead poles unless otherwise allowed by the village board after review and recommendation by the plan commission due to exceptional topography or other physical barrier. Plans indicating the proposed location of all gas, electrical power, streetlighting, and telephone distribution and transmission lines required to service the development shall be approved by the village engineer. 
(h)  Street signs. All street signs at all intersections shall be installed by the subdivider in conformity with standards as established by the village board. 
(i)  Construction schedule. At the time of approval of the plat or plan, the subdivider shall submit to the village engineer a construction schedule to which the subdivider shall adhere during the process of development. Any deviation from such schedule must receive prior approval from the village engineer. 
(j)  Improvements on boundary of subdivisions. Any public improvement occurring on the boundaries of the subdivision shall use normal assessing values for establishing payments. 
(k)  Erosion and sediment control. The plan commission and village board shall review each plat on the basis of size, topography, erosion hazards and other factors relating to sedimentation to determine the need for erosion and sediment control measures. If it is determined that such measures are needed, the village engineer shall direct the subdivider to undertake such erosion and sediment control as the village engineer deems necessary, at the subdivider's expense. 
(l)  Dedication guarantee. All facilities and improvements installed prior to the final approval of the plat shall be considered dedicated along with streets and other public areas upon the approval of the plat. Facilities and improvements completed under bond or other financial guarantee after the approval of the plat shall be considered dedicated upon their approval and acceptance and release of the bond or other guarantee. The required improvements in the subdivision shall be guaranteed for a period of one year following the completion and acceptance of such improvements. In order to insure the good quality of materials, workmanship and maintenance of all sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers, streets and all appurtenances thereto, the subdivider shall provide a guarantee bond or other satisfactory financial guarantee to the village in the amount of 20 percent of the total installation cost of the aforesaid improvements as determined by the village engineer, for a period of one year after completion of construction and written acceptance by the village engineer. 
(m)  Building permits. No building permit shall be issued for erection of a structure on any lot of record until the installation of all the improvements as set forth in subsections (a) through (m) of this section has been accepted by the village board. 
(n)  Sidewalks. After the installation of all utilities, the subdivider shall construct sidewalks according to specifications provided by the village engineer. 
(Code 1983, § 18.26(1)-(11), (13)-(15); Ord. No. 2003-14, 8-18-03) 
Secs. 86-133-86-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 86-150. - Penalties and remedies. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 plus the costs of prosecution for each offense and the penalty for default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisonment in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding six months. Provided however, that the maximum forfeiture where a violation of any provision of this ordinance which is also a violation of a state statute, shall not exceed the maximum fine imposed by statute. In addition, the Village of Kewaskum, may seek injunctive relief or other appropriate remedial action and in addition to the forfeiture, may order an assessor's plat to be made under § 70.27, Wis. Stats., at the expense of the subdivider or his agent, when a subdivision is created by successive divisions of land. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. Violations and concomitant penalties shall include: 
(a)  Recordation improperly made carries penalties as provided in § 236.30, Wis. Stats. 
(b)  Conveyance of lots in unrecorded plats carries penalties as provided for in § 236.31, Wis. Stats. 
(c)  Monuments disturbed or not placed carries penalties as provided for in § 236.32, Wis. Stats. 
(Ord. No. 2003-14, 8-18-03) 
Sec. 86-151. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or failure to approve a plat may appeal therefrom, as provided in § 236.13(5), Wis. Stats., within 30 days of notification of the rejection of the plat. Where failure to approve is based on an unsatisfied objection, the agency making the objection shall be made a party action. The court shall direct that the plat be approved if it finds that the action of the approving or objecting agency is arbitrary, unreasonable or discriminatory. 
(Ord. No. 2003-14, 8-18-03) 
Chapter 87 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL 

Sec. 87-1. - Authority. 
    This chapter is adopted by the Village of Kewaskum Village Board under the authority granted by § 61.354, Wis. Stats. This chapter supersedes all conflicting and contradictory regulations previously enacted by Village of Kewaskum relating to stormwater management and construction site erosion control. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.01, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-2. - Findings of fact. 
    The village board finds that construction site erosion and uncontrolled stormwater runoff from land disturbing and land development activities have significant adverse impacts upon local water resources and the health, safety and general welfare of the community, and diminish the public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, soil erosion and stormwater runoff can: 
(a)  Carry a significant amount of sediment, nutrients, bacteria/other pathogens, organic matter, toxins and other pollutants to local lakes, streams and wetlands; 
(b)  Diminish the capacity of water resources to support recreational and water supply uses, and a natural diversity of plant and animal life; 
(c)  Clog drainage systems with sediment, which in turn increases maintenance costs; 
(d)  Overwhelm existing drainage ways with increased flows, causing bank and channel erosion, and increasing downstream flooding and property damage; 
(e)  Reduce groundwater recharge, which may diminish stream base flows and/or lower water levels in local lakes, ponds and wetlands; 
(f)  Contaminate drinking water supplies; and 
(g)  Generate airborne particulate concentrations that are health threatening or may cause other off-site damage to property or the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.02, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-3. - Purpose and intent. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements for land development and land disturbing activities aimed to minimize sedimentation, water pollution, flooding and related property and environmental damage caused by soil erosion and uncontrolled stormwater runoff during and after construction, in order to diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare, and the natural resources of Washington County. 
(2)  Intent. This chapter is intended to regulate construction site erosion and stormwater management under the authority granted in § 60.627, Wis. Stats. This chapter is not intended to limit activity or land divisions permitted under the applicable zoning and land division ordinances. 
(3)  Regional stormwater management. The village board recognizes that the preferred method of permanently managing stormwater runoff from land development activities is through the preparation and implementation of regional stormwater management plans by watershed areas which are designed to meet the requirements of this chapter. Accordingly, provisions have been incorporated into this chapter to allow for the implementation of this type of plan in lieu of complying with on-site stormwater management requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.03, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-4. - Jurisdiction. 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdictional boundaries of Village of Kewaskum. 
(2)  Under the authority of § 61.354, Wis. Stats., this chapter shall continue in effect in any area annexed by a city or village, unless the city or village enacts, maintains and enforces a city or village ordinance which complies with minimum standards established by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and which is at least as restrictive as this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.04, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-5. - Applicability, exemptions and waivers. 
(1)  Construction site erosion control. Unless otherwise exempted under subsection (3) below, or waived under subsection (4) below, an erosion and runoff control permit under section 87-6 of this chapter shall be required, and all construction site erosion control provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land disturbing activity that meet any of the following: 
(a)  Disturbs 4,000 square feet or more of total land surface area; 
(b)  Involves excavation or filling, or a combination of excavation and filling, in excess of 400 cubic yards of material; 
(c)  Disturbs 100 lineal feet of road ditch, grass waterway or other land area where surface drainage flows in a defined open channel; including the placement, repair or removal of any underground pipe, utility or other facility within the cross-section of the channel at flow capacity; or 
(d)  Other land disturbing activities, including the installation of access drives, that the administering authority determines to have a high risk of soil erosion or water pollution, or that may significantly impact an environmentally sensitive area. All determinations made by the administering authority under this subsection shall be made in written or electronic form, unless otherwise waived by the requesting entity. 
(2)  Stormwater management. Unless otherwise exempted under subsection (3) below, or waived under subsection (4) below, an erosion and runoff control permit under section 87-6 below, shall be required, and all stormwater management provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land development activity that meet any of the following: 
(a)  Divides an existing tax parcel into five separate parcels of five acres each or less in total area within a common plan of development; 
(b)  Involves the construction of any new public or private roads; 
(c)  Ultimately results in the addition of impervious surfaces of 20,000 square feet or greater in total area, including smaller individual sites that are part of a common plan of development; or 
(d)  Other land development activities, including access drives, that the administering authority determines may significantly increase downstream runoff volumes, flooding, soil erosion, water pollution or property damage, or significantly impact an environmentally sensitive area. All determinations made by the administering authority under this subsection shall be made in written or electronic form, unless otherwise waived by the requesting entity. 
(3)  Exemptions. 
(a)  The following sites shall be exempt from all of the requirements of this chapter: 
1.  All activities directly relating to the planting, growing and harvesting of agricultural crops. 
2.  Any land disturbing or land development activity conducted by or contracted for any state agency, as defined under § 227.01(1) Wis. Stats., including but not limited to road construction projects administered by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. These activities must meet the erosion control and stormwater management requirements of the state. 
(b)  The following sites shall be exempt from subsection (1) above, which includes the construction site erosion control provisions of this chapter only: 
1.  The construction of one and two family residential buildings under Wis. Adm. Code COMM 21.125, unless requested by the village building inspector or village board. These activities must meet the erosion control requirements of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. 
2.  Any land disturbing activity within the shoreland/wetland/floodplain zone as defined by the Washington County Code that disturbs less than one acre of total land surface. These activities must meet the erosion control requirements of the Washington County shoreland/floodplain/wetland zoning ordinance(s). 
(c)  The following sites shall comply with all of the erosion control and stormwater management requirements of this chapter, but shall be exempted from obtaining a permit, providing a financial guarantee or paying a fee under section 87-6 of this chapter: 
1.  Any proposal that is designed and/or certified by the Washington County Land Conservation Department as part of a soil conservation or water pollution control project; and 
2.  Any road construction or other land disturbing or land development activity by the village or Washington County, where an approved working agreement with the ordinance administrator is in effect at the time of the activity. 
(4)  Waivers. 
(a)  The administering authority shall waive any requirement of this chapter if the administering authority, or the board of appeals under section 87-14 of this chapter, determines that: 
1.  The site will have no appreciable off-site impact; 
2.  Compliance is impractical or impossible due to site conditions, urban street cross section requirements, or other circumstances beyond the control of the applicant; 
3.  Compliance would be in direct conflict with other regulations or related objectives of this chapter which would take precedent; or 
4.  The specific requirement is not necessary for a particular site to ensure compliance with the erosion control and stormwater management requirements of sections 87-8 and 87-9 of this chapter. 
(b)  Any waiver granted shall be in written or electronic form and shall comply with the general requirements under section 87-8(1)(a) of this chapter relating to construction site erosion control and under section 87-9(1)(a) of this chapter relating to stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.05, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-6. - Application for erosion and runoff control permit or preliminary approval letter. 
(1)  Application. The applicant shall submit a completed application on a form provided by the administering authority for that purpose, and indicate whether applying for a preliminary approval letter or an erosion and runoff control permit. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the administering authority to enter upon the site to obtain information needed to administer this chapter. 
(2)  Erosion and runoff control permit. An erosion and runoff control permit is required for all sites that meet the applicability provisions of section 87-5(1) or (2) of this chapter and are not exempt under section 87-5(3) of this chapter or waived under section 87-5(4) of this chapter. To request an erosion and runoff control permit under this chapter, the following information shall be submitted to the administering authority: 
(a)  A completed application on a form provided by the administering authority for that purpose; 
(b)  The applicable fee(s); 
(c)  A final erosion control plan in accordance with section 87-8 of this chapter for those land disturbing activities that meet any of the applicability criteria in section 87-5(1) of this chapter; 
(d)  A final stormwater management plan in accordance with section 87-9(5) of this chapter and a draft maintenance agreement in accordance with section 87-12 of this chapter for those land development activities that meet any of the applicability criteria of section 87-5(2) of this chapter; or the documentation required under section 87-9(2) of this chapter related to a regional stormwater management plan; and 
(e)  A financial guarantee, in accordance with section 87-11(3) of this chapter. 
(3)  Preliminary approval letter. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. A preliminary approval letter is an optional step in the permit process that is strongly encouraged for subdivisions and other large or complex land development activities. It is designed to assist the applicant in preparing general site plans and obtaining other applicable permits or zoning approvals prior to finalizing detailed construction plans for a proposed project. It will also act to notify other review authorities that the applicant has agreed to meet the requirements of an erosion and runoff control permit and provides a preliminary plan of what will likely be required. An erosion and runoff control permit is still required prior to the start of any proposed land disturbing or land development activity. The administering authority shall issue an erosion and runoff control permit after determining that the final erosion control and stormwater management plans are in substantial compliance with the preliminary plans and after the applicant has met all other requirements of subsection (2) above. 
(b)  Application. To request a preliminary approval letter, the following information must be submitted to the ordinance administrator: 
1.  A completed application, on a form provided by the administering authority for that purpose; 
2.  The applicable fee(s); 
3.  A preliminary erosion control plan in accordance with section 87-8(5) of this chapter; for those sites that meet any of the applicability criteria under section 87-5(1) of this chapter; and 
4.  A preliminary stormwater management plan in accordance with section 87-9(6) of this chapter, for those land development activities that meet any of the applicability criteria of section 87-5(2) of this chapter. 
(4)  Fees. Except as provided in section 87-9(2)(c) of this chapter for regional stormwater management plans, all application and review fees for this chapter shall be established by the village board. Fee amounts shall be designed to offset the costs to the village for the administration of this chapter and may be modified from time to time based on the records and recommendation of the administering authority. A schedule of the fees established by the village board shall be available for review and distribution through the office of the village clerk. No fee shall exceed the actual and direct costs of administering this chapter. Those persons as defined in § 32.01(1) Wis. Stats., shall be exempt from the fees in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.06, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-7. - Plan review procedures. 
(1)  For applications that only involve erosion control plans for less than one acre of disturbed area. 
(a)  The procedures under this subsection shall only apply to applications which meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  Meet one of the applicability criteria under section 87-5(1) of this chapter relating to construction site erosion control; 
2.  Disturb less than one acre in total land surface area; and 
3.  Do not meet any of the applicability criteria under section 87-5(2) of this chapter relating to stormwater management. 
(b)  Within ten working days of receipt of a completed application form, fee and final erosion control plan, the administering authority shall: 
1.  Determine if the requirements of this chapter have been met, including section 87-8(4)(a) of this chapter relating to the requirements of a final erosion control plan; 
2.  Determine if more information or additional review is needed; and 
3.  Notify the applicant of the results of subsections (b)1. and 2., above. Notification shall be in written or electronic form, unless otherwise waived by the applicant. 
(c)  The administering authority may request comments from other agencies or units of government within the ten-day review period. Unless determined by some other procedures, the other agency or unit of government shall have ten working days to respond to such a request. The administering authority shall notify the applicant if additional comments are being requested and shall have ten working days from the receipt of those comments to notify the applicant of the results of the review. 
(d)  If all of the applicable requirements of this chapter have been met, the administering authority shall issue an erosion and runoff control permit. If the requirements of this chapter have not been met, the administering authority shall notify the applicant what changes would be necessary to meet the requirements. 
(e)  For any resubmittal of plans and supporting information by the applicant, the administering authority shall have ten working days from the date of receipt to review the resubmitted information in accordance with subsections (b) through (d) above. 
(f)  If the administering authority fails to act within the timelines stated in this subsection, the submitted documents shall be deemed approved, and the administering authority shall issue an erosion and runoff control permit. 
(2)  For all other applications for an erosion and runoff control permit or preliminary approval letter. 
(a)  The procedures under this subsection shall apply to all other applications that meet at least one of the applicability criteria under section 87-5 of this chapter, but do not meet all of the criteria under subsection (1) above, for erosion control plans for less than one acre. 
(b)  Within 20 working days of receipt of a completed application form, fee and applicable erosion control and/or stormwater management plan(s) in accordance with sec. 87-6 of this chapter, the administering authority shall: 
1.  Determine if the requirements of this chapter have been met, including section 87-8(4)(b) of this chapter and/or section 87-9(5) of this chapter relating to the required contents of final erosion control and stormwater management plans; and 
2.  Determine if more information or additional review is needed; and 
3.  Notify the applicant of the results of subsections (b)1. and 2., above. Notification shall be in written or electronic form, unless otherwise waived by the applicant. 
(c)  The administering authority may request comments from other agencies or units of government within this 20-day review period. Unless determined by some other procedures, the other agency or unit of government shall have 20 working days to respond to such a request. The administering authority shall notify the applicant if additional comments are being requested and shall have ten working days from the receipt of those comments to notify the applicant of the results of the review. 
(d)  If all of the applicable requirements of this chapter have been met, the administering authority shall provide a preliminary plan approval letter or an erosion and runoff control permit. If the requirements of this chapter have not been met, the administering authority shall notify the applicant what changes would be necessary to meet the requirements. 
(e)  For any resubmittal of plans and supporting information by the applicant, the administrating authority shall have 20 working days from the date of receipt to review the resubmitted information in accordance with subsections (b) through (d) above. 
(f)  If the administering authority fails to act within the timelines stated in this subsection, the submitted documents shall be deemed approved, and the administering authority shall issue a preliminary approval letter or erosion and runoff control permit. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.07, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-8. - Erosion control plan requirements. 
(1)  General requirements. 
(a)  An erosion control plan shall ensure, to the extent practical, that soil erosion, siltation, sedimentation and other off-site impacts from land disturbing activities are minimized. 
(b)  All erosion control plans and best management practice designs prepared under this chapter shall comply with the plan requirements of this section and the technical standards and specifications described in section 87-10 of this chapter. 
(2)  Guiding principles. To satisfy the requirements of this section, all proposed land disturbing activities shall, to the extent practical: 
(a)  Be planned and implemented in a manner that best fits the terrain of the site, avoiding steep slopes and other environmentally sensitive areas; 
(b)  Minimize the loss of trees and other natural vegetation and the size of the disturbed area; 
(c)  Minimize, through project phasing and proper construction sequencing, the time the disturbed soil surface is exposed Note: See section 87-11(2)(c) of this chapter for special conditions relating to construction scheduling and the issuance of a permit. 
(d)  Emphasize the use of erosion control measures that prevent soil detachment and erosion rather than trying to intercept its transport or repair damage done. 
(3)  Specific erosion control requirements. Unless otherwise waived under section 87-5(4) of this chapter, the following minimum requirements shall be met on all sites subject to the applicability criteria under section 87-5(1) of this chapter and shall be addressed in the erosion control plan submitted by the applicant, if applicable. The administering authority is authorized to exceed the minimum requirements stated below for any site that the administering authority determines is a high risk of soil erosion or may significantly impact an environmentally sensitive area, and that further controls are practical. 
(a)  Access drives and tracking. Each site shall provide an access drive(s) and parking area, of sufficient dimensions and design, surfaced with a material that will prevent erosion and minimize tracking or washing of soil onto public or private roadways. All nonpaved access drives shall be designed so that stormwater runoff from adjacent areas does not flow down the drive surface. Culverts shall be sized for calculated peak flows produced by the ten-year 24-hour design storm and shall meet all other State and local requirements relating to road access. 
(b)  Diversion of upslope runoff. Any significant amount of runoff from upslope land area, rooftops or other surfaces that drains across the proposed land disturbance shall be diverted around the disturbed area, if practical. Any diversion of upslope runoff shall be done in a manner that prevents erosion of the flow path and the outlet. 
(c)  Cut and fill slopes. Any cuts and fills shall be planned and constructed to minimize the length and steepness of slope, and stabilized in accordance with the approved erosion control plan timelines and technical standards of this chapter. 
(d)  Open channels. Any open channels shall be designed and constructed to carry the calculated peak flows for a ten-year 24-hour design storm, and stabilized in accordance with the approved erosion control plan timelines and technical standards of this chapter. 
(e)  Inlet protection. All inlets to storm drains, culverts and other stormwater conveyance systems shall be protected from siltation until final site stabilization. 
(f)  Outlet protection. All outlets for site dewatering and stormwater conveyance systems, including pipe or open channels entering a stormwater management facility, shall be protected from erosion through channel lining or other stabilization measures. 
(g)  Site erosion control. Measures shall be taken, using approved best management practices, to minimize sediment from being carried off-site by water or wind during the construction phase, such as: diversions, silt fence, straw bales, downspout extenders, soil treatment, temporary mulch, sediment traps, sediment basins, etc. All temporary best management practices shall be maintained until the site is stabilized. Some best management practices, such as sediment basins, may be designed to also serve as a permanent stormwater best management practice after the site is stabilized. 
(h)  Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by sediment basins or other approved measures to prevent soil erosion and water pollution. 
(i)  Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials, or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed of and not allowed to be carried off-site by runoff or wind. 
(j)  Topsoil. Enough topsoil from the disturbed area must be saved to ensure that a minimum of four to six inches is reapplied for all areas to be seeded or sodded. If adequate topsoil does not exist on the site to meet this requirement, it shall be imported. If the disturbed area is to be used for the growing of agricultural crops in the future, the original depth of topsoil shall be restored. 
(k)  Subsoil. For disturbed areas that are to be used for the growing of agricultural crops, trees or other woody vegetation in the future, a minimum of one foot of original subsoil shall remain or be reapplied prior to the application of topsoil to provide an adequate root zone. 
(l)  Soil stockpiles. Soil stockpiles shall be located no closer than 75 feet from lakes, streams, wetlands, ditches, drainage ways, curbs/gutters or other stormwater conveyance system, unless otherwise approved by the administering authority. Measures shall be taken to minimize erosion and runoff from any soil stockpiles that will likely remain for more than five working days. Any soil stockpile that remains for more than 30 days shall be covered or treated with stabilization practices such as temporary or permanent seeding and mulching. 
(m)  Sediment cleanup. All off-site sediment deposits occurring as a result of construction work or a storm event shall be cleaned up by the end of each day. Flushing shall not be allowed. 
(n)  Final site stabilization. All disturbed areas shall be treated with stabilization measures such as seeding, mulching, soil treatment, erosion netting, matting, sodding, etc. within three working days of final grading. Large sites shall be treated in stages as final grading is completed in each stage. Any soil erosion that occurs after final grading and/or the application of stabilization measures must be repaired and the stabilization work redone. 
(o)  Temporary site stabilization. For any disturbed area that remains inactive for greater than seven working days, or where grading work extends beyond the permanent seeding deadlines established by the Village Board, the administering authority may require the site to be treated with temporary stabilization measures such as soil treatment, temporary seeding and/or mulching in addition to other erosion control measures as part of an approved erosion control plan. 
(p)  Removal of practices. When the disturbed area has been stabilized by permanent vegetation or other means, temporary best management practices such as silt fences, straw bales and sediment traps shall be removed and these areas stabilized. 
(4)  Final erosion control plan contents. 
(a)  Sites of less than one acre of total land disturbance. The following shall be the minimum requirements for items to be included in a final erosion control plan: 
1.  A scaled drawing of the site with a north arrow, delineation of the proposed land disturbance, existing and proposed buildings, roads, access drives, property boundaries, drainage ways, water bodies, trees, culverts, and other structures within 50 feet of the proposed land disturbance; 
2.  The direction and steepness of slopes before and after the proposed land disturbance; 
3.  A description and location of all temporary best management practices proposed to be used to minimize off-site impacts during the construction phase; 
4.  A description and location of all permanent best management practices proposed to be used to stabilize the site within 3 working days following construction; 
5.  The name, address and day time phone number of the person(s) charged with installing and maintaining all best management practices and thus subject to the enforcement provisions of section 87-13 of this chapter; and 
6.  Other information determined to be necessary by the administering authority to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Sites of one acre or greater in total land disturbance. The following shall be the minimum requirements for items to be included in an erosion control plan: 
1.  Existing site map and data. A map and supporting data of existing site conditions at a scale of one inch equals no more than 100 feet showing the following items on the site and within 50 feet in each direction of the site boundaries: 
a.  Ownership boundaries and other references that will accurately identify site location; 
b.  Name, address and daytime telephone number of the applicant; 
c.  Site topography at a contour interval not to exceed two feet; 
d.  Location and name, if applicable, of all lakes streams and other water bodies as defined on a 7.5-minute topographic map published by the U.S. Geological Survey; 
e.  Location and name, if applicable, of all other channels, ditches, and other water courses or areas of channelized flow; 
f.  Location and name, if applicable, of all wetlands, as defined on the official wetland zoning maps at the Washington County Planning and Parks Department and as defined by the USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) under federal jurisdiction and definition; 
g.  Boundaries of shoreland zones, 100-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways, as defined on the official shoreland and floodplain zoning maps at the Washington County Planning and Parks Department; 
h.  Boundaries and soil symbol for each soil mapping unit, as published in the Soil Survey of Washington County (Note: This item may be on a separate map at smaller scale showing key locations of proposed land disturbing or land development activity); 
i.  Location and description of trees and other vegetative cover types; 
j.  Location, dimensions and contributing watershed area delineations and flow calculations for all existing stormwater drainage systems and natural flow paths or channels entering and/or leaving the site; 
k.  Locations and dimensions of any buildings, roads, parking areas, fence lines, access lanes, rock outcrops, tile drains, utilities and other physical features or structures; 
l.  Location and support documentation for any well currently located on the site and/or delineation of any regulatory setback distances of other wells, as stated in Wis. Adm. Code NR chs. 811 and 812; 
m.  Locations and dimensions of any easements, right-of-ways, building setbacks or other restrictions; 
n.  Location of primary environmental corridor boundaries, as defined by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission; 
o.  Any other existing site information that the administering authority determines to be necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  Site development plan. A site development plan, using the same map scale as the existing site map, shall include the following map items and supporting documentation: 
a.  Locations and dimensions of all proposed land development and land disturbing activities, including proposed cuts, fills and two-foot contours of final grade; 
b.  Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil stockpiles, the estimated length of time they will exist and any applicable erosion control method; 
c.  Locations, dimensions and applicable design documentation for all temporary and permanent best management practices necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter; 
d.  Location, dimensions, supporting flow calculations and stabilization plans for the proposed construction or modification of any open channels; 
e.  A construction schedule, including the sequence and anticipated starting and completion date for each construction step and the installation of best management practices needed to meet the requirements of this chapter; 
f.  Description of maintenance responsibilities for all temporary best management practices; 
g.  The name(s) and daytime phone number(s) of the person(s) charged with the responsibility of installing and maintaining all best management practices until the completion of a satisfactory final inspection by the administering authority under section 87-11(5) of this chapter ( Note: All persons so designated shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of section 87-13 of this chapter, should they fail to insure compliance with this chapter); 
h.  Location and description of individual trees greater than eight inches in diameter at four feet above existing mean ground level, that are proposed to be lost and plans for replacement, if practical; 
i.  Description of site revegetation and stabilization plans, including topsoil and subsoil reapplication, seeding mixtures, fertilizer, rates of application, time schedule and maintenance responsibilities until the grass and/or other plants are well established; and 
j.  Detailed drawings, including profiles, cross-sections, and other information determined to be necessary by the administering authority to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
k.  Certification, from a professional engineer registered in the State of Wisconsin, that all computations and designs included in the final erosion control plan have been reviewed and approved as being in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The name, address and daytime phone and FAX number of the engineer must also be included for contact during the plan review process. 
(5)  Preliminary erosion control plan. Preliminary erosion control plans shall contain the same information listed under subsection (4)(b) above, with the exception of subsection (4)(b)2.b., f., g., above, the supporting documentation in subsection (4)(b)2.d., above, and the starting and completion dates in subsection (4)(b)2.e., above. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.08, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-9. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(1)  General requirements. 
(a)  A stormwater management plan, prepared in accordance with this chapter shall maintain, as nearly as practical, the site's natural drainage patterns and assumed predevelopment peak flows. In addition, measures shall be taken to prevent or minimize the pollution of surface waters and groundwater resources, damage to downstream property and local flooding as a result of permanent stormwater discharges from the proposed land development. 
(b)  All stormwater management plans and best management practice designs prepared under this chapter shall comply with the plan requirements of this section and technical standards and specifications described in sec. 87-10 of this chapter. 
(2)  Exception-Regional stormwater management plans. 
(a)  In lieu of submitting a preliminary or final stormwater management plan for an individual site, an applicant may submit documentation of the following: 
1.  A regional stormwater management plan, that: 
a.  Includes the entire area of the proposed land development activity; 
b.  Is prepared in accordance with the general requirements of subsection (1) above and the regional stormwater management planning technical guidelines adopted by the village board under section 87-10(3) of this chapter; and 
c.  Is approved by the village board and all other applicable units of government included in the planning area. 
2.  A site development plan, in accordance with subsection (5)(b) below, for the planned development showing any on-site stormwater best management practices recommended in the regional stormwater management plan; 
3.  Certification, by a professional engineer registered in the State of Wisconsin, that any stormwater best management practice(s) planned to treat the runoff from the area of the proposed land development as part of a regional stormwater management plan, has been constructed in accordance with the technical standards and specifications under section 87-10 of this chapter, if applicable; and 
4.  Documentation that there is an entity with the legal obligation for operation and maintenance of any applicable stormwater management facility in accordance with section 87-12 of this chapter, if applicable. 
(b)  Upon certification by the administering authority that all of the conditions of subsection (a) above have been met, and the submitted materials are in compliance with the regional stormwater management plan, an application shall be deemed as meeting the stormwater management planning requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  As a condition of an erosion and runoff control permit, the applicant may be required to pay a fee or meet other requirements, as determined by the applicable entity charged with the implementation of the regional stormwater management plan. Any fee would be based on an equitable distribution of the cost for land, engineering design, construction, and maintenance of stormwater management practices needed to serve the land development through the regional stormwater management plan. 
(3)  Guiding principles. To satisfy the requirements of this section, unless otherwise waived under section 87-5(4) of this chapter, all proposed land development activities shall, to the extent practical: 
(a)  Be planned and implemented in a manner that best fits the terrain of the site, avoiding steep slopes and other environmentally sensitive areas; 
(b)  Preserve natural watershed boundaries and drainage patterns; 
(c)  Maintain groundwater recharge areas and the infiltration capacity of native soils by avoiding the unnecessary filling of large natural depressions or compaction of upper soil horizons by construction equipment; 
(d)  Utilize natural or constructed vegetated swales or reinforced permeable open channels for stormwater conveyance and attenuation; 
(e)  Minimize impervious surfaces and have them drain to vegetated areas for flow attenuation, pollutant filtering and groundwater recharge; and 
(f)  Reserve adequately sized areas to allow for detention of flows and treatment of pollutants from stormwater before being discharged from the site. 
(4)  Specific stormwater management requirements and performance standards. Except where provided for under subsecrtion (2) above, or waived under section 87-5(4) of this chapter, all land development activities subject to the provisions of this subsection shall provide on-site stormwater management plans, practices and facilities that meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Peak flows. To minimize streambank erosion and the failure of downstream conveyance systems, the post-development peak flow discharge rates of stormwater runoff shall not exceed the calculated predevelopment discharge rates for both the two-year 24-hour and the ten-year 24-hour design storms in accordance with the standards in section 87-10(1) of this chapter. Additional peak flow controls may be required under subsection (4)(e) below. Note: This will require a multiple-staged outlet in some stormwater management facilities. 
(b)  Stormwater quality. The first one-half-inch of stormwater runoff (commonly referred to as the "first flush") shall, to the extent practical, be treated to remove suspended solids, nutrients, organic matter, trace metals, hydrocarbons and other pollutants associated with the planned land development activity. At a minimum, any best management practice that relies on ponding runoff and settling the suspended solids shall be designed for settling, on an average annual basis, 80 percent of the total estimated suspended solids load. The administering authority may require a higher level of controls if the administering authority determines that the site has a high risk of water pollution or may otherwise significantly impact an environmentally sensitive area, and that further controls are practical. 
(c)  Protection of wetlands. Stormwater discharges shall minimize the hydrologic changes and pollutant loadings to wetlands, to the extent practical, in order to preserve the wetland functional values. All discharges to wetlands shall require the same protection as subsections (a) and (b) above, unless otherwise approved by any other applicable regulatory agency and the administering authority in accordance with technical standards adopted under section 87-10 of this chapter. If any land disturbing activity is proposed in a wetland as part of a final stormwater management plan, the administering authority may require all other applicable permits to be obtained prior to the issuance of an erosion and runoff control permit. 
(d)  Protection of groundwater quality. 
1.  Stormwater discharges shall prevent the introduction of pollutants in the groundwater at concentrations that will likely exceed groundwater preventive action limits or enforcement standards established by the Department of Natural Resources in Wis. Adm. Code NR 140. Pretreatment shall be provided for all stormwater management facilities that will likely violate this subsection, as determined by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or stated in the technical standards adopted under section 87-10 of this chapter. 
2.  Stormwater structures shall not be installed that meet the definition of an injection well under Wis. Adm. Code NR 812.05. 
3.  Stormwater ponds and infiltration devices shall not be located closer to water supply wells than allowed by the Department of Natural Resources in Wis. Adm. Code NR chs. 811 and 812. 
4.  If a wellhead protection plan has been approved for any area included in the proposed land development, the administering authority shall consult with the appropriate authority to ensure compliance with any recommendations or regulations contained in that plan. 
(e)  Flooding. All stormwater management facilities shall have the capacity to safely handle the calculated peak flow rates for a 100-year 24-hour design storm without structural failure, bank erosion, loss of freeboard or other problems. At a minimum, an emergency spillway must be provided to carry these flows. Additional control measures, such as infiltration practices or maintaining predevelopment peak flows for the 100-year design storm, may be required if the administering authority determines that the proposed land development activity has a high risk of creating or significantly compounding downstream flooding or chronic wetness problems. 
(f)  Soil investigations. Soil profile investigations shall be conducted at each site proposed for the construction of a stormwater management facility. Each excavation shall extend a minimum of three feet below the proposed bottom of the facility or any component of the facility, such as infiltration trenches. An adequate number of excavations shall be conducted to examine all soil types present in the immediate area of the proposed facility, as determined by the administering authority. Each soil investigation site shall be located on the site development plan, under subsection (5)(b) below along with the elevation, to the nearest tenth of a foot, of the original ground surface. A soil tester, certified in the State of Wisconsin, or the administering authority is required to log the soil profile and groundwater elevation(s). The administering authority may require an inspection of the soil profile when it is logged by another party. 
(5)  Final stormwater management plan contents. The following shall be the minimum requirements for items to be included in a final stormwater management plan: 
(a)  Existing site map and data. The requirements for the existing site map and data are the same as those listed under subsection 87-8(4)(b)1 of this chapter. 
(b)  Site development plan. A site development plan, using the same map scale as the existing site map, shall include the following map items and supporting documentation: 
1.  Locations and dimensions of all proposed land development activities, including proposed cuts, fills and two-foot contours; 
2.  Delineation and labeling of all proposed impervious areas and accompanying area computations; 
3.  Location of all proposed stormwater conveyance systems and grade stabilization structures, including grade lines, cross-sections, flow/velocity computations based on a ten-year 24-hour design storm, and the delineation of proposed subwatersheds for each reach (Note: For watershed areas that extend outside of the boundaries of the site map, other scaled maps may be used); 
4.  Location of all proposed stormwater best management practices and facilities, including plan views, cross-sections, profiles, inlet/outlet and other detail drawings and supporting flow computations; 
5.  Summary of hydrologic and hydraulic computations prepared to meet the requirements of subsection (4) above, and for the design of all stormwater management facilities. All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be clearly stated, and all geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map(s); 
6.  Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required under subsection (4)(e) above, including location and elevation of each investigation site, for the placement and design of stormwater management facilities; 
7.  Location(s) and dimensions of all proposed easements or other methods used to ensure the preservation of flow paths and adequate access for maintenance purposes, in accordance with section 87-12 of this chapter; 
8.  Certification, from a professional engineer registered in the State of Wisconsin, that all calculations and designs included in the final stormwater management plan have been reviewed and approved as being in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
9.  The name, address and daytime phone and FAX number of the contact person during the plan review process, the construction supervisor, and the engineer that will certify construction of all stormwater management facilities under section 87-11(4) of this chapter; 
10.  For sites where changes are proposed in stormwater flow paths, or where proposed stormwater discharges may otherwise have a significant negative impact on downstream property owner(s), the administering authority may require the applicant to obtain written authorization or complete other legal arrangements with the affected property owner(s); and 
11.  Other items deemed necessary by the administering authority to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(6)  Preliminary stormwater management plan contents. Preliminary stormwater management plans shall contain the same information listed under subsection (5) above, with the following exceptions: 
(a)  No computations will be required for stormwater conveyance systems, water control structures or other individual system components; and 
(b)  No detail drawings, cross-sections or profiles will be required unless the administering authority determines they are necessary to assess the general feasibility of the preliminary stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.09, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-10. - Technical standards and specifications. 
(1)  Hydrologic and hydraulic computations. 
(a)  All computations of runoff volumes and peak flow rates used in the development of erosion control and stormwater management plans in accordance with this chapter shall be based on the principles of Technical Release 55 (TR-55), "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds", published by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), United States Department of Agriculture, June 1986 revision, using Type II design storms. To determine compliance with this chapter (for Washington County), the following design storms values shall be used: 
Design Storm 1-year 
24-hour 2-year 
24-hour 10-year 
24-hour 100-year 
24-hour Rainfall depth 2.3 inches 2.7 inches 3.9 inches 5.5 inches  
(b)  All computations of predevelopment conditions as required under section 87-9(4)(a) of this chapter shall use those TR-55 runoff curve numbers assigned for a "good" hydrologic condition for each land cover type. For lands where the predevelopment land use was cropland, the following TR-55 curve number values shall be used as maximums: 
Soil Hydrologic Group A B C D NRCS Runoff Curve Number 56 70 78 82  
(c)  All velocity and peak flow computations for open channels and storm sewer pipe flows shall be based on Mannings Formula. 
(d)  Flow routing, culvert design, weir and orifice flow and other related hydraulic computations used to design stormwater management facilities shall be based on standard applicable engineering formulas. 
(e)  Any data or design method proposed to be used for hydrologic or hydraulic computations other than those listed above shall be approved in advance in writing by the administering authority. 
(2)  Best management practice design standards. The design of all best management practices used to meet the requirements of this chapter shall comply with the following technical standards: 
(a)  The Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook, published by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources; 
(b)  Chapter IV of the Field Office Technical Guide, published by the United States Department of Agriculture - Natural Resource Conservation Service; and 
(c)  Other technical standards published or adopted by the above noted agencies, the Wisconsin Standards Oversight Council or the Land Conservation Committee. 
(3)  Technical guidelines. The land conservation committee may adopt technical guidelines to assist with the consistent administration of certain portions of this chapter where more specific standards currently do not exist, are insufficient or are subject to rapid change. The land conservation committee shall seek the expertise of other agencies and organizations in the development and maintenance of technical guidelines under this subsection. 
(4)  Construction specifications. The construction or installation of all best management practices and other structures shall comply with all the construction specifications adopted by the village board, including standard seeding or sodding deadlines for site stabilization. 
(5)  Availability. Copies of all technical standards, guidelines and specifications adopted by the village board shall be available for review and distribution through the village clerk. Fees may be charged for copies of these items in accordance with a fee schedule established by the village board. 
(6)  Future revisions or updates. The technical standards, guidelines and specifications referenced in this section are made a part of the chapter and shall be updated periodically in order to keep current with field experiences, research, technological advances and the development of related technical standards by other agencies and units of government. Any future revision or update of the technical standards or specifications incorporated herein are also made part of this chapter unless otherwise acted upon by the village board. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.10, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-11. - Permit requirements. 
(1)  General conditions. For all permits issued under this chapter, the permit holder shall: 
(a)  Obtain all other applicable federal, state, county or local permits and comply with all other applicable regulations. The administering authority may require the applicant to obtain other permits or plan approvals prior to issuing an erosion and runoff control permit. 
(b)  Complete all activities in accordance with the plan(s) and construction schedule approved by the administering authority. Any significant changes made during implementation without prior approval by the administering authority shall be subject to enforcement action under section 87-13 of this chapter. 
(c)  Notify the administering authority at least 24 hours in advance of commencing any work associated with the permit. The administering authority may require further notification of work on various stages of construction or upon completion of individual components for inspection purposes. 
(d)  Authorize the administering authority access to the property to perform inspections and to carry out any necessary enforcement activities under section 87-13 of this chapter. 
(e)  Inspect all best management practices after each rain event of one-half inch or more, or at least once each week, and make any needed repairs. The permit holder shall maintain best management practices until the financial guarantee under subsection (3) below is released by the administering authority. 
(f)  Clean up all off-site sediment deposits and repair any erosion or other damage occurring as a result of construction work or a storm event at the end of each work day, or within any other time period approved by the administering authority. Flushing of sediment is not allowed. 
(2)  Permit issuance and duration. 
(a)  The administering authority shall establish an expiration date for all permits issued under this chapter. The expiration date shall not exceed 18 months and shall be based on the construction schedules submitted by the applicant under section 87-8(4)(b)1.e. and i. of this chapter, and the technical standards and specifications adopted by the village board under section 87-10 of this chapter. 
(b)  The administering authority may grant longer permit periods or grant extensions to existing permits if deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter or village board policy. The administering authority may require additional erosion and runoff control measures as a condition of granting longer permit periods or permit extensions. 
(c)  In accordance with the technical standards and specifications in sec. 87-10 of this chapter, the administering authority may withhold issuance, suspend or revoke an erosion and runoff control permit, or require a change in the proposed construction schedule as a condition of a permit under subsection (1) above, if the administering authority determines that all of the following apply: 
1.  The proposed or actual land disturbing activity will exceed standard deadlines for seeding and sodding; 
2.  Runoff or erosion from the site may significantly impact an environmentally sensitive area or cause other off-site environmental or property damage; and 
3.  The applicant or permit holder is unable or unwilling to provide other approved measures to minimize off-site impacts. 
(3)  Financial guarantee. 
(a)  Purpose and type. A bond, escrow or letter of credit in a form approved by the administering authority shall be required for all erosion and runoff control permits issued to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Amount. The amount of the financial guarantee shall be determined by the administering authority and shall be based on the estimated costs of construction of the best management practices in the approved erosion control and/or stormwater management plan(s) plus any costs for best management practice maintenance that may be needed during the construction phase or immediately after the site is stabilized, such as sediment removal. 
(c)  Security. Each financial guarantee shall be accompanied by a written agreement outlining its purpose, applicable amounts and all of the conditions for release. 
(d)  Conditions for release. 
1.  The administering authority shall release the financial guarantee only after determining full compliance with the requirements of the permit and this chapter, including the following: 
a.  Certification of construction by a professional engineer, in accordance with subsection(4) below; 
b.  Completion of a satisfactory final inspection by the administering authority in accordance with subsection (5) below; 
c.  Submittal of a copy of the recorded maintenance agreement, in accordance with section 87-12 of this chapter. 
2.  The permit holder may apply for a prorated release of the financial guarantee based on the completion or partial completion of various construction components or satisfaction of individual requirements of subsection (d) above. 
3.  The administering authority shall withhold from the financial guarantee amount released to the permit holder, any costs incurred by the county to complete installation or maintenance of best management practices through enforcement action, as described in section 87-13 of this chapter, or prior to the transfer of maintenance responsibilities through an approved maintenance agreement, or other unpaid fees or costs incurred by the county associated with the administration of this section. 
(e)  Other financial guarantees. The financial guarantee provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to any other financial guarantee requirements of the town board for other site improvements. Any arrangements made to combine the financial guarantee provisions of this chapter with other related requirements shall be made at the discretion of the administering authority. 
(4)  Construction certification. 
(a)  A professional engineer, licensed in the State of Wisconsin, shall be in responsible charge and certify that the construction of all stormwater management facilities, and other best management practices as determined by the administering authority, comply with the plan(s) approved by the administering authority and the technical standards and specifications of section 87-10 of this chapter. 
(b)  "As-built" plans shall be submitted for all stormwater management facilities and other permanent best management practices or practice components as deemed necessary by the administering authority to ensure compliance with this chapter. As-built plans shall document, on maps and drawings of the same scale and quality as the site development plan, actual location, elevations, materials, construction specifications and other items and be certified by the project engineer. 
(5)  Final inspection. After completion of construction, the administering authority shall conduct a final inspection of all sites regulated by this chapter to assist in determining compliance with the approved plan(s) and other applicable requirements, the permit and this chapter. If upon inspection, the administering authority determines that any of the applicable requirements have not been met, the administering authority shall notify the permit holder what changes would be necessary to meet the requirements. At the request of the permit holder, the administering authority shall provide notification of noncompliance or a report of final inspection in written or electronic form. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.11, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-12. - Maintenance of stormwater management facilities. 
(1)  Maintenance agreement required. A maintenance agreement between the local municipality or other approved unit of government and the proposed property owner(s) shall be required for all stormwater management facilities installed to comply with the requirements of this chapter. The agreement shall be independent of all other restrictions or covenants and shall be prepared in accordance with this section. 
(2)  Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall, at a minimum, contain the following information and provisions: 
(a)  Identification of the owner(s) of the land parcel where the stormwater management facility is located; 
(b)  Identification of each type of stormwater management facility and a general description of its purpose and design, including but not limited to facility dimensions, inlet and outlet design and dimensions and the drainage area served by the facility; 
(c)  A description of all long term maintenance activities that may or will be required for each stormwater management facility, and an estimated time interval between each activity; 
(d)  Granting of an access easement for access to all stormwater management facilities that is a minimum of 15 feet wide, not including drainage easements, right-of-ways or other restricted areas, and a minimum 12-foot wide travel lane within this area that is capable of withstanding construction equipment loads for future maintenance work. 
(e)  Identification of the landowner(s), organization, municipality or other entity responsible for long term maintenance of the stormwater management facility; 
(f)  Authorization for access to the property by employees of the village board, the ordinance administrator, and employees of the Washington County Land Conservation Department to conduct periodic inspections of the facility, monitor its performance and maintenance, and notify the designated entity when maintenance or repair activities are necessary; 
(g)  Recognition that, upon written notification, the designated entity shall, within a reasonable time period, complete any needed maintenance or repair work recommended as a result of an inspection of the facility; 
(h)  Authorization for the village, Washington County and/or other designated authority to carry out any maintenance activities if the designated entity does not perform the required maintenance or repair work within the time period specified in subsection (g) above; 
(i)  Recognition that the applicable local government may exercise their statutory authority to levy and collect special assessments and charges under § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., for any services carried out relating to subsection (h) above; 
(j)  Language confirming that the entire agreement shall remain binding among all parties to and within the agreement, until changes are mutually agreed to in writing by all parties. Any changes made to the agreement must maintain the minimum items listed in this subsection and the long term maintenance of the stormwater management facility; 
(k)  Other information as determined to be necessary by the administering authority or the land conservation committee to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(3)  Agreement approval and recording. 
(a)  The administering authority shall ensure that all submitted maintenance agreements comply with subsection (2) above. If the agreement does not comply, the administering authority shall notify the applicant or permit holder what changes are needed in order to comply. 
(b)  Upon certification of compliance with subsection (2) above by the administering authority, the maintenance agreement shall be recorded at the Washington County Register of Deeds referencing any plat, certified survey or other ownership transfer device pertaining to land which contains a stormwater management facility or is subject to maintenance responsibility in the approved agreement. The agreement as recorded shall ensure that the maintenance requirements are binding on all subsequent owners of the property upon which the stormwater management facility is located and that the restrictions run with the land and on any other property which is subject to maintenance responsibility in the agreement. 
(c)  The permit holder shall provide a copy of the recorded agreement, including evidence of the actual recording(s), to the ordinance administrator. 
(4)  Agreement form. The maintenance agreement requirements of this section may, at the discretion of the ordinance administrator, be a separate document or may be incorporated into a developers agreement. The form of the document proposed for recording shall be reviewed and approved by the ordinance administrator. Any method used shall comply with all of the requirements of this section. 
(5)  Maintenance responsibilities prior to a maintenance agreement. The permit holder shall be responsible for the maintenance of all stormwater management facilities prior to a satisfactory final inspection under section 87-11(5) of this chapter and the release of a financial guarantee under section 87-11(3) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.12, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-13. - Enforcement. 
(1)  Administering authority. The ordinance administrator is authorized to administer and enforce compliance with this chapter. The ordinance administrator shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Advise applicants as to the requirements of this chapter and assist them in filling out forms and other related administrative procedures. 
(b)  Review applications, issue permits, and make all determinations stated in this chapter. 
(c)  Conduct on-site inspections and investigate complaints in a timely manner to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Maintain records of all permits issued, inspections and determinations made, work approved, enforcement action and other official action. 
(e)  Make recommendations to the land conservation committee on any revisions or updates to this chapter, including keeping all technical standards, construction specifications and administrative tools current and advising on policy issues. 
(f)  Assist the board of adjustment with the appeal process by providing the necessary information for their consideration and action. 
(g)  Carry out duties relating to ensuring the long term maintenance of stormwater management facilities, such as site inspections and making recommendations for needed repairs or maintenance, in accordance with approved working agreements. 
(2)  Prohibited practices. It shall be deemed a violation, and be subject to enforcement action, for any person, firm, association, corporation or other entity subject to the requirements of this chapter to do in any of the following: 
(a)  Commence in any land disturbing or land development activity prior to: 
1.  Obtaining an erosion and runoff control permit; 
2.  Notifying the ordinance administrator a minimum of 24 hours in advance of commencement of the activity; 
3.  Installing those best management practices identified in the approved plan(s) to be installed prior to any land disturbing or land developing activity. 
(b)  Fail to follow the approved plan(s), or other permit conditions, including but not limited to the required construction sequence, practice installation and technical standards or specifications. 
(c)  Fail to maintain, repair or replace any best management practice deemed ineffective prior to the release of a financial guarantee. 
(3)  Violations. 
(a)  The ordinance administrator is authorized to use the following methods of enforcement in any combination thereof against any person, firm, association, corporation or other entity that is found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter: 
1.  Forfeiture. Any violator shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00 plus the cost of prosecution for each violation. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
2.  Stop work order. Any violator is subject to an order to stop all work except that which is needed as a corrective action to bring the site into compliance, or the corporation counsel may be requested to obtain a temporary restraining order and such other remedial court orders as shall be necessary to ensure compliance. 
3.  Permit revocation. The ordinance administrator may revoke a permit issued under this chapter and the village may withhold other permits or approvals, if the ordinance administrator determines that the permit holder is not making a good faith effort to comply with the conditions of the permit. Upon loss of the permit, all construction shall cease and the site shall be stabilized, with any costs incurred by the county or local government to be charged against the financial guarantee. 
4.  Emergency action. The village may enter upon the property and take any necessary emergency action if the ordinance administrator determines that the site in violation is an immediate threat to public health, safety, welfare, the environment or downstream property, or if the permit holder or other violator refuses to take the corrective action as ordered by the ordinance administrator. Any cost incurred by the village as a result of this action shall be billed to the permit holder or subtracted from the financial guarantee provided by the permit holder. Failure to pay said costs on a timely basis shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Any enforcement measures shall continue until compliance is achieved or as ordered by the court. 
(c)  The ordinance administrator shall notify the permit holder, in writing, of any violation. The written notice shall be hand delivered to the permit holder or sent by certified mail and shall describe the violation, remedial action(s) needed, a schedule for all remedial action to be completed, and additional enforcement action which may be taken. 
(d)  The schedule established by the ordinance administrator for required remedial action shall be based on a reasonable amount of time required to carry out the remedial action. 
(e)  Private enforcement. Any person affected by activities regulated under this chapter may enforce the provisions of this chapter by private action seeking an injunction. 
(4)  Responsible party. For purposes of determining the responsible party or parties for any enforcement action under this chapter, the phrase "person, firm, association, corporation or other entity" as used in this chapter shall include, as the context requires, any owner, lessee, tenant, mortgagee, trustee, land contract vendor or vendee, or other holder of any legal or equitable interest in the particular land subject to this chapter and shall also include any contractor, subcontractor, engineer, consultant, agent or employee retained or acting on behalf of any of the preceding and having any material responsibility or having undertaken any activity with respect to the particular land subject to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.13, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-14. - Appeals. 
(1)  Authority. The board of adjustment shall act as the review and appeal authority for any order, requirement, decision or determination by the ordinance administrator under this chapter. 
(2)  Procedure. The rules, procedures, duties and powers of the board of adjustment shall be as provided in the county code and the provisions of § 59.694, Wis. Stats., shall apply to any review or appeal under this chapter. 
(3)  Variances. Upon appeal, the board of adjustment may authorize variances from the provisions of this chapter which are not contrary to the public interest or the purpose of this chapter, and where owing to special conditions beyond the control of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. 
(4)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by an officer, department or board of the village affected by any decision of the ordinance administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.14, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-15. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.15, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 87-16. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meaning: 
    Affected as used in section 87-13(3)(e) of this chapter, means that a regulated activity has significantly: 
(a)  Caused negative impacts on water quality or the use or maintenance of one's property or business; or 
(b)  Endangered one's health, safety or general welfare. 
    Agricultural crops means any plant grown for the purpose of harvest to support a business. 
    Best management practice means a practice, technique or measure that is an effective, practical means of preventing or reducing soil erosion and/or water pollution from runoff both during and after land development activities. These can include structural, vegetative or management practices. 
    Common plan of development means all lands included within the boundary of one or more certified surveys or other land divisions where multiple, separate and distinct land development activity may occur at different times. 
    Construction site erosion control means preventing or reducing soil erosion and sedimentation from land disturbing activity. 
    Design storm means a hypothetical depth of rainfall that would occur for the stated return frequency (e.g. two-year or ten-year) and duration (e.g. 24-hour). All values are based on the historical rainfall records for the area and are available for reference in many publications. (Note: See section 87-10(1) of this chapter for a table of applicable design storms for Washington County.) 
    Environmentally sensitive area means any area that, due to the natural resources present or the lack of filtering capacity, is significantly more susceptible to the negative impacts of sedimentation and other pollutants associated with erosion and urban runoff. Examples include direct hydrologic connections to lakes, stream, wetlands or other water resources, very coarse or shallow soils to groundwater or bedrock, or areas inhabited by endangered resources. 
    Final grading means the placement of topsoil over disturbed areas in accordance with the requirements of section 87-8(3) of this chapter. 
    Impervious surface means any land cover that prevents rain or melting snow from soaking into the ground, such as roofs (including overhangs), roads, sidewalks, patios, driveways and parking lots. For purposes of this chapter, all road, driveway or parking surfaces, including gravel, shall be considered impervious, unless specifically designed to encourage infiltration and approved by the ordinance administrator. 
    Impractical means that complying with a specific requirement would cause undue economic hardship and that special conditions exist which are beyond the control of the applicant and would prevent compliance. 
    Infiltration means the process by which rainfall or runoff seeps into the soil. 
    Intercept soil transport means the process of trying to prevent delivery of sediment by installing a silt fence or some other form of sediment trap in the flow path to slow flows and settle the suspended soil particles. 
    Land conservation department means the county department that is charged with implementing the soil and water conservation policies and programs of the Washington County Land Conservation Committee, under ch. 92, Wis. Stats. 
    Land disturbing activity means any construction related activity that exposes soil to the erosive forces of wind, rain and snow melt. Land disturbing activities include removing vegetative cover, grading, excavating and filling. It does not include the planting, growing and harvesting of agricultural crops or mining activity that is otherwise regulated through a local mine reclamation ordinance. 
    Land development activity means any construction related activity that results in the addition or replacement of impervious surfaces such as rooftops, roads, parking lots and other structures. 
    No appreciable off-site impact means that the impact of any land disturbing or land development activity on off-site property or natural resources would be negligible due to site conditions, such as internal drainage or a very large vegetative buffer area surrounding a small building project. 
    Peak flow means the highest flow rate of runoff, measured in cubic feet per second, that would normally result from a given design storm. 
    Permanent best management practice means any best management practice that is designed to remain in place after the development is complete. They are designed to stabilize the site or to permanently manage stormwater runoff. 
    Practical means that complying with a specific requirement does not cause undue economic hardship and that special conditions do not exist which are beyond the control of the applicant and would prevent compliance. 
    Predevelopment condition means the conditions of the land surface, including vegetative cover and natural drainage patterns, prior to the proposed land development activity. For purposes of this chapter, all predevelopment conditions shall assume good land management and good hydrologic condition, as stated in TR-55. 
    Regional stormwater management plan means a published document that establishes a planned course of action for managing stormwater runoff from an entire drainage area or watershed, including future land development activities within the watershed. A regional stormwater management plan will recommend the use of best management practices for individual development sites and for selected points within the watershed to meet the goals and objectives of the plan. 
    Roads means, as used in section 87-5(2)(b) of this chapter, any access drive that serves more than two residences or businesses. 
    Runoff means any rain or melting snow that flows over the ground surface. Also referred to as "stormwater runoff". 
    Shoreland/wetland/floodplain zone means the land area that is within the districts identified as the shoreland/wetland/floodplain zone on the official zoning maps of the Washington County Land Use and Park Department. The shoreland zone generally includes all lands within 300 feet of a navigable stream or 1,000 feet from a lake shore. The wetland and floodplain zoning districts may extend beyond the shoreland zone. 
    Soil detachment means the first step in the soil erosion process, or the dislodging of the soil particle from raindrop impact, water flow or wind. After detachment, the soil particle can be suspended and carried in runoff or wind to another site. Soil detachment is reduced by providing a vegetative or synthetic cover over the soil surface or through the application of soil treatment measures designed for this purpose. 
    Stabilized means that vegetation is well established or other surfacing material is in place and the risk of further soil erosion is minimal. 
    Stormwater management means any measures taken to permanently reduce or minimize the negative impacts of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from urban areas after land development activities. 
    Stormwater management facility means any structural best management practice, such as a retention pond, infiltration basin or other physical structure, that is designed to collect and permanently manage the quantity and/or quality of stormwater runoff. 
    Subsoil means the "B" horizon in any natural soil profile. Natural soil profiles are described in detail in the Soil Survey of Washington County. 
    Temporary best management practice means any best management practice that is intended to reduce soil erosion and/or sediment in runoff during the construction phase only, and is intended to be removed after the site is stabilized. 
    Topsoil means the "A" horizon found in any natural soil profile not formed from organic material. Natural soil profiles are described in detail in the Soil Survey of Washington County. 
    Total suspended solids load means the total weight of material, including sediment and other solids, that is assumed to be carried in the runoff water and discharged from the site based on runoff models for urban lands. For best management practice design purposes, a five micron particle size is usually selected as a target to achieve 80 percent total suspended solids removal rate, as required in section 87-9(4) of this chapter. 
    Watershed means the total area of land where runoff drains to a specific point on the landscape. It is also referred to as the drainage area. 
    Wetland functional values means the type, quality and significance of the ecological and cultural benefits provided by the wetland, such as: flood storage, water quality protection, groundwater recharge and discharge, shoreline protection, fish and wildlife habitat, floral diversity, aesthetics, recreation and education. 
    Working day means a day when the ordinance administrator and other local businesses are routinely and customarily open for business, not including Saturdays, Sundays or scheduled holidays. When used in section 87-8 of this chapter, relating to specific erosion control requirements, the term working days shall not include any days that site stabilization activities could not reasonably be carried out due to inclement weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 87.16, 4-1-02) 
Chapters 88, 89 - RESERVED 
Chapter 90 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Moving buildings, § 14-121 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority regarding traffic generally, § 349.06, Wis. Stats. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - State traffic laws adopted. 
(a)  Highways. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions of chs. 340-348 and 350, Wis. Stats., and ch. 110, Wis. Adm. Code, describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles, snowmobiles and traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, including penalties to be imposed and procedure for prosecution, are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth in this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated in this section are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of the state. For purposes of this Code, such adopted statutes may be prefixed by the number 7. 
(b)  Nonhighway. Subsection (a) of this section adopting state motor vehicle laws, in addition to being applicable upon highways, as defined by the laws of the state, shall be applicable upon all premises within the village held out to the public for use of their motor vehicles, whether such premises are publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use of such streets. The penalty for a violation under this subsection shall be limited to a forfeiture under section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 7.01) 
Sec. 90-2. - Speed limits. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle in excess of the speed limit posted on any street or highway within the village limits and indicated on the official traffic control map of the village adopted by reference and on file in the office of the police department. 
(Code 1983, § 7.02) 
Sec. 90-3. - Penalty. 
(a)  Generally. The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a forfeiture and penalty assessment if required by § 165.87, Wis. Stats., and the jail assessment if required by § 302.46(1), Wis. Stats., plus any applicable fees prescribed in ch. 814, Wis. Stats. Only those violations of ordinances adopted under the sections of the Wisconsin Statutes listed below are exempt from the penalty assessment: 
346.50 Exceptions to Stopping and Parking Restrictions 346.51 Stopping, Standing or Parking Outside of Business or Residence Districts 346.52 Stopping Prohibited in Certain Specified Places 346.53 Parking Prohibited in Certain Specified Places 346.54 How to Park and Stop on Streets 346.55 Other Restrictions on Parking and Stopping 349.13 Authority to Regulate the Stopping, Standing or Parking of Vehicles 349.14 Authority to Use Parking Meters  
(b)  State forfeiture statutes. Any forfeiture for a violation of section 90-1(a) shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for violation of the statutes adopted by reference, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses. 
(c)  Local regulations. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be as provided in section 1-11. 
(d)  Parking violations. 
Forfeiture Minimum Maximum 346.51(1) Improper parking on/off roadway $30.00 $300.00 346.52(1) Stopping/standing in prohibited areas 20.00 40.00 Second conviction within one year 50.00 100.00 346.52(2) Stopping/standing on highway by grade school 20.00 40.00 Second conviction within one year 50.00 100.00 346.53 Parking/standing where prohibited 20.00 40.00 Second conviction within one year 50.00 100.00 346.54 Improper parking/standing of vehicle 20.00 40.00 Second conviction within one year 50.00 100.00 346.55(1) Parking on left side of highway 30.00 300.00 346.55(2) Parking vehicle for sale on highway 30.00 300.00 346.55(3) Parking on posted private property 20.00 40.00 Second conviction within one year 50.00 100.00  
(Code 1983, § 7.15) 
Sec. 90-4. - Use of dynamic braking devices prohibited. 
(a)  Definition. A "dynamic braking device", commonly referred to as "jake" brakes, "Jacob's" brake, engine brake or compression brake, means a device primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. 
(b)  Use prohibited. No person shall use a motor vehicle within the village limits where the dynamic braking device is in any way engaged or activated on such motor vehicle or any unit a part thereof, except for emergency situations for the purpose of avoiding a collision with another object or vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, 1-6-03) 
Secs. 90-5-90-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-36. - Enforcement procedure. 
    This chapter shall be enforced according to §§ 23.33, 66.12, 345.11-345.61, 350.17 and ch. 800, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 7.16(1)) 
Sec. 90-37. - Official traffic signs and signals. 
(a)  Director of public works to procure and erect signs and signals. The director of public works shall procure, erect and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to the rules of the state department of transportation giving such notice of the provisions of this chapter as required by state law. Signs shall be erected in such locations and manner as the chief of police, with approval of the village board, shall determine will best effect the purposes of this chapter and give adequate warning to users of the street or highway. The official traffic control map of the village on file in the office of the police department is adopted by reference. 
(b)  Removal of unofficial signs and signals. The chief of police shall order the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this section or § 346.41, Wis. Stats. Any charge imposed on a premises for removal of such an illegal sign, signal or device shall be reported to the village board at its next regular meeting for review and certification. 
(Code 1983, § 7.12) 
Sec. 90-38. - Accident reports. 
    The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall notify and file with the police department a copy of the report as required by § 346.70, Wis. Stats., if any. If the operator is unable to make such report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making such report shall comply with § 346.70, Wis. Stats. Such reports shall be subject to the provisions and limitations in §§ 346.70(4)(f) and 346.73, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 7.08) 
Secs. 90-39-90-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Court, ch. 26. 

Sec. 90-61. - Uniform citation. 
    The uniform traffic citation promulgated under § 345.11, Wis. Stats., shall be used for all moving traffic violations under this chapter, except for violations of section 90-1(b). 
(Code 1983, § 7.16(4)) 
Sec. 90-62. - Parking and nonhighway citations. 
    Citations for all nonmoving traffic violations under this chapter and for all violations of section 90-1(b) shall conform to § 345.28, Wis. Stats., and shall permit direct mail payment of the applicable minimum forfeiture to the police department within five days of the issuance of the citation in lieu of court appearance. The issuing officer shall specify on the citation the amount of the applicable forfeiture as provided in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 7.16(5)) 
Sec. 90-63. - Deposit. 
(a)  Any person arrested for a violation of this chapter may make a deposit of money as directed by the arresting officer at the police station or at the office of the clerk of the municipal court or by mailing the deposit to such places. The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall notify the arrested person, orally or in writing, that: 
(1)  If the person makes a deposit for a violation of a traffic regulation, the person need not appear in court at the time fixed in the citation and the person will be deemed to have tendered plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture and penalty assessment if required by § 165.87, Wis. Stats., a jail assessment if required by § 302.46(1), Wis. Stats., plus any applicable fees prescribed in ch. 814, Wis. Stats., not to exceed the amount of the deposit that the court may accept as provided in § 345.37, Wis. Stats.; and 
(2)  If the person fails to make a deposit for a violation of a traffic regulation or appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, the court may enter a default judgment finding the person guilty of the offense or issue a warrant for his arrest. 
(b)  The amount of the deposit shall be determined in accordance with the deposit schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference and shall include court costs, including any applicable fees prescribed in ch. 814, Wis. Stats., any applicable penalty assessment and any applicable jail assessment. If a deposit schedule has not been established, the arresting officer shall require the alleged offender to deposit the forfeiture established by the chief of police, which shall include the penalty assessment established under § 165.87, Wis. Stats. Deposits for nonmoving violations shall not include the penalty assessment. 
(c)  The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall issue the arrested person a receipt therefor as required by § 345.26(3)(b), Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 7.16(5)) 
Sec. 90-64. - Petition to reopen judgment. 
    Whenever a person has been convicted in this state on the basis of a forfeiture of deposit or a plea of guilty or no contest and the person was not informed as required under § 345.27(1), (2), Wis. Stats., the person may, within 60 days after being notified of the revocation or suspension of the operating privilege, petition the court to reopen the judgment and grant him an opportunity to defend on merits. If the court finds that the petitioner was not informed as required under § 345.27(1), (2), Wis. Stats., the court shall order the judgment reopened. The court order reopening the judgment automatically reinstates the revoked or suspended operating privilege. 
(Code 1983, § 7.16(3)) 
Secs. 90-65-90-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 90-96. - Regulated. 
(a)  Parking limits. 
(1)  The village declares yellow to be the paint color designating restricted (no) parking. Signage or stenciling of a painted curb takes precedence over those limitations. Buses are exempt as provided for in §§ 346.51 and 346.52, Wis. Stats. ( Reference: Wis. Stats., § 346.52 Stopping prohibited in certain specified places. (2) During the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. during school days, no person may stop or leave any vehicle standing, whether temporarily or otherwise, upon the near side of a through street adjacent to a schoolhouse used for any children below ninth grade.) 
(2)  When signs or parking meters are erected in any block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the period specified on such sign or meter at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and national holidays. 
(3)  No vehicle (motorized or nonmotorized) may remain parked in any one location on any village street, without a permit, for longer than 24 consecutive hours unless such vehicle is moved a minimum of 100 feet (pursuant to § 349.13(1)(c), Wis. Stats.). 
(b)  Snow emergency parking restrictions. Whenever the village board, village president or village administrator shall, by reason of heavy snowstorm or blizzard, proclaim a snow emergency pursuant to § 166.23, Wis. Stats., no person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle upon the streets or any portions of the streets during the hours set forth in the proclamation. 
(c)  Night parking restrictions. When signs have been erected at or reasonably near the corporate limits as provided in § 349.13, Wis. Stats., no person except physicians or licensed emergency vehicles on emergency calls shall park or stop any vehicle on any public street or highway within the village between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from December 1 to April 1 of each year. Notwithstanding such restrictions, vehicles may be parked for a period of time not longer than three minutes for loading or unloading of passengers, provided no other regulation restricting parking as to place, time or manner is violated thereby. 
(d)  Removal of illegally parked vehicles. Any vehicle parked or left standing upon a highway, street or alley or other public grounds in violation of any of the provisions of this section is declared to be a hazard to traffic and public safety. Such vehicle shall be removed by the owner or operator, upon request of any police officer, to a position where parking, stopping or standing is not prohibited. Any police officer after issuing a citation for illegal parking, stopping or standing of a vehicle in violation of this section is authorized to remove such vehicle whenever there is a snowplowing or snow removal operation being conducted in the village to a position where parking is not prohibited. The officer may order a motor carrier holding a permit to perform vehicle towing services, a licensed motor vehicle salvage dealer or a licensed motor vehicle dealer who performs vehicle towing services to remove and store such vehicle in any storage garage or rental parking grounds or any facility of the person providing the towing services. In addition to other penalties provided by section 90-65, the owner or operator of a vehicle so removed shall pay the cost of towing and storage. 
(e)  Registration record of vehicle as evidence. When any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this section regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner as shown by the ownership registration of the vehicle supplied by the state department of transportation, or a comparable authority of any other state, shall be subject to the appropriate penalty. 
(f)  School bus operator to actuate warning lights. As authorized by §§ 346.48(2)(b)2 and 349.29(1), Wis. Stats., when loading or unloading pupils or other authorized passengers in a residence or business district within the village limits, the operator of a school bus equipped with flashing red warning lights as specified in § 347.25(2), Wis. Stats., shall actuate such lights at least 100 feet before stopping to load or unload pupils or other authorized passengers, and shall not extinguish such lights until loading or unloading is completed and all persons who must cross the road are safely across. The foregoing state statutes are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1983, § 7.04; Ord. No. 96-3, § 7.04(1)(a), 3-4-96; Ord. No. 2001-05, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 10-13, §§ 1, 2, 11-15-10) 
Sec. 90-97. - Off-street parking lots. 
(a)  Off-street parking shall be permitted in properly designated off-street lots in the village. Those lots are designated as follows: 
(1)  Municipal Building parking lot, Railroad Street parking lot between Main Street and 2nd Street. 
(2)  River Hill Park parking lot, Riverview Drive west side curbed area adjacent to 1155 Riverview Drive. 
(3)  Fire house north parking lot, 1106 Fond du Lac Avenue. 
(4)  Downtown parking lot, adjacent to the Municipal Building Annex, 1308 Fond du Lac Avenue. 
(5)  Kewaskum Kiwanis Community Park, 1601 Brooklane Drive. (Seasonal with specific permission.) 
(b)  The village reserves the right to limit the number of vehicles allowed in any lot, to designate specific area allowed for parking, and to restrict vehicles by weight and size, so as to not interfere with the routine business of the village. 
(c)  All vehicles are to be moved once every 24-hour period and are to be currently licensed, registered vehicles. 
(d)  The fee for such overnight winter, spring, summer and fall parking shall be $10.00 per month, and permits therefor shall be obtained at the office of the chief of police. The permit received must be displayed in the front window of the vehicle, left lower/driver's side of the dash. 
(Code 1983, § 7.05; Ord. No. 2000-02, 5-1-00; Ord. No. 2002-03, 2-18-02) 
Sec. 90-98. - Abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means any vehicle, licensed or unlicensed, remaining on any street, highway or road in the village for more than 48 hours without the written permission of the chief of police or his authorized agent. 
(b)  Notice. The police department shall make reasonable efforts to locate the owner of any abandoned vehicle. If such an owner can be found, he shall be required to immediately remove such vehicle or be subject to a possible penalty in addition to having the police department remove the vehicle. 
(c)  Removal and storage. The police department may direct removal of any abandoned vehicle. Such vehicle shall be removed to an area for storage and remain in storage not to exceed 30 days. At the end of the 30 days, the police may direct the removal and sale of the vehicle. Any costs received in the sale of the vehicle shall be used to offset the costs incurred in storage of the vehicle. Upon the removal and sale of the vehicle, the police department shall keep a record, setting forth the name of the party removing the vehicle, the price paid for the vehicle, the costs for the storage of the vehicle, and reasonable identification of the vehicle. 
(Code 1983, § 7.09) 
Secs. 90-99-90-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - THROUGH HIGHWAYS, HEAVY TRAFFIC AND WEIGHT LIMITS 

Sec. 90-131. - Through highways designated. 
    In the interest of public safety and pursuant to § 349.07, Wis. Stats., the following streets or portions thereof are declared to be through highways; and traffic signs or signals giving notice thereof shall be erected by the director of public works in accordance with section 90-37: 
(1)  Fond du Lac Avenue. 
(2)  Main Street. 
(Code 1983, § 7.03) 
Sec. 90-132. - Heavy traffic routes. 
(a)  Designated. The following streets and parts of streets within the village are designated heavy traffic routes: 
(1)  Fond du Lac Avenue. 
(2)  Main Street. 
(3)  County Trunk Highway H. 
(4)  County Trunk Highway S. 
(b)  Restrictions on use of other streets. Vehicles which are not equipped with pneumatic tires or have a combined vehicle load weight exceeding 12,000 pounds shall not be operated or moved on any street or alley not part of the heavy traffic route designated in subsection (a) of this section, except for the purpose of obtaining orders for, moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or from a place of business or residence facing thereon. No vehicle using any street or alley in the village, regardless of the purpose, shall exceed the weight limitations of § 348.15 or 346.16(3), Wis. Stats. This restriction shall not apply to passenger buses. 
(Code 1983, § 7.07; Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 8-4-14) 
Sec. 90-133. - Weight limits. 
(a)  Class B highways designated. All streets and alleys within the village, except the following enumerated streets and alleys, are designated class B highways and shall be subject to the weight limitations imposed by § 348.16, Wis. Stats.: 
(1)  Fond du Lac Avenue. 
(2)  Main Street. 
(3)  County Trunk Highway H. 
(b)  Special and seasonal weight limitations. The director of public works shall impose special or seasonal weight limits to prevent injury to the roadway of any highway, bridge or culvert within the jurisdiction of the village or for the safety of users of such highway, bridge or culvert and shall be responsible for erecting signs giving notice thereof in accordance with § 349.16, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 7.06) 
Secs. 90-134-90-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 90-166. - Registration. 
(a)  Registration. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle customarily kept or operated in the village upon any street, alley or roadway within the village unless such bicycle shall first have been properly registered and tagged. 
(b)  Application. Every owner of any bicycle operated within the limits of the village shall, prior to the operation of such bicycle, obtain a registration for that bicycle. Such registration shall be nonexpiring during the ownership of the bicycle by the licensee. Such registration shall be serially numbered and kept on file by the chief of police or his designee in the police department as a public record. 
(c)  Registration plate. The chief of police shall furnish to each registrant an identification tag or license plate serially numbered to correspond with the registration number. Such license plate shall be affixed to the bicycle and remain so affixed unless removed by the chief of police for cause or for replacement with another plate upon reregistration. 
(d)  Registration fee. The registration fee is as prescribed in section 18-57. 
(e)  Inspection of bicycle. The chief of police shall inspect each bicycle presented to him for registration and may refuse to register any bicycle found by him to be in unsafe mechanical condition. 
(f)  Cancellation of registration. The chief of police may cancel the registration of and remove the registration plate from any bicycle being operated upon any street in the village in an unsafe manner or in violation of any state law or local ordinance; and such cancellation of registration and removal of registration plate shall be in addition to other penalties provided under this chapter. 
(g)  Change of ownership. Within ten days after any bicycle registered under this article changes ownership or is dismantled and taken out of operation, such information shall be reported to the chief of police by the person in whose name the bicycle has been registered. 
(Code 1983, § 12.06) 
Secs. 90-167-90-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SNOWMOBILES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Snowmobiles generally, ch. 350, Wis. Stats. 

Sec. 90-201. - Snowmobiles. 
(a)  Applicability of rules of the road to snowmobiles. The operator of a snowmobile upon a roadway shall in addition to the provisions of ch. 350, Wis. Stats., be subject to §§ 346.04, 346.06, 346.11, 346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19, 346.20, 346.21, 346.26, 346.27, 346.33, 346.35, 346.37, 346.39, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46, 346.47, 346.48, 346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54, 346.55, 346.87, 346.88, 346.89, 346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1) and 346.94(1), (9), Wis. Stats. 
(b)  Snowmobile routes and trails designated in the River Hill Park and KKC Park. Those routes and trails on the annual snowmobile route map are hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this section. 
(c)  Additional regulations. 
(1)  Speed. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public highway, trail designated in subsection (b) of this section or public park, golf course or recreation area within the village at a speed in excess of the posted limit or ten miles per hour, whichever is lower. 
(2)  Hours of operation. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the village between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except upon a public highway as authorized by statute and this section or for the purpose of gaining access to or leaving such highway. The hours of operation as spelled out in this subsection do not affect the curfew hours for minors as stated in section 62-76. 
(3)  Unattended snowmobiles. No person shall leave or allow a snowmobile to remain unattended on any public highway or public property while the motor is running or with the starting key in the ignition. 
(4)  Operation on sidewalks and malls prohibited. No person shall operate a snowmobile on any sidewalk, pedestrian way or mall within the village except as specifically authorized by subsection (b) of this section or for the purpose of crossing to obtain immediate access to an authorized area of operation. 
(Code 1983, § 7.10) 
Sec. 90-202. - Recreational vehicles, minibikes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Recreational vehicle means any two-, three- or four-wheeled vehicle, motorcycle, trailbike, minibike, motorized bicycle, dune buggy, dirt bike or similar vehicle constructed for use on terrains other than public roads or in addition to public roads. Snowmobiles are specifically excluded from this section. 
(b)  Permission required. 
(1)  No person shall operate a recreational vehicle on private or public property other than roads without first obtaining the written permission of the abutting property owners and the owners of 75 percent of the land within 200 feet of the lot or parcel of land driven or operated upon. Copies of written permission shall be filed by the driver or operator involved with the police department and shall be valid for one year from the date thereof. 
(2)  Such written permission shall be signed by the owner of the land involved and shall accurately describe the land involved by address or otherwise. 
(3)  Such written permission shall be revocable by the owner or owners of the land by notification to the police department in writing with a copy to the operator of the recreational vehicle. 
(Code 1983, § 7.11) 
Sec. 90-203. - All-terrain vehicles 
(a)  Definition. "All-terrain vehicle (ATV)" has a meaning set forth in § 340.01(2g), Wis. Stats., which is adopted hereby by reference. 
(b)  State traffic laws adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions of §§ 340.01(2g) and 23.33, Wis. Stats., and ch. NR 64, Wis. Adm. Code, describing and defining regulations with respect to all-terrain vehicles for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, including penalties to be imposed and procedures for prosecution, are adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth in this section, and shall specifically apply to the operation of all-terrain vehicles in the Village of Kewaskum. Any act required to be performed are prohibited by references required are prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated in this section are intended to be made part of this section. For purposes of this Code, such adopted statutes may be prefixed by the number 7. 
(c)  All-terrain vehicle use area is a permitted use as to that portion of the Eisenbahn State Trail located within the village limits. If use of the Eisenbahn State Trail or a portion of the trail is opened to ATV use by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and its operating agent, the planning, conservation and parks committee of Washington County, then that portion of that corridor located within the village limits is adopted as the sole and exclusive use area for operation of all-terrain vehicles within the village limits. 
(d)  Additional regulations. 
(1)  Speed. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle upon the trail designated in subsection (c) of this section, at a speed in excess of the posted limit or ten miles per hour, whichever is lower. 
(2)  Hours of operation. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within the village between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except upon a public highway as authorized by statute and this section or for the purpose of gaining access to or leaving such highway. The hours of operation as spelled out in this subsection do not affect the curfew hours for minors as stated in section 62-76. 
(e)  Operation permitted. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within the village except for loading the vehicle onto a trailer while on the owner's private property, on that portion of the Eisenbahn State Trail as designated in subsection (c) above, one sole exit from the Eisenbahn Trail at 890 and 900 Fond du Lac Avenue to cross U.S. Highway 45 for access to lodgings located at 900 Prospect Street for direct immediate access on the marked snowmobile trail, (if permission is granted by private property owners at 890 Fond du Lac Avenue, 900 Fond du Lac Avenue and 900 Prospect Street) and for purposes of obtaining immediate access to the authorized trail as posted in River Hill Park, at the south end of Parkview Drive and at the trail intersection on Main Street. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 2-15-10; Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 90-204. - Use of neighborhood electric vehicles and low-speed vehicles. 
(a)  Purpose. The village board recognizes that § 349.26, Wis. Stats., permits municipalities by ordinance to allow the use of neighborhood electric vehicles (NEVs), or low-speed vehicles (LSVs) as defined therein, on roadways with a speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less that are located within the territorial boundaries of the municipality. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Low-speed vehicle (LSV) means a motor vehicle that conforms to the definition and requirements for low-speed vehicles as adopted in the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards for Low-Speed Vehicles under 49 CFR 571.3(b) and § 571.500, Wis. Stats. "Low-speed vehicle" does not include a golf cart. 
    Neighborhood electric vehicle (NEV) means any self-propelled electrically-powered motor vehicle, excluding golf carts, that has a maximum speed of 20 to 25 miles per hour, and that has successfully completed the Neighborhood Electric Vehicle America Test Program conducted by the Federal Department of Energy, and that conforms to the definition and requirements for low-speed vehicles as adopted in the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards for Low-Speed Vehicles under 49 CFR 571.3(b) and § 571.500, Wis. Stats. 
(c)  Requirements. LSVs or NEVs shall be four-wheeled and have a speed range of at least 20 mph and not more than 25 mph on a level paved surface and have a gross vehicle weight at rest of less than 3,000 pounds. LSVs and NEVs shall have: 
(1)  Head lamps. 
(2)  Front and rear turn signals. 
(3)  Stop lamps. 
(4)  Reflex reflectors: one red on each side as far to the rear as practicable, and one red on the rear (three total). 
(5)  An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side, and either an exterior mirror on the passenger side or an interior rearview mirror. 
(6)  A parking brake. 
(7)  A windshield that conforms to the requirements of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard on glazing materials (49 CFR 571.205). 
(8)  A vehicle identification number (VIN) that complies with federal law (49 CFR 565). 
(9)  A type 1 or type 2 seatbelt assembly conforming to 49 CFR 571.209 and Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 209 for each designated seating position. 
(10)  Meets the general test conditions under 49 CFR 571.50056. 
(d)  Permitted users of low-speed vehicles. To use an LSV or NEV on village streets, the operator must have a valid motor vehicle driver's license from Wisconsin or another state. 
(e)  Operation. Operation of a LSV or NEV within the village is permitted on roadways and alleys located within the territorial boundaries of the village, regardless of whether the village has jurisdiction over the roadway, subject to the following prohibitions: 
(1)  Operation of a LSV or NEV is prohibited on any roadway with a speed limit greater than 35 mph. 
(2)  Operation of a LSV or NEV is prohibited on any municipal sidewalk or recreational trail. 
(3)  Operation of a LSV or NEV is prohibited within any municipal park or recreational area except on a roadway or parking area routinely open to motor vehicle traffic. 
(4)  Headlamps must be on at all times during the operation of a LSV or NEV on village streets. 
(5)  No person may operate a LSV or NEV at a speed in excess of 25 mph. 
(f)  Operational requirements of low-speed vehicles. LSVs and NEVs are subject to all vehicle, traffic and parking requirements as set forth in Wisconsin Statutes and the Village Municipal Code. Owners and operators of LSVs and NEVs shall be subject to citations and forfeitures for any violations. 
(g)  Registration. LSVs and NEVs operated within the village shall be registered with the state department of transportation and shall display that registration in accordance with ch. 341, Wis. Stats. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Secs. 90-205-90-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REGULATION OF PLAY VEHICLES AND IN-LINE SKATES 

Sec. 90-221. - Definitions. 
    In-line skates has a meaning set forth in § 340.01(24m), Wis. Stats. 
    Play vehicle has the meaning set forth in § 340.01(43m), Wis. Stats., and does not include bicycles regulated under section 90-166 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-5, 8-17-98) 
Sec. 90-222. - Pedestrian right-of-way. 
    Every person riding in or upon a play vehicle or in-line skates on a sidewalk, pedestrian way or mall shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and exercise due care when passing any pedestrian. 
(Ord. No. 98-5, 8-17-98) 
Sec. 90-223. - Prohibited areas for play vehicles and in-line skates. 
    No person shall ride in or upon a play vehicle or in-line skates in the following areas: 
(1)  In addition to prohibited areas under §§ 346.78 and 346.94(17), Wis. Stats., on the roadways of CTH "H", Third Street, Bilgo Lane, Main Street, Fond du Lac Avenue, Railroad Street, First Street, Second Street, Reigle Drive, Parkview Drive and Riverview Drive, except while crossing a roadway at a crosswalk. 
(2)  On any parking lot owned by the village or on any private property posted by means of a sign or signs prohibiting the riding of play vehicles and in-line skates, unless with the express permission of the owner or occupant in charge of such area. 
(Ord. No. 98-5, 8-17-98) 
Chapters 91-93 - RESERVED 
Chapter 94 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; solid waste, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- Regulation of public utilities generally, §§ 66.06, 196.01 et seq., Wis. Stats.; authority regarding fees, rates, etc., § 66.069, Wis. Stats. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Compulsory connection to sewer and water. 
(a)  Notice to connect. Whenever the public sewer or water system becomes available to any public, commercial, mercantile or business building or any building used for human habitation, the health officer shall notify in writing the owner, agent or occupant thereof to connect thereto all facilities required by the health officer. If the person to whom notice has been given fails to comply within 90 days after notice, the health officer shall cause the necessary connections to be made; and the expense thereof shall be assessed as a special tax against the property pursuant to § 144.06, Wis. Stats. See section 94-184 for sewer connection procedure. 
(b)  Privies and waterless toilets prohibited. After connection of any building to a sewer main hereunder, no privy or waterless toilet shall be used in connection with such building. 
(Code 1983, § 13.01) 
Sec. 94-2. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to section 1-11. 
Secs. 94-3-94-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-36. - Public service commission rules adopted. 
    The following provisions of ch. PSC 185, Wis. Adm. Code, are adopted by reference and made a part of this article as if set forth in full. A violation of any such rules shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 13.02(6)) 
Sec. 94-37. - Plumbing system to withstand 300 pounds of pressure. 
    The owner of any building connected with the waterworks system may adopt such system of plumbing as he may see fit, but it must stand at least a pressure of 300 pounds per square inch and be subject to the inspection of the water department. 
(Code 1983, § 13.10) 
Sec. 94-38. - Water utility rules and regulations. 
(a)  Contract. The rules, regulations and water rates in this chapter shall be considered a part of the contract with every person supplied with water through the water system of the village; and every such person by the acceptance and usage of the system and its services shall be bound by all of such rules and regulations. 
(b)  Water commission. The public works committee shall constitute the village water commission. The commissioners shall not receive any compensation for work done in connection with the water department. The village president shall designate one of the members chairman, and the village clerk/treasurer shall serve as secretary of the commission. 
(c)  Business manager of water department. The village clerk/treasurer or such competent person as the village president and the village board may appoint shall act as business manager of the water department. The village board shall fix the compensation for such person. 
(d)  Director of public works, duties. The village president and the village board shall appoint a competent person to have charge of the pumping stations and its transmission and distribution lines, tanks, services and meters and such other work as the village board may direct. The board shall fix the compensation for such person. 
(Code 1983, § 13.02) 
Sec. 94-39. - Use of water during emergencies. 
    The village board or the water commission may suspend the use of fountains and hoses for sprinkling streets, yards, gardens, and other places during disastrous fires or whenever in the opinion of the village board or water commission such emergency may require it. 
(Code 1983, § 13.13) 
Sec. 94-40. - Tampering with equipment; penalty. 
(a)  No person, except the members of the village board, the water commission, members of the fire department in case of fire or when drilling with the department, and such other duly authorized village officials or employees as may be designated, shall open or in any manner tamper with any public or private hydrant, plug, draw-cock, hose or other attachment, without first obtaining a permit and conforming to such conditions as the village board or water commission may impose; nor shall any person authorized to open a hydrant delegate his authority to another, or let out or suffer to take the wrenches or keys furnished such person, or suffer the same to be taken from any house within the village, except for purposes strictly connected with the fire department. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall upon conviction be subject to section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 13.17) 
Sec. 94-41. - Damage to equipment; penalty. 
    Any person who willfully defaces, marks or in any way injures or meddles with the fire hydrants, valves or other parts of the waterworks system of the village, or attempts to work them without authority, shall be subject to section 1-11. Any person who places any obstruction in front of or around a hydrant shall thereby be subject to section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 13.18) 
Sec. 94-42. - Water cutoff. 
    Whenever any rule or regulation is violated, the water may be cut off from the building or place of such violation, even though two or more persons receive water through the same pipe, and shall not be turned on again except by order of the village board, after payment as specified in the state PSC rate file as expenses for cutting off and turning on, and upon such other terms as the village board may determine, and a satisfactory understanding that no further complaint shall arise. In case of such violation, the village board may declare any payment made for water by any person committing such violation to be forfeited, and the same shall thereupon be forfeited. 
(Code 1983, § 13.02(5)) 
Sec. 94-43. - Interruption of supply. 
    No claim shall be made against the village by reason of the breaking of any main pipe, service pipe or cock, or for any interruption of supply, or by reason of breakage of the machinery, or stoppage of necessary repairs. 
(Code 1983, § 13.23) 
Sec. 94-44. - Access to premises; inspection of taps, wasting water. 
    Any officer or authorized employee of the water department shall enter the premises supplied with service, during reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspection or for the enforcement of the department's rules and regulations. The department will make a systematic inspection of all unmetered water taps at least once every 12 months for the purpose of checking for waste and unnecessary use of water. If it is found that water is wasted willfully, negligently or through want of repairs, and the same not be immediately remedied, the water leading to such premises shall be shut off and not turned on again until such defect in the private or service pipes or other fixtures, as may be the case, has been remedied; in such case the village board, water commission, or person authorized by them, shall give a notice in writing of such fact, to be mailed to the owner or occupant of the premises; and the owner or occupant shall be allowed 24 hours to repair the same before the water will be shut off. 
(Code 1983, §§ 13.07, 13.11) 
Sec. 94-45. - Fluorides. 
    Upon receiving the consent and approval of the state department of health and until further direction by the village board, the water department shall provide the means and proceed with the introduction of approximately 1 to 1.5 parts of fluoride to every million parts of water being distributed in the water supply system of the village. 
(Code 1983, § 13.27) 
Secs. 94-46-94-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 94-66. - Applications. 
(a)  All applications for the introduction of water shall be made to the village clerk/treasurer by the owner, or occupant with the written consent of the owner of the premises, upon application blanks from the village clerk/treasurer provided for that purpose. 
(b)  Upon the filing of an application for water, if there is no objection, the village clerk/treasurer shall authorize such tapping and installation of all necessary fittings and service piping. 
(c)  Such applications shall be accompanied by payment in full for the cost of such tap, which shall include all the work in trenching, tapping and furnishing of necessary fittings and service piping up to the outer sidewalk line and excavation and repair of streets and sidewalks. 
(d)  The initial water service lateral will be installed from the main through the curb stop and box by the utility, for which there will be made a charge as follows: 
(1)  One-inch copper service, $600.00. 
(2)  Larger sized service, actual cost. 
(Code 1983, § 13.03) 
Sec. 94-67. - Connections. 
    All connections with the mains shall be made with brass ferrule and copper or compression fittings compliant with village standards and in no case shall a tap larger than the following be allowed to be made: four-inch pipe, five-eighths-inch; six-inch pipe, three-quarter-inch; eight-inch pipe, one inch. All pipe to the service cock must be laid six and one-half feet deep, and there shall be a stop and waste cock and water box attached to every service pipe at some convenient point, on the line to the building, so as to permit the water to be shut off in frosty weather and the pipe emptied. 
(Code 1983, § 13.04; Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 94-68. - Cross connections prohibited. 
(a)  Purpose. Chapters NR 810/NR 811, [Wis. Adm. Code], and Wisconsin Plumbing Code require protection of the public water system from contaminants due to backflow of contaminants through the water service connection; and the state departments of natural resources and industry labor and human relations require the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connections control, which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination of all potable water systems. This section is intended to prevent such contamination. 
(b)  Cross connection defined. A cross connection is any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the village water system and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases or chemicals whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems. 
(c)  Prohibited. No person shall establish, permit to be established, maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the village may enter the village system unless such water supply and the method of connection and use of same have been approved by the water utility and the department of natural resources in accordance with NR 811.09(2), Wis. Adm. Code. 
(d)  Inspections required. The water utility director shall cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system where cross connections with the public water system are possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the utilities and as approved by the department of natural resources. 
(e)  Enforcement. The water utility may discontinue water service to any property where any connection in violation of this section exists and take such other precautionary measures necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under section 2-366 et seq., of this Code, except as provided in subsection (f) of this section. Water service to such property shall not be restored until any cross connection has been eliminated. 
(f)  Emergency discontinuance. If it is determined by the water utility that a cross connection or an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action and a written finding to that effect is filed with the village administrator/clerk/treasurer and delivered to the customer's premises, service may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under section 2-366 et seq., of this Code within ten days of such discontinuance. 
(g)  State plumbing code adopted. The state plumbing code, ILHR 82, Wis. Adm. Code, is adopted by reference as a part of this section. 
(h)  Application of section. This section does not supersede the state plumbing code and the village plumbing code but is supplementary to them. 
(Code 1983, § 13.045(1)-(6); Ord. No. 98-2, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-20-12) 
Sec. 94-69. - Vacation of premises. 
    When premises are to be vacated, the water department shall be notified in writing at once so it may remove the meter and shut off the supply at the curb stop. The owner of the premises shall be liable for any damage to the department's property by reason of failure to notify the department of vacancy. 
(Code 1983, § 13.05) 
Sec. 94-70. - Maintenance and repair of service pipe. 
    The service pipe from the main to the outer sidewalk line will be maintained and kept in repair at the expense of the water department. However, the consumer shall maintain the service pipe from the outer sidewalk line to the point of use, and the department shall not be responsible for the loss of water which has passed through the meter and has been wasted by leakage of defective pipes and fixtures. 
(Code 1983, § 13.06) 
Sec. 94-71. - Stop boxes to be protected. 
    The consumer shall protect the stop boxes located in his sidewalk or lawn and shall keep the same free from dirt and other obstructions. The water department shall not be liable for failure to locate stop boxes and shut off water in case of a leak on the consumer's premises. 
(Code 1983, § 13.08) 
Sec. 94-72. - Water to be turned on only by department. 
    The water shall not be turned on or off at the stop box for a consumer except by a duly authorized employee of the water department. When a plumber has completed a job, he must leave the water turned off. 
(Code 1983, § 13.09) 
Sec. 94-73. - Extensions. 
    Whenever extensions are issued or new attachments are to be made, permits shall be obtained in the usual manner, and the tapper shall be notified to draw out the old tap and insert the new if necessary. 
(Code 1983, § 13.12) 
Sec. 94-74. - Water for cisterns. 
    Persons desiring water for cisterns, tanks or other intermittent supply will be charged at regular rates as per schedule on file with the public service commission. 
(Code 1983, § 13.14) 
Sec. 94-75. - Water for building and construction work. 
    Persons desiring water for building and construction will be charged at regular rates as per schedule on file with the public service commission. 
(Code 1983, § 13.15) 
Sec. 94-76. - Water for sprinkling systems and standpipes. 
    If any persons, being regular patrons of the waterworks system, wish to lay large pipes to connect with buildings equipped with automatic overhead fire sprinkling systems or standpipes equipped with hose couplings to fit the village fire hose, to be used only in case of fire, permission will be given to connect the standpipes with the mains at their own expense, and upon application the department will allow the use of the water, for fire purposes only, free of charge, and for no other purpose without having first obtained permission from the water department. Persons using the water without such permission shall incur a penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 for such offense. 
(Code 1983, § 13.16) 
Secs. 94-77-94-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - METERS AND FEES 

Sec. 94-101. - Meters; location, installation, repair. 
(a)  Meters will be furnished and installed by the water department and are not to be disconnected or interfered with by the consumer. 
(b)  All meters shall be so located that they shall be preserved from obstructions and allow easy access thereto for reading and inspection, such location to be designated by the department. All piping within the building must be supplied by the consumer. If additional meters are desired by the consumer, he shall pay for all piping; and each meter so installed will be charged at the regular schedule of rates for water passing through the meter but in no case less than the minimum charge. 
(c)  Meters will be repaired by the department, and the cost of such repairs caused by ordinary wear and tear will be borne by the department. Any damage to a meter resulting from the carelessness of the owner of the premises, his agent or tenant, or from negligence of any one of them to properly secure and protect same, including any damage that may result from allowing a water meter to become frozen or to be injured from the presence of hot water or steam in the meter, shall be paid for by the consumer or the owner of the premises. 
(Code 1983, § 13.19) 
Sec. 94-102. - Meters to be read quarterly; rates. 
    Meters are to be read quarterly and water bills are to be rendered accordingly and in conformity with the regular schedule of rates in force, and all such bills for water usage are to be rendered against and delivered to the owner of the premises where water is furnished, except where specifically requested by such owner that such bills be delivered to the occupant or tenant; however, that if such occupant or tenant becomes delinquent in the payment of water usage and the water is shut off from the premises in accordance with the regulations of the water department, the owner of such premises will be at all times liable for such delinquent charge for water and such other charges as provided for in this section and relating thereto be fully paid and satisfied. 
(Code 1983, § 13.20) 
Sec. 94-103. - Failure to read meters. 
(a)  When the water department is unable to read any meter after two successive attempts, the fact shall be plainly indicated upon the quarterly bill, the minimum charge assessed and the difference adjusted with the consumer when the meter is again read; that is, the bill for the succeeding quarter will be computed with the gallons or cubic feet in each block of the rate schedule doubled, and credit will be given on that bill for the amount of the minimum bill paid in the preceding quarter. 
(b)  If the meter is damaged or fails to operate for any reason, the department will render a bill for the current period, based on an average of the last two quarters, provided there is no particular reason why the use during that period has not been normal. In case the last two periods cannot be properly used, the bill shall be estimated by some equitable method. 
(Code 1983, § 13.25) 
Sec. 94-104. - Complaint meter tests. 
    Each utility shall promptly make an accuracy test without charge of any metering installation upon request of the customer if 24 months or more have elapsed since the last complaint test of the meter in the same location. If less than 24 months have elapsed, an amount equal to one-half the estimated cost of the meter test shall be advanced to the utility by the customer. Said amount shall be refunded if the test shows the meter to be overregistering by more than two percent. A report giving the results of such test shall be made to the customer and a complete original test record shall be kept on file in the office of the utility. Upon request, the test shall be made in the presence of the customer during normal business hours. 
(Code 1983, § 13.26) 
Sec. 94-105. - Delinquent water bills. 
(a)  On quarterly water bills due and not paid within seven business days of due date, a late payment charge of one percent will be added to the bills per PSC rate file Mg-1 and a past due notice will be mailed warning of possible disconnection. This late payment charge will be applicable to all customers. The utility customer may be given written notice that the bill is overdue no sooner than 20 days after the bill is issued. If water bill is still not paid ten business days after the past due notice was mailed a disconnection notice will be attached to the front entry of the building. Unless payment or satisfactory arrangement for payment is made with the clerk/treasurer service will be disconnected between 24 and 48 hours after the disconnection notice was attached to the front entry of the building, pursuant to public service commission rule 185.37, Wis. Adm. Code. The total amount due and a reconnection fee of $35.00 ($45.00 if outside office hours per public service commission rate form R-1) must be paid before the water service is restored. 
(b)  If the customer requests a deferred payment agreement the calculated payment must be enough to pay the entire balance due prior to the next billing cycle. Deferred payment agreements will be scheduled in weekly or bi-weekly payments (not monthly) and can also be arranged for automatic withdrawal from the customer's bank account. The village administrator will review and authorize all deferred payment agreements prior to their execution. All deferred payment agreements for nonresidential accounts with a history of two past due notices in two years will be required to make all past payments and provide advance deposits for the next four quarters to avoid disconnection. 
(c)  Failure to receive a water bill does not exempt consumers from the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  The water department shall not be responsible for the collection of water bills from renters who are required to pay their own water bills. 
(e)  On October 15 in each year notice shall be given to the owner or occupant of all lots or parcels of real estate to which water has been furnished prior to October 1 by the water utility operated by the village and payment for which is owing and in arrears at the time of giving notice. The department in charge of the utility shall furnish the treasurer with a list of all such lots or parcels of real estate, and the notice shall be given by the clerk/treasurer. Such notice shall be in writing and shall state the amount of such arrears, including any penalty assessed pursuant to the rules of such utility and PSC rate file Mg-1; that unless the same is paid by November 1 thereafter a penalty of ten percent of the amount of such arrears will be added thereto; and that unless such arrears, with any such penalty, shall be paid by November 15 thereafter, the same will be levied as a tax against the lot or parcel of real estate to which water was furnished and for which payment is delinquent as above specified. Such notice may be served by delivery to either such owner or occupant personally, or by letter addressed to such owner or occupant at the post office address of such lot or parcel of real estate. On November 16 the department issuing the notice shall certify and file with the clerk/treasurer a list of all lots or parcels of real estate, giving the legal description thereof, and the owner or occupants of which notice of arrears in payment were given as above specified and which arrears still remain unpaid, and stating the amount of such arrears together with added penalty thereon as herein provided. Each such delinquent amount, including such penalty, shall thereon become a lien upon the lot or parcel of real estate. 
(Code 1983, § 13.21; Ord. No. 95-8, § 13.21(1), (4), 8-21-95; Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 7-18-16; Ord. No. 16-08, § 1, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 94-106. - Discontinuance of water. 
    Consumers desiring to discontinue the use of water must give notice thereof in writing on or before the quarterly water use is due, otherwise the minimum quarterly charge for the next succeeding quarter will go on in full. 
(Code 1983, § 13.22) 
Sec. 94-107. - Surreptitious use of water. 
    When the utility has reasonable evidence that a consumer is obtaining his supply of water, in whole or in part, by tampering with or altering the meter or other parts of the utility service connected to his property or equipment, the utility reserves the right to estimate and present immediately a bill for service unmetered as a result of such interference and such bill shall be payable subject to a 24-hour disconnection of service. When the water department shall have disconnected the consumer for any such reason, the department will reconnect the consumer upon the following conditions: 
(1)  The consumer shall be required to deposit with the utility an amount sufficient to guarantee the payment of the consumer's bills for utility service to the utility. 
(2)  The consumer will be required to pay the utility for any and all damages to its equipment on the consumer's premises due to such stoppage or interference with its metering. 
(3)  The consumer must further agree to comply with reasonable requirements to protect the utility against further losses. 
(Code 1983, § 13.24) 
Secs. 94-108-94-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY 

Sec. 94-141. - Well abandonment and well operation permit. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect public health, safety and welfare and to prevent contamination of groundwater by assuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells or wells that may act as conduits for contamination of groundwater or wells that may be illegally cross connected to the municipal water system, are properly maintained or abandoned. 
(b)  Applicability. This section applies to all wells located on premises served by the village water utility system. Utility customers outside the jurisdiction of the municipal system may be required under contract agreement or utility rule to adopt and enforce equivalent ordinances within their jurisdictions for purpose stated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Definitions. 
(1)  Municipal water system means a community water system owned by city, village, county, town, town sanitary district, utility district, public inland lake and rehabilitation district, municipal water district or a federal, state, county or municipally owned institution for congregate care or correction, or privately owned water utility serving the foregoing. 
(2)  Noncomplying means a well or pump installation that does not comply with § NR 812.42, Wis. Adm. Code, Standards for Existing Installations, and has not been granted a variance pursuant to § NR 812.43, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(3)  Pump installation means the pump and related equipment used for withdrawing water from a well, including the discharge piping, the underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling faucets and well seals or caps. 
(4)  Unsafe well or pump installation means one which produces water that is bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with substances that exceed the drinking water standards of ch. NR 140 or 809, Wis. Adm. Code, or which a health advisory has been issued by the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Unused well or pump installation means one which is not used or does not have a functional pumping system. 
(6)  Well means a drillhole or other excavation or opening deeper than it is wide that extends more than ten feet below the ground surface constructed for the purpose of obtaining groundwater. 
(7)  Well abandonment means the proper fill and sealing of a well according to the provisions of § NR 812.26, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(d)  Abandonment required. All wells on premises served by the municipal water system shall be properly abandoned in accordance with subsection (f) of this section no later than one year from the date of connection to the municipal water system unless a valid well operation permit has been issued to the well owner by the village under terms of subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Well operation permit. Owners of wells on premises served by the municipal water system wishing to retain their wells for any use shall make application for a well operation permit for each well no later than 90 days after connection to the municipal water system. The village shall grant a permit to a well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed five years providing all conditions of this section are met. A well operation permit may be renewed by submitting an application verifying that the conditions of this section are met. The village or its agent may conduct inspections and water quality tests or require inspections and water quality tests to be conducted at the applicant's expense to obtain or verify information necessary for consideration of a permit application or renewal. Permit applications and renewals shall be made on forms provided by the clerk/treasurer. All initial and renewal applications must be accompanied by a fee of $20.00. The following conditions must be met for issuance or renewal of a well operation permit: 
(1)  The well and pump installation shall meet the standards for existing installations described in § NR 812.42, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(2)  The well and pump shall have a history of producing safe water evidenced by at least two coliform bacteria samples taken a minimum of two weeks apart. In areas where the department of natural resources has determined that groundwater aquifers are contaminated with substances other than bacteria, additional chemical tests may be required to document the safety of the water. 
(3)  There shall be no cross connections between the well's pump installation or distribution piping and municipal system. 
(4)  The water from the private well shall not discharge into a drain leading directly to a public sewer utility unless properly metered and authorized by the sewer utility. 
(5)  The private well shall have a functional pumping system. 
(6)  The proposed use of the private well shall be justified as reasonable in addition to water provided by the municipal water system. 
(f)  Abandonment procedures. 
(1)  All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this section shall be done according to the procedures and methods of § NR 812.26, Wis. Adm. Code. All debris, pumps, piping, unsealed liners and any other obstructions that may interfere with sealing operations shall be removed prior to abandonment. 
(2)  The owner of the well or the owner's agent shall notify the clerk/treasurer and/or director of public works at least 48 hours in advance of any well abandonment activities. The abandonment of the well may be observed or verified by personnel of the municipal water system. 
(3)  An abandonment report form, supplied by the department of natural resources, shall be submitted by the well owner to the clerk/treasurer and department of natural resources within 30 days of the completion of the well abandonment. 
(g)  Penalties. Any well owner violating any provision of this section shall upon conviction be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-11. If any person fails to comply with this section for more than 30 days after receiving written notice of the violation, the village may impose a penalty and cause the well abandonment to be performed and the expense to be assessed a special tax against the property. 
(Code 1983, § 13.29; Ord. No. 96-5, 6-17-96) 
Secs. 94-142-94-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-176. - Creation; authority. 
(a)  The village board, pursuant to the provisions of § 66.067, Wis. Stats., does hereby declare that the sewerage system of the village consisting of the collection system, waste collection and disposal operations, sewerage system and all other appurtenances and equipment used for such purposes or wastewater treatment facility shall be designated the sewerage system utility. This public utility is not a public service subject to regulation by the state public service commission for the purposes defined above. 
(b)  This article is adopted under authority granted by § 66.076, Wis. Stats., and shall be known as, referred to or cited as the "Sewerage Service Ordinance for the Village of Kewaskum, State of Wisconsin." 
(Code 1983, §§ 13.30, 13.31) 
Sec. 94-177. - Purpose and intent; declaration of policy. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the citizens of the village and is designed to provide the legislative enactments required under Pub. L. 92-500, as amended, and applicable federal regulations for the acceptance of construction grants to improve the quality of effluent discharges from wastewater treatment works. It is further intended to provide for administration and enforcement of this article and to provide penalties for its violations. 
(b)  Declaration of policy. The village board finds and declares that the public health, comfort and safety is preserved and enhanced by the provision of the sewerage system in the promotion of a clean and healthful environment and that the failure to connect to the sewerage system is contrary to minimum health standards. 
(Code 1983, §§ 13.32, 13.37(1)) 
Sec. 94-178. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the village, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by statute. 
(Code 1983, § 13.33) 
Sec. 94-179. - Management. 
(a)  The operation, management and control of the sewerage system utility is vested in the village board acting as the board of public works under the provisions of § 196.58(1), Wis. Stats., and is referred to in this article as the approving authority. All records of the sewerage system utility shall be kept by the village administrator/clerk/treasurer in the village hall or other officially designated place. 
(b)  The rules, regulations and rates set forth in this article shall be considered part of the regulations applicable to every individual or entity connected to the sewerage system and all persons discharging wastes to the sewerage system. The rules, regulations and rates may be changed from time to time as determined by the village board and the right is reserved to make special rates and contracts in all proper cases. 
(c)  The village board shall cause an annual audit of the books of the sewerage system utility to be made and shall make the books and records relating to the sewerage system utility available for inspection during regular business hours. 
(d)  A proportionate distribution of operation, maintenance and replacement costs shall be maintained among user classes. Users shall be notified annually of the sewer service charges associated with the sewerage system. 
(Code 1983, § 13.34) 
Sec. 94-180. - Application of article. 
    The application of this article, its rules, regulations and rates, shall apply to all individuals, firms, corporations and institutions residing within the corporate limits of the village and any person by attachment to the sewerage system or otherwise by contract or agreement coming within the village sewer service area subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and all entities hauling wastes and discharging to the sewerage system. 
(Code 1983, § 13.35) 
Sec. 94-181. - Connection to collection system. 
    No person shall connect to and discharge to the collection system unless there is capacity available in all downstream components of the sewerage system as determined by the village administrator. 
(Code 1983, § 13.40(5)) 
Sec. 94-182. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, (33 USC 1251 et seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub.L. 92-500) and Pub.L. 93-243, or as modified by ch. 147, Wis. Stats., or appropriate sections of the Wis. Adm. Code adopted pursuant to ch. 147, Wis. Stats. 
    Administrator means the village administrator, the individual employed by the village to manage the village records. 
    Approving authority means the village board or its authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius. The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
    Building sewer, lateral or service pipe means a sewer that carries only sewage or industrial wastes from the building plumbing to the public sanitary sewer. 
    Collection system means the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of domestic wastewater and industrial waste. 
    Connection means each physical connection to the collection system or private sewer system that connects to the municipal collection system. 
    Debt retirement means all annual principal and interest requirements and obligations of the approving authority for the wastewater treatment facilities. 
    Discharge monitoring station means a sampling and metering station required to be installed through a discharge monitoring agreement signed by an industrial user with the village in order to obtain information on a user's discharge to the system and to establish sewer user and debt charges. 
    Domestic wastewater means waterborne wastes normally being discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, apartment houses, hotels, office buildings, factories and institutions, free of industrial wastes, and in which the average concentration of suspended solids is established at or below 250 mg/l, the BOD concentration is established at or below 200 mg/l and the phosphorous (P) concentration is established at or below four mg/l. 
    Facilities user charge means a charge levied on users annually for each equivalent water meter connection associated with the sewer and water system. 
    Flow proportional composite sample means a sample consisting of portions of waste taken in proportion to the volume of flow of the wastes. 
    Industrial user means any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of publicly owned wastewater works that discharges more than the equivalent of 5,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary wastes and whose activities are identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions: Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing; Division B, Mining; Division D, Manufacturing; Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric Gas and Sanitary Services; Division I, Services. In determining the amount of a user's discharge for purposes of industrial cost recovery, the village may exclude domestic wastes or discharges from sanitary conveniences. After applying the sanitary waste exclusion, dischargers in the above divisions that have a volume exceeding 5,000 gpd or the weight of BOD or suspended solids (SS) equivalent to that weight found in 5,000 gpd of sanitary waste are considered industrial users. Sanitary wastes for purposes of this calculation of equivalency are the wastes discharged from residential users. Any nongovernmental user of publicly owned wastewater treatment facilities that discharges wastewater to the wastewater treatment facilities that contains toxic pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal system; to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process; or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the wastewater treatment facilities shall be an industrial user even if it does not discharge the equivalent of 5,000 gpd of sanitary wastes. 
    Industrial waste means any waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes other than domestic wastewater, resulting from discharging from, flowing from, or escaping from any commercial, industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or process or from the development of any natural resource or any mixture of these with water or domestic wastewater. 
    Intercepting sewer means a sewer constructed to receive the dry weather flow of untreated or inadequately treated sewage from one or more existing sanitary sewer system terminals other than from a dwelling or building that presently discharges or formerly discharged flow directly into any waters of the state and convey the flow to a wastewater treatment facility or is to serve in lieu of an existing or proposed wastewater treatment facility. 
    Lead plant operator/LAB technician means the lead plant operator of the wastewater treatment and conveyance facilities, who shall be in charge of and supervise the operations and functions of the wastewater treatment and conveyance facilities. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination permit means a permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) for the discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant to § 402 of Pub.L. 92-500, as amended. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Normal sewage means sanitary sewage in which BOD and total suspended solids concentrations do not exceed normal concentrations of: 
(1)  A five-day, 20 degrees Celsius BOD of not more than 200 ppm. 
(2)  A total suspended solids concentration of not more than 250 ppm. 
(3)  A phosphorous concentration of not more than four ppm. 
    Operation and maintenance cost means the actual sums spent by the village in the operation and maintenance of its sewerage system consisting of, but not limited to, each and all of the following purposes: 
(1)  Wages, salaries and employee related expenses of operating, maintenance, clerical, laboratory and supervisory personnel, together with fringe benefits and premiums paid on the wages and salaries for the state workers' compensation coverage. 
(2)  Electrical power and other utility services. 
(3)  Chemicals, fuel and other operating supplies. 
(4)  Repairs to and maintenance of associated equipment. 
(5)  Premiums for hazard insurance. 
(6)  Premiums for insurance providing coverage against liability for the injury to persons and property. 
(7)  Rents and leasing costs. 
(8)  Operation, licensing and maintenance costs for trucks and heavy equipment. 
(9)  Consultant and legal fees. 
(10)  Training and educational expenses. 
    Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, government agency or other entity and agents, servants or employees. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen concentration expressed in moles per liter. It shall be determined by one of the procedures outlined in Standard Methods. 
    Phosphorous means the total phosphorous as determined by procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
    Private sewer means a privately owned sewer serving two or more buildings and not directly controlled by a public authority. 
    Public sewer means a sewer or lateral in a public right-of-way or easement abutting properties and is controlled or owned by the public authority. 
    Replacement costs means the expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories and appurtenances necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. 
    Replacement fund means a segregated account to which moneys are deposited to be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  The purpose of replacement of mechanical equipment. 
(2)  The major mechanical repair for the purpose of extending the useful life of equipment. 
    Residential equivalency charge means a charge levied on nonmetered users for debt retirement, operation and maintenance costs and the replacement fund. The charge shall be based on the average gallons of water used by a residential customer as determined by the water utility and multiplied by the cost per 1,000 gallons for operation and maintenance costs, debt and replacement fund. 
    Residential equivalent connection (REC) means the wastewater flow and loadings to the system equivalent to that contributed by an average residential family equivalent. An average residential family equivalent shall be calculated yearly by the village based upon the residential water used divided by the total number of residential customers. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that conveys domestic wastewater, industrial waste or a combination of both and into which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastewater are not intentionally contributed. 
    Septage means scum, liquid, sludge or other waste from a septic tank, soil absorption field, holding tank, vault toilet or privy. This does not include the waste from a grease trap. 
    Sewerage system means all facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating and disposing of domestic wastewater, industrial wastes and septage. Also may be referred to as sewer system. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and which adversely affects the collection system or performance of the wastewater treatment facilities. 
    Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Storm sewer means a sewer that carries storm and surface drainage, but excludes domestic wastewater and industrial wastes. 
    Summer quarter means the user's quarter starting in July and ending in September. 
    Surcharge user means a user of the sewerage system who discharges wastes which have higher concentrations than domestic wastewater and is assessed an additional charge (surcharge) for the constituents higher in concentration than domestic wastewater. 
    Total suspended solids (TSS) means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of total suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. Also referred to as suspended solids (SS). 
    Unpolluted water means water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharging to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    Use factors means flow, BOD, total suspended solids, phosphorous and infiltration/inflow or the quantity of these factors as determined by the village by sampling and monitoring the wastewater treatment facility influent and surcharge users and from the water utility records. 
    User means any person discharging domestic wastewater or industrial wastes into the collection system or entity discharging septage or other waste hauled or trucked to the sewerage system. 
    User charge means a charge levied on users for operation, maintenance and replacement costs and capital costs. The charge shall be based on the total gallons of water used as determined by the water utility and multiplied by the cost per 1,000 gallons for operation, maintenance and replacement costs and capital costs. 
    Village engineer means: 
(1)  Lead plant operator/LAB technician of the wastewater treatment facility. The individual employed by the village to efficiently and effectively operate the facility within the guidelines of this article and governmental regulations. 
(2)  Village consulting engineer. The engineer hired by the village to assist in the planning and development of the facility, also to assist with the specialized details of the facility as requested by the village administrator, superintendent and village board. 
    Waste means any solids, liquid or gaseous material or combination thereof discharged from any residences, business buildings, institutions, industrial establishments and septage haulers into the collection system, storm sewer or septage receiving station. 
    Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried waste discharged into the collection system from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
    Wastewater pumping station means a pumping facility utilized to pump wastewater within the collection system. 
    Wastewater treatment facilities means any village-owned facility, devices and structures used for receiving and treating wastewater from the village collection system. 
    Water utility means the village water utility. 
    WPDES permit means a permit to discharge pollutants obtained under the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination system (WPDES) pursuant to ch. 147, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 13.36) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-183. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article or with an order of the village issued in pursuance of the article or shall tamper with metering or sampling shall be liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by such violation, including reasonable attorney's fees and other expenses of litigation, and upon conviction of any violation of this article, shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $2,500.00 per violation, plus damages. Each day a condition is allowed to exist contrary to all or any part of this article shall constitute a new violation. Change of ownership or occupancy of premises delinquent under the provisions of this article shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating charges due and penalties for violations. 
(b)  If any user shall discharge a waste or wastewater, including septage, that is inhibiting to the sewer system or wastewater treatment facility, such user shall pay a penalty of up to $200.00 per violation upon conviction. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. Such penalty shall be added to the monthly or quarterly billing statement if not paid within 30 days of conviction or such other time as set by the court. 
(c)  In addition to the court proceedings and penalties described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, whenever a person violates any provision of this article or fails to comply with any order of the village, the village may order that an action be commenced on behalf of the village in the circuit court for the county for the purpose of obtaining an injunction restraining the person violating this article or failing to comply with the order from making any further discharges into the sewer system of the village. 
(d)  Any licensed disposer discharging to the wastewater treatment facility or to a public sewer found to be violating a provision of this article, or of any conditions of the approval for septage disposal, may have his approval immediately revoked. This revocation shall be done in writing and state the reason for revoking the septage disposal approval. 
(Code 1983, § 13.60) 
Sec. 94-184. - Rules and regulations-Generally. 
(a)  Toilet facilities; permission for installation required. To assure preservation of public health, comfort and safety, the owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other habitation situated within the village and adjacent to a public sewer or in a block through which a public sewer extends, is required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after the public sewer first becomes operational or, if an immediate health hazard exists, within ten days upon receipt of notice from the county health officer or the village building inspector. Such person shall apply for and obtain permission for the installation from the village board. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Failure to comply with connection requirements. If a person fails to comply with the notice to connect within the given period of time, the village may, at its option: 
(1)  Cause such connection to be made and bill the property owner for such costs. If such costs are not paid within 30 days, such costs shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property unless the owners within 30 days after the completion of the work files a sworn affidavit with the village administrator stating that it be levied in not to exceed five equal annual installments; and the amount shall be so collected with interest at a rate sufficient to recover the village's cost of borrowed funds or interest lost plus one percent per annum from the completion of the work, the unpaid balance to be a special tax lien. 
(2)  Impose a standby charge for the period of time in excess of 90 days that such failure continues after the date the public sewer first becomes operational, after ten days written notice to any owner failing to make a connection to the sewerage system, for an amount equal to 150 percent of the annual facilities charge, payable monthly for the period in which the failure to connect continues. Upon failure to make such payment, a charge shall be levied as a tax against the lot or parcel to which sewerage service was furnished. 
(d)  Alternative disposal prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended to be used for the disposal of domestic wastewater if a public sewer is available. 
(2)  No person shall discharge to any natural outlet within the village in any area under the jurisdiction of the village sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(e)  Maintenance of services. All sewer services within the limits of the village at the point of connection to the street main and all street mains shall be maintained and repaired by the village without expense to the property owner, except when they are damaged as a result of negligence on the part of the property owner. All building sewers and laterals located in the public right-of-way or easement from the point of connection to the sewer main and all facilities throughout the premises served must be maintained free of defective conditions by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of the property served. 
(f)  User to keep in repair. All users shall keep their own service pipes in good repair and protected from frost at their own risk and expense, and shall prevent any unnecessary overburdening of the sewerage system. Users are responsible for their service pipe from the street main through their facility served. 
(g)  User use only. No user shall allow other persons to connect to or permit other uses to be made of the sewerage system through his lateral. 
(h)  User to permit inspection. All users shall permit the village or its authorized agent at all reasonable hours of the day to enter their premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the drains and sewer connections operate, and they must at all times frankly and without concealment answer all questions put to them relative to its use. Should the owner or occupant of the premises refuse voluntary access to the premises, the plumbing inspector is authorized to seek a special inspection warrant under § 66.122, Wis. Stats. 
(i)  Responsibility. No claim shall be made against the village or its agents or employees by reason of the breaking, clogging, stoppage or freezing of any service pipe, nor from any damage arising from repairing mains, making connections or extensions or any other work that may be deemed necessary by the village, absent of gross negligence of the village, its agents or employees. The village may cut off the service at any time for the purpose of repairs or any other necessary purpose, any permit granted or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it shall become necessary to shut off the sewer service within an area of the village, the village shall, if practicable, give notice to each affected user. 
(Code 1983, § 13.37(2), (3), (5), (6)(a), (c)-(f); Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 4-17-06) 
Sec. 94-185. - Same-Excavations. 
    Excavation requirements in any easement or public right-of-way shall be as specified and required by the authority having jurisdiction over the easement or right-of-way. In all cases a permit is required, and construction methods shall conform to section 82-76 et seq. 
(Code 1983, § 13.37(7)) 
Sec. 94-186. - Same-Laterals. 
(a)  All laterals on private property will be installed in accordance with the Wis. Adm. Code as from time to time amended. 
(b)  The building sewer shall be inspected by the director of public works or his designee upon completion of the placement of the pipe and before backfilling and tested before and after backfilling. The director of public works or his designee may order any building sewer exposed and removed if the building sewer is covered before inspection. 
(Code 1983, § 13.37(8)) 
Sec. 94-187. - Same-Tapping the mains. 
(a)  No persons, except those having special permission from the village or persons in their service and approved by them, will be permitted under any circumstances to tap the public sanitary sewers. The kind and size of the connection to the public sanitary sewers shall be that specified in the permit or order from the village. A minimum of 48 hours' notice shall be given to the village prior to tapping any main. 
(b)  Tap permits. After sewer connections have been installed into any building or upon any premises, no plumber shall make any alterations, extensions or attachments unless the party ordering such tapping or other work shall obtain and exhibit the proper permit for the same from the village engineer. 
(c)  Pipes should always be tapped at the top and not within six inches of the joint or within 24 inches of another lateral connection. 
(d)  When any building sewer service is to be relaid and there are two or more buildings on such service, each building shall be disconnected from such service and a new building sewer shall be installed for each building. 
(Code 1983, § 13.37(6)(b), (9)) 
Sec. 94-188. - Plumbers; license required. 
    No plumber or other person will be permitted to engage in or work at any plumbing in connection with the sewerage system without first receiving a license from the state bureau of plumbing. 
(Code 1983, § 13.37(4)) 
Sec. 94-189. - Annual budget and method of payment of charges. 
(a)  Budget. Annually before the first village board meeting in October, the village administrator shall prepare a budget for the following fiscal year, which shall be separated into sections, the first for operation, maintenance and replacement and the second for capital costs. 
(b)  Revenues for operation and maintenance budget. Revenues for the operation and maintenance budget shall include any projected year-end balance (excluding replacement funds), operating fund investment income, contract revenues, permit fees, special rates and sewer use charges. 
(c)  Expenditures for operation and maintenance budget. Expenditures for the operation and maintenance budget shall include all costs defined in sections 94-253 and 94-255 plus any projected year-end deficit. 
(d)  Budget to balance with sewer use charge. The operation and maintenance budget shall balance with the sewer use charge so that projected revenues equal projected expenditures. 
(e)  Excess revenues. Any excess revenues collected from a user class for operation, maintenance and replacement costs will be attributable to that class for future charges within two years. 
(f)  Revenues for debt service budget. Revenues for the debt service budget can include any projected year-end balances in the special assessments funds, connection charges and sinking fund interest income. 
(g)  Expenditures for capital budget. Expenditures for the capital budget shall include principal, interest, premiums, depreciation, paying agency fees and other expenses related to capital. 
(Code 1983, § 13.39(1)-(7)) 
Sec. 94-190. - Admission to property. 
    The village, its agents and employees, shall be permitted to gain access to such properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with provisions of this article pursuant to §§ 66.122-66.125, Wis. Stats. 
(Code 1983, § 13.51) 
Sec. 94-191. - Confidentiality of critical information. 
    When requested by the user furnishing a report or permit application or questionnaire, the portions of the report or other document that might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for use by the village or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. 
(Code 1983, § 13.52) 
Sec. 94-192. - Wastewater measurement. 
    Wastewater flows from users who do not obtain their water from the water utility shall be assigned a residential equivalent connection as determined from section 94-193 unless: 
(1)  The village requires the installation of a meter to measure the water amount. 
(2)  In any lot, parcel of land, building or premises discharging domestic wastewater or industrial waste into the collection system, the owner or occupant of such property shall cause to be installed necessary metering equipment as approved by the village administrator to measure the quantity of water pumped or discharged to the collection system. The user charge shall be based on the quantity of water so measured. Whenever the person fails to install such metering equipment or where it is not practicable to measure the water consumed on any premises by a meter, the village administrator shall determine the estimated volume of water discharged into the sewerage system. 
(3)  The village administrator may require the installation of devices for metering the volume of waste discharged if those volumes cannot otherwise be determined or if the user discharges over 5,000 gallons on any day. The metering devices shall be owned and maintained by the property owner or user and may not be removed without consent of the village administrator. 
(Code 1983, § 13.44) 
Sec. 94-193. - Residential equivalent connection. 
    For unmetered users of the sewerage system, the following table shall be used to determine the residential equivalent connection (REC) or estimated gallons of wastewater discharged to the sewerage system, except as provided for in section 94-192. The REC may be determined by dividing the wastewater flow obtained from the table by the flow of the average residential user. The minimum REC for any account shall not be less than 1.0 REC. Upon completion of the REC computations, all RECs will be rounded to the nearest 0.25 REC. 
Residential Users REC Condominium ..... 1.0  Single-family home ..... 1.0  Duplex ..... 2.0  Multiple-family (2 bedrooms), per unit ..... 1.0  Multiple-family (1 bedroom or less), per unit ..... 0.75  
(Code 1983, § 13.53) 
Sec. 94-194. - Unmetered flow assignments for industrial and commercial users. 
    For unmetered commercial and industrial users of the sewerage system, their wastewater flow shall be determined from the table adopted by reference and on file in the office of the village administrator, unless the village administrator determines that the information in the table does not accurately reflect the user's wastewater discharge to the sewerage system, in which case the village administrator will assign a wastewater flow to the user. 
(Code 1983, § 13.54) 
Sec. 94-195. - Industrial and septage waste analysis, measurement and sampling. 
(a)  All persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewerage system shall construct and maintain sampling and metering manholes in suitable and accessible positions on public property or easement to facilitate the observation, measurement and sampling of all wastes or wastewater. These manholes shall be located and constructed in a manner approved by the village administrator. Plans shall be submitted to the village administrator prior to construction. 
(b)  The village or its designee will monitor flow, collect samples and perform laboratory tests on industrial waste discharges and septage discharges as necessary to verify quantity of flow or character and concentration of an industrial waste or septage. The village test results shall be used to determine the applicable surcharge. 
(c)  Waste or wastewater discharge may be sampled manually or by the use of mechanical equipment as necessary to obtain a representative 24-hour composite sample. Samples shall be taken at intervals to be established by contractual agreement under section 94-308 or at intervals as determined by the lead plant operator or the village administrator. 
(d)  When chs. NR 101 or NR 202, Wis. Adm. Code, requires the submittal of the character and concentration of wastes, waste volume and production information to the district or state department of natural resources (DNR), the user shall have the waste character and concentration determined by a DNR certified testing laboratory. A copy of the test results and DNR reports shall be submitted to the lead plant operator and the village administrator. 
(e)  All measurements and test analyses of the characteristics of industrial wastes shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods. 
(Code 1983, § 13.45) 
Sec. 94-196. - Reporting criteria for nonresidential users. 
(a)  The village reserves the right to require any nonresidential user to submit quarterly to the village on forms provided by the village a certified statement of the characteristics of its industrial wastes discharged in the sewers and treatment works of the village or to any sewers connected to its treatment works. This statement shall be filed with the village administrator no later than the tenth day of the month following the quarter for which the report is required. 
(b)  The waste characteristics to be measured and certified by the user shall be: 
(1)  BOD in mg/l. 
(2)  Suspended solids in mg/l. 
(3)  Total phosphorus in mg/l. 
(4)  Such other constituents of wastewater as directed by the village administrator. 
(c)  Should there be a difference in understanding between the village and user as to the characteristics in this section, the village reserves the right to use the village results from analyses for purposes of billing. 
(d)  Whenever required by the village in accordance with section 94-195, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying nonresidential wastewater and material shall install a large manhole or sampling chamber in the building sewer in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village engineer and installed and maintained at all times at the user's expense. There shall be ample room in each sampling chamber to accurately sample and obtain composite samples for analyses. The chamber shall be safely, easily and independently (of other premises and buildings of users) accessible to authorized representatives of the village at all times. Where construction of a sampling chamber is not economically or otherwise feasible, alternate arrangements for sampling may be arranged at the discretion of the village engineer. 
(e)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be determined in accordance with the Standard Methods or with any other method approved by the village. 
(f)  The village administrator may elect at his option to have the metering and sample collection done by the industrial plant personnel and have composite samples delivered to a laboratory as designated by the village administrator for analysis. This procedure can also be terminated at any time by the village administrator upon reasonable notice. 
(Code 1983, § 13.47) 
Secs. 94-197-94-218. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FEES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 94-219. - Sewer service charges. 
(a)  Basis for sewer service charges. The sewer service charge shall be based on the sewer use charge. If any user of the sewer system procures any part or all of his water from sources other than the water utility, the user shall furnish, install and maintain at his expense water meters of a type approved by the water utility for the purpose of determining the volume of sewage discharged to the sewerage system as described in section 94-192. At the discretion of the village, a user procuring water from other sources than the water utility may be assigned a residential equivalent connection (REC) to be used as a basis for the sewer use charge as determined from section 94-193. If in the opinion of the village administrator the information in section 94-193 does not accurately reflect the user's wastewater discharge to the sewerage system, the village administrator may assign an REC to the user. 
(b)  Sewer use charge. 
(1)  A sewer use charge is imposed upon all users of the sewerage system. The sewer use charge shall have a component for recovering the operation, maintenance and replacement costs, a portion for recovering the capital costs and a portion for income credits of the sewer utility annual budget. On or before the first village board meeting in October of every year, the village administrator shall compute the sewer use charge. The operation, maintenance and replacement portion of the sewer use charge shall be computed by allocating the proposed net yearly operation, maintenance and replacement budget to the appropriate use factors. The cost per use factor shall be divided by the village in conjunction with the use factor to determine the unit cost ($/1,000 gallons, $/#) per use factor. The flow use factor will be determined by the village in conjunction with the water utility. The BOD, total suspended solids and phosphorous use factors will be determined from the concentration assigned to domestic wastewater plus surcharge user data. These use factors and the infiltration/inflow use factor will be determined by the village administrator, considering actual data for the previous 12-month period from the wastewater treatment facility and surcharge user data. The computations for recovering the capital cost portion of the sewer utility budget and for deriving the income credits will be computed in a similar manner. 
(2)  The residential water consumption for sprinkling as determined by the water utility and any water credit meters for any refrigeration, air conditioning system or industrial cooling water not entering the sewerage system shall not be used in computing the sewer use charge. 
(3)  The metered residential water use shall be adjusted to account for consumptive water use during the summer quarter. The volume used as the basis for the sewer service charge shall be the average quarterly water volume read by the village for the previous nine months. 
(4)  Users with domestic wastewater connected to the sewerage system who derive all or part of their water discharged to the sewer system from other sources than the water utility and who do not have these other water sources metered will be charged for operation, maintenance and replacement costs based upon their assigned number of residential equivalent connections. The flow per residential equivalent connection will be computed by the water utility or the village administrator on or before the first village board meeting in October of every year and shall equal the water used by residential customer minus sprinkling credits divided by the number of residential water customers. 
(Code 1983, § 13.38) 
Sec. 94-220. - Annual facilities use charge. 
    An annual facilities use charge is imposed upon each user connected to the collection system, including nondomestic and industrial waste dischargers. The facilities use charge recovers the portion of the sewer utility budget associated with infiltration/inflow for the operation, maintenance, replacement costs and capital costs. The annual facilities use charge shall be payable as herein provided and shall be computed on the basis of equivalent water meter connections associated with the sewerage system. At the same time the village administrator shall compute the average percentage of infiltration/inflow (I/I) to the system for the previous 12 months. The cost assigned to the flow use factor for the operation, maintenance and replacement budget and the capital costs shall be multiplied by the percentage of system I/I. The facilities use charge for the I/I related operation, maintenance, replacement costs and capital costs will be computed by dividing the appropriate I/I costs by the total number of equivalent water meter connections. 
(Code 1983, § 13.38(3)) 
Sec. 94-221. - Industrial and commercial charges for other than domestic wastewater. 
    Charges for wastewater other than domestic wastewater shall be based on flow, BOD, suspended solids and phosphorous and such other constituents that affect the cost of the collection and treatment. All persons discharging wastes into the sewerage system are subject to a surcharge, in addition to any other wastewater service charge, if their wastewater has a concentration greater than domestic wastewater concentrations. The volume of flow used for computing waste surcharges shall be the metered water consumption or the actual volume of waste as determined by a sampling and metering manhole or a discharge monitoring station. The sewer user charge shall be computed in accordance with the following formula: 
TC = (V × C v ) + 8.34V × [(BOD × C BOD ) + (TSS × C TSS ) + (P × C P )] 
Where: 
TC = Total user charge per quarter 
V = Volume of wastewater discharged during the quarter in million gallons 
C v = Unit cost for flow per million gallons 
BOD = Concentration of BOD in mg/l 
C BOD = Unit cost per pound of BOD 
TSS = Concentration of TSS in mg/l 
C TSS = Unit cost per pound of TSS 
P = Concentration of total phosphorous in mg/l 
C P = Unit cost per pound of P 
(1)  Business retention incentive. Any industrial customer with a total sanitary sewer user fee (charge) of $20,000.00 or more per quarter shall receive a ten percent discount applied to the total sewer bill. 
(Code 1983, § 13.38(4); Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, 1-23-12) 
Sec. 94-222. - Ready-to-serve charge. 
    The owner of each premises to which sewer service has been made available by the village but not connected to the sewerage system for sewer service shall pay for the availability of a ready-to-serve charge provided by section 94-220. Any ready-to-serve charge becoming effective during any year shall be charged on a pro rata basis for that year in which such charge becomes effective. This charge shall begin from date of notice by the village that the facility is ready to use. Pursuant to section 94-184(a), connection shall be made to the public sewer within 90 days. 
(Code 1983, § 13.38(5)) 
Sec. 94-223. - Special rates. 
    It is understood that the approving authority may at any time set special rates for any large commercial service, industrial use, extraterritorial areas, contract users or any other unique user that does not readily fit into other categories of users. Any user discharging any toxic pollutants, wastewater or other wastes to the sewerage system shall pay for the increased operation, maintenance and replacement costs caused by their discharge. 
(Code 1983, § 13.38(6)) 
Sec. 94-224. - Billing-Frequency, due date, late payment charge. 
    Sewer service charges shall be billed quarterly and shall be payable at the village clerk/treasurer's office or at any officially designated location. Statements for such charges and assessments levied and assessed in accordance with this section shall be due and payable within 20 days from and after the billing date. A late payment charge of ten percent per month will be added to quarterly sewer bills due and not paid within 20 days of issuance. This late payment charge will be applicable to all customers. The utility owner or customer may be given written notice that the bill is overdue not sooner than 20 days after the bill is issued. Unless payment or satisfactory arrangement for payment is made within the next ten business days, service may be disconnected pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1983, § 13.39(8); Ord. No. 95-8, § 13.39(8), 8-21-95; Ord. No. 16-10, § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 94-225. - Same-Responsible party, addressee. 
    The property owner is held responsible for all sewer bills on premises that he owns. All sewer bills and notices of any nature, relative to the sewer service, will be addressed to the owner or occupant and delivered to the addressee by bulk mail. 
(Code 1983, § 13.39(9)) 
Sec. 94-226. - Failure to receive bill; no penalty exemption. 
    Every reasonable care will be exercised in the proper delivery of sewer bills. Failure to receive a sewer bill, however, shall not relieve any person of the responsibility for payment of sewer rates within the prescribed period, nor exempt any person from any penalty imposed for delinquency in the payment thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 13.39(10)) 
Sec. 94-227. - Delinquent accounts. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 66.60(16)(a) and 66.069(1), Wis. Stats., the following procedure shall apply to collection of delinquent accounts for sewer service: 
(1)  Notice of payment due. On October 15 in each year notice shall be given to the owner or occupant of all lots or parcels of real estate to which sewer service has been furnished prior to October 1 by the sewer utility operated by the village and payment for which is owing and in arrears at the time of giving notice. The department in charge of the utility shall furnish the clerk/treasurer with a list of all such lots or parcels of real estate, and the notice shall be given by the clerk/treasurer. Such notice shall be in writing and shall state the amount of such arrears, including any penalty assessed pursuant to the rules of such utility; that unless the same is paid by November 1 thereafter a penalty of ten percent of the amount of such arrears will be added thereto; and that unless such arrears, with any such penalty, shall be paid by November 15 thereafter, the same will be levied as a tax against the lot or parcel of real estate to which sewer service was furnished and for which payment is delinquent as above specified. Such notice may be served by delivery to either such owner or occupant personally, or by letter addressed to such owner or occupant at the post office address of the owner or occupant of such lot or parcel of real estate. On November 16 the department issuing the notice shall certify and file with the clerk a list of all lots or parcels of real estate, giving the legal description thereof, to the owner or occupants of which notice of arrears in payment were given as above specified and which arrears still remain unpaid, and stating the amount of such arrears together with added penalty thereon as herein provided. Each such delinquent amount, including such penalty, shall thereon become a lien upon the lot or parcel of real estate to which the water or sewer service was furnished and payment for which is delinquent, and the clerk shall insert the same as a tax against the lot or parcel of real estate. All proceedings in relation to the collection of general property taxes and to the return and sale of property for delinquent taxes shall apply to such tax if the same is not paid within the time required by law for payment of taxes upon real estate. 
(2)  Request for hearing. The owner or occupant may, within ten days of the date the notice is sent, request a hearing in any charge disputed. Such a request for hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed with the village administrator. No such charge shall be placed upon the tax roll if a properly filed request for hearing is pending. All hearings shall be held by the village board within 30 days. 
(Code 1983, § 13.39(11); Ord. No. 95-8, § 13.39(11), 8-21-95) 
Sec. 94-228. - Service to outlying territory. 
(a)  The village, by proper resolution of the village board, shall have the right at its discretion, upon payments, terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon, to contract in writing for the right to use any sewer serving property located wholly or partly outside the village corporation limits. A permit fee of $250.00 for each sanitary sewer connection shall accompany the application. 
(b)  If a contract is made pursuant to subsection (a) above, a user of any sewer serving property wholly or partly outside the village corporate limits shall be subject to all of the terms and provisions of this article and, in addition to all payments and charges, is required to install a meter for the purpose of flow measurement. The meter shall be installed at the owner's expense in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village engineer and maintained at all times at the user's expense. In addition to the quarterly fees determined according to the rates set forth in section 94-221, a surcharge of 25 percent shall be assessed on each quarterly statement. 
(c)  If any property of a person desirous of becoming a user is situated outside the corporate limits of the village and not contiguous thereto so that it may not properly be annexed to and become part of the village corporate limits, the village, at its discretion, may permit such a connection, provided that a contract providing essentially the following be entered into between the village and the user: 
(1)  The user may connect buildings situated only on the fully described tract set forth in the agreement and in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations of the village and local, state and federal governments. 
(2)  The user, his successors and assigns, shall, in addition to costs noted previously, pay annually an amount equivalent to village taxes computed in the following manner: 
a.  The equalized, assessed value of the user's taxable property or of any subdivided part or separate tract thereof, as determined by proper authority of the county, shall be multiplied by the village's rate of tax upon real estate and personal property situated within its corporate area for the year when the tax rate is determined. 
b.  The amount, when computed by the village, shall be charged to the user, its successors and assigns, and the statement sent to the user shall be paid within 30 days after the date of sending. Any amount remaining unpaid after the due date shall draw interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum until paid. 
c.  The amount computed for the use shall be prorated from the date of the contract if the sewer system was used for only a partial year. 
d.  If the user or any successor or assigns thereof shall fail to pay the amount when due, each tract for which payment is not made shall be disconnected by the owner from any other sewer that was connected under the contract and ultimately attaches to the village wastewater treatment plant. The user shall have caused or required its sewer system to be constructed within the property in order that separate tracts may be so disconnected and hereby gave and granted the village an irrevocable easement for the purpose of going upon the same and disconnecting any such sewer if the producer, its successors or assigns fails to disconnect promptly when required. 
e.  In addition to the right of disconnection, the village shall have a lien upon the property or subdivided portion of it in the amount of any unpaid charges due. Upon the filing of notice, the lien shall be deemed perfected and the lien may be charged and redeemed or foreclosed and the property sold to satisfy the unpaid charges in accordance with statute. 
f.  The village shall have the additional right to file a civil suit to recover the amount of the lien, the full cost incurred in disconnection and all its reasonable legal expenses and attorney's fees incurred as a result of the suit. 
g.  All amounts charged under this section are due and shall continue to be due, whether or not such sewer is disconnected; and no sewer shall be reconnected until the village is paid in full for all amounts due it; and, in addition, the village shall be paid a deposit equal to the estimated charge for the next succeeding year. This deposit shall be held by the village in escrow and will be returned upon satisfactory payments of amounts due the village for a period of two years. 
(3)  The village shall not, without its prior written consent and acceptance, have dedicated to it or own any sewer system installed within the property; and the producer, its successors and assigns shall maintain the same at its own cost. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the dedication of part or all of such sewer system to another unit of government. 
(4)  Upon conveyance by the owner of all or any subdivided portion or tract of such property, the successor in title shall succeed to all rights and liabilities in this section; and the owner shall have no future liability to the village in respect to such tract except as shall have accrued as of the date the instrument of conveyance is recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county. 
(5)  If such property described in this section or any subdivided or separate tract shall be annexed to the village by proper ordinance, the agreement executed under this article shall terminate. 
(6)  The agreement executed under this article shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county, which recording shall constitute notice to any successor or assign of the owner of its terms and provisions and to which any subsequent conveyance or assignment of the owner shall be subject. 
(7)  If any part or provision of the agreement shall be found or held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the entire agreement shall terminate and all sewers of the owner or its successors or assigns shall be promptly disconnected from any such system that ultimately connects to the village wastewater treatment plant. 
(8)  The applicant for treatment service under an agreement pursuant to this article shall agree to assume user charges, industrial waste charges and capital surcharge, if applicable, and to obtain from the village the proper building permit by which the connection is allowed and the discharge permit, if applicable, which indicates what discharge will be made to the treatment system. 
(Code 1983, § 13.49) 
Secs. 94-229-94-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 

Sec. 94-251. - Unpolluted waters and stormwater. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sanitary sewer, except that stormwater runoff from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the village administrator. 
(b)  Stormwater other than that exempted in subsection (a) of this section and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the village administrator. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process water may be discharged upon approval of the village administrator to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1983, § 13.40(1)) 
Sec. 94-252. - Contents of wastes or wastewater. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the collection system either directly or indirectly any of the following described wastes or wastewater: 
(1)  Any liquid having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any wax, grease, oil, plastic or any other substance that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius to 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any solids, liquids or gases that by themselves or by interaction with other substances may cause fire, explosion or hazards; create toxic fumes; or in any other way be injurious to persons or property involved in the operation or maintenance of the sewerage system. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size to be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewer system, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and similar items, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension in the village sewers (100 percent passing half-inch screen, 90 percent passing quarter-inch screen). 
(6)  Any noxious or malodorous substance that either singly or by interaction with other substances is capable of causing odors objectionable to persons of ordinary sensitivity. 
(7)  Any wastes or wastewater having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to the sewerage system. 
(8)  Any wastes or wastewater of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle them in the sewerage system. 
(9)  Any wastewater or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance, such as plating or heat treating wastes, in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with wastewater treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create any hazard in the sewerage system, or that would cause the village wastewater treatment facilities to discharge any of the following pollutants in quantities in excess of the limitations established: 
Pollutant Mg/l Aluminum   800.00 Arsenic     0.25 Barium     2.00 Boron     1.00 Cadmium     2.00 Chromium-Total    21.80 Chromium-Hexavalent     3.60 Copper    17.60 Cyanide     1.20 Fluorides     2.50 Iron-Total    56.00 Lead     1.50 Manganese     1.00 Mercury     0.0005 Nickel     6.70 Phenols     0.30 Selenium     1.00 Silver     0.10 Total Dissolved Solids 1,500.00 Zinc    16.50  
(10)  Any radioactive wastes greater than allowable releases as specified by the current United States Bureau of Standards handbooks dealing with the handling and release of radioactivity. 
(11)  Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average of 100 mg/l of either or both of combinations of free or emulsified oil and grease. 
(12)  Any cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas or acidification in excess of one-half mg/l by weight as cyanide in the wastes. 
(13)  Wastes or wastewater which: 
a.  Cause unusual concentrations of solids or compositions; as for example, in total suspended solids of inert nature, such as fuller's earth, or in total dissolved solids, such as sodium chloride or sodium sulfate. 
b.  Cause excessive discoloration in the wastewater treatment facilities discharge. 
c.  Has a total BOD or suspended solids loading in excess of the wastewater discharge permit described in section 94-306. 
d.  Is discharged without application for a wastewater discharge permit or contractual agreement as required under section 94-308. 
e.  Cause damage to the collection system or impair the treatment process. 
(Code 1983, § 13.40(2)) 
Sec. 94-253. - Slugs of water or wastes. 
    No person shall allow the discharge of slugs of water or wastes to the collection system that may be harmful to the operation of the sewerage system. Where in the opinion of the lead plant operator slugging does occur, each person producing such a discharge into the collection system shall construct and maintain at his own expense, a storage reservoir of sufficient capacity with flow control equipment to ensure an equalized discharge over a 24-hour period. 
(Code 1983, § 13.40(3)) 
Sec. 94-254. - Discharge causing violation of WPDES permit. 
    No person shall discharge any waste or wastewater that would cause the wastewater treatment facilities to be in violation of any of the requirements of their WPDES permit. 
(Code 1983, § 13.40(4)) 
Sec. 94-255. - Accidental discharges. 
    Any person who accidentally discharges any wastes or wastewater prohibited under this division to the sewer system shall immediately report such discharge to the lead plant operator. 
(Code 1983, § 13.41) 
Secs. 94-256-94-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRETREATMENT, SAND AND GREASE TRAPS 

Sec. 94-281. - Pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  The village may require pretreatment facilities of any person discharging or planning to discharge industrial waste, if the waste or wastewater: 
(1)  Could cause damage to the collection system. 
(2)  Impair the treatment process. 
(3)  Cause the village to incur treatment costs exceeding those of domestic wastewater. 
(4)  Have any of the characteristics of the prohibited discharges described in division 3 of this article. 
(5)  Cause the wastewater treatment facilities to exceed its total design loading for volume, BOD, suspended solids or any other pollutant. 
(6)  Cause a particular industry to exceed its design allocation for volume, BOD, suspended solids or any other pollutant. 
(b)  Construction, operation and maintenance of pretreatment facilities shall be at the expense of the person discharging the industrial waste. 
(c)  Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for review of the lead plant operator and village prior to the start of construction. 
(d)  In accordance with ch. NR 114, Wis. Adm. Code, all pretreatment facilities shall be operated by qualified personnel holding certificate of the proper class issued by the state department of natural resources. 
(e)  All such preliminary treatment facilities required by this section shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating condition by the user or person operating and maintaining the facility served thereby at the user's expense. 
(f)  No provision contained in this section shall be construed to prevent or prohibit a separate or special contract or agreement between the village and any industrial user whereby industrial waste and material of unusual strength, character or composition may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to additional payment by the industrial user. Such contract or agreement shall have the prior approval of the village board. 
(g)  The village reserves the right to reject admission to the system of any waste harmful to the treatment or collection facilities or the receiving stream. 
(Code 1983, § 13.42) 
Sec. 94-282. - Sand and grease trap installations. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided at restaurants, repair garages, gasoline stations, car washes and other industrial or commercial establishments for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, oil, flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients. All sand and grease trap installations shall be constructed in accordance with the state plumbing code and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for easy cleaning and inspection. All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuous, efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 1983, § 13.43) 
Secs. 94-283-94-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 94-306. - Required. 
(a)  A wastewater discharge permit is required under this section if a person's discharge into the village's sewerage system has any of the following: 
(1)  A BOD greater than 200 mg/l. 
(2)  A suspended solids concentration greater than 250 mg/l. 
(3)  A phosphorous concentration greater than four mg/l. 
(4)  A volume of 5,000 gallons per day or greater is discharged by any user at one or more points of discharge. 
(5)  Any of the characteristics listed under division 3 of this article. 
(b)  Any such persons planning to discharge, change the characteristics of their discharge or whose discharge permit has expired shall make application to the village within 90 days prior to the discharge. A discharge permit will be required for each separate point of discharge into the village's sewerage system. No person shall discharge waste or wastewater into the village sewer system without a wastewater discharge permit, if required by this section. 
(c)  Commercial and industrial classification codes set forth in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972 Edition, as amended and supplemented, are adopted by the village as the basis for the issuance of discharge permits for building connections to a sewer. 
(Code 1983, § 13.46(1)) 
Sec. 94-307. - Application. 
    Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the village an application on the form prescribed by the village. If requested, the person making application shall also submit such scientific testing data or other information as may be required by the village board. The village administrator shall also have, at his discretion, the right to personally inspect the premises, equipment, material and laboratory testing facilities of the applicant. In support of this application, the user shall submit the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and Standard Industrial Classification number of applicant. 
(2)  Average daily volume of wastewater to be discharged. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by a method approved by the village administrator. 
(4)  Time and duration of discharge. 
(5)  Average and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials and types of materials that are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production. 
(9)  Number and type of employees and hours of work. 
(10)  Any other information as may be deemed by the village to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(Code 1983, § 13.46(2)) 
Sec. 94-308. - Conditions. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other regulations, user charges and fees established by the approving authority. The conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced by the village in accordance with this article and applicable state and federal regulations. Permit conditions will include the following: 
(1)  The sewer use charge, schedule for unit parameter charges and facility use charge for the wastewater to be discharged to the sewer system. 
(2)  The average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(4)  Requirements for installation of sampling and metering manholes or discharging monitoring stations. 
(5)  Pretreatment requirements. 
(6)  Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to wastewater discharges as specified by the lead plant operator and affording the village access thereto. 
(7)  Average and maximum pollutant concentrations and total daily average and maximum pollutant discharges for all pollutants subject to limitations and prohibitions present in the user's wastewater discharge. 
(8)  All persons required to make applications for a wastewater discharge permit shall, before issuance of the permit, enter into a contractual agreement with the village. The contractual agreement shall contain the conditions set forth in the discharge permit, requirements for industrial cost recovery charges and other items deemed necessary by the village. 
(9)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the village to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 1983, § 13.46(3)) 
Sec. 94-309. - Duration. 
    A permit shall be issued for one year and shall be automatically renewed on a year-to-year basis unless the person is notified by the village within 60 days prior to the expiration or any renewal of the permit or unless the discharger has signed a discharge monitoring agreement with the village which specifies a different duration period. After such notification by the village, the permit shall expire at the end of that year. The terms and conditions of the permit shall be subject to modification and change by the village during the life of the permit, if so required because of any ordinance, statutes, or rules and regulations of the approving authority of any applicable state or federal body. The person shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 60 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Code 1983, § 13.46(4)) 
Sec. 94-310. - Transfer. 
    Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation. 
(Code 1983, § 13.46(5)) 
Sec. 94-311. - Revocation. 
    Any user who violates any of the conditions of his permit contractual agreement or this article or of applicable state and federal regulations is subject to having his permit revoked. 
(Code 1983, § 13.46(6)) 
Sec. 94-312. - Discharge monitoring agreement. 
    The village may require an industry or any high-volume or high-strength waste discharger to enter into a discharge monitoring agreement if in the judgment of the village such an agreement is necessary to properly evaluate the user's discharge to the sewerage system or to obtain adequate information to properly assess a surcharge. In the absence of a discharge monitoring agreement, the village may assign a surcharge to a user which in the village's judgment is appropriate of the user's discharge. The village may assess a surcharge to a user even though the village does not require the user to enter into a discharge monitoring agreement. A sample of a discharge monitoring agreement is on file with the village. 
(Code 1983, § 13.46(7)) 
Secs. 94-313-94-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PRIVATE SEWAGE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 94-331. - Regulated. 
(a)  Where a public sewer is not available as set forth in section 94-184(a), the building or structure shall be connected to a private sewer and a disposal or treatment system shall be constructed in compliance with the terms and provisions of all applicable village, county, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(b)  Within 90 days after a property served by a private sewer or disposal system as described in this section shall become subject to the terms and provisions of section 94-184(a), direct connection shall be made to the public sewer according to the terms and provisions of this article, and all private sewers and disposal systems shall be disconnected and abandoned and all openings, tanks or other containers of human wastes, garbage and other wastes shall be permanently filled with granular material or removed. 
(c)  The village shall not be responsible in any way for the operation and maintenance of a private sewer or disposal system or facility. 
(d)  No provisions of this article shall be construed to provide lesser requirements for private sewers and systems as are presently or may be imposed and required by any other local governmental body or the state or federal government. 
(Code 1983, § 13.48) 
Sec. 94-332. - Septic and holding tank haulers. 
(a)  Nonindustrial users hauling wastes from a septic tank will not be permitted to discharge into the village sewer system or wastewater treatment system. 
(b)  Haulers of domestic holding tank wastewater will be permitted to discharge into the village wastewater treatment plant, provided that they: 
(1)  Have a permit to discharge such holding tank wastewater. Permits are required on an annual basis from the village administrator for a fee of $25.00. 
(2)  Provide a certificate of insurance for general liability, automobile liability and workers' compensation prior to permit issuance in the insurable amount equal to $300,000.00 for general liability, $300,000.00 for automobile liability, and the statutory limit for workers' compensation. 
(3)  Pay a user charge fee for each load of domestic holding tank wastewater at a rate established annually by the village for each 1,000 gallons or portion thereof. 
(4)  That the normal time frame for discharge of such holding tank wastewater during normal work hours, Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, from 7:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., time exception only in the case of an emergency as agreed to by the lead plant operator of the wastewater treatment facility, also with the hauler's knowledge that a surcharge will be added to the invoice. 
(c)  Industrial users hauling liquid wastes to the treatment plant shall be assessed user charges as described in section 94-219. 
(d)  Liquid wastes hauled to the treatment plant containing concentrations of constituents in excess of the limits set forth in section 94-251 shall not be accepted. 
(Code 1983, § 13.50) 
Chapter 95 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2004-04, adopted May 25, 2004, repealed and reenacted the village's zoning ordinance adopted August 21, 1978, as a new ch. 95. With the village's permission, the form used for section numbering has been changed to conform to the style of the rest of the chapters in the Code. The original section designations have been included in the parenthetical history note following each section. In addition, an appendix B has been added at the end of the chapter for cross referencing the renumbering. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 95-1. - Authority. 
    These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by §§ 61.35, 61.351, 61.354, 62.23(7), 87.30, and 281.33, Wis. Stats., and amendments thereto. Therefore, the village board of the Village of Kewaskum does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0101, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-2. - Title. 
    This Ordinance shall be known as, referred to, and cited as the "Zoning Ordinance, Village of Kewaskum, Washington County, Wisconsin" and is hereinafter referred to as the "Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0102, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-3. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare of the Village of Kewaskum, Wisconsin. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0103, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-4. - Intent. 
    It is the general intent of this Ordinance to regulate and restrict the use of all structures, lands and waters; and to: 
(a)  Regulate lot coverage and the size and location of all structures so as to prevent overcrowding and to provide adequate sunlight, air, sanitation, and drainage; 
(b)  Regulate population density and distribution so as to avoid sprawl or undue concentration and to facilitate the provision of adequate public services and utilities; 
(c)  Regulate parking, loading and access so as to lessen congestion in and promote the safety and efficiency of streets and highways; 
(d)  Secure safety from fire, flooding, pollution, contamination, and other dangers; 
(e)  Stabilize and protect existing and potential property values; 
(f)  Preserve and protect the beauty of the Village of Kewaskum; 
(g)  Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation, and other pollution of the surface and subsurface waters; 
(h)  Further the maintenance of safe and healthful water conditions; 
(i)  Provide for and protect a variety of suitable commercial and industrial sites; 
(j)  Prevent flood damage to persons and property and minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects; 
(k)  Protect the traffic-carrying capacity of existing and proposed arterial streets and highways; 
(l)  Implement those municipal, county, watershed, and regional comprehensive plans or elements of such plans adopted by the Village of Kewaskum; and 
(m)  Provide for the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance and to provide penalties for the violation of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0104, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-5. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0105, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-6. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the village and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power granted to the Village of Kewaskum by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0106, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-7. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this Ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0107, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed § 95-8, which pertained to warning and disclaimer of liability-floodplain, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0108, adopted May 25, 2004. 
Sec. 95-9. - Repeal. 
    All other Ordinances or parts of Ordinances of the village inconsistent or conflicting with this Ordinance, to the extent of the inconsistency only, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0109, 5-25-04) 
Secs. 95-10-95-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 95-21. - Jurisdiction. 
    The jurisdiction of this Ordinance shall apply to all structures, lands, water, and air within the corporate limits of the Village of Kewaskum. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0201, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-22. - Compliance. 
    No structure, land, water, or air shall hereafter be used or developed and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, substantially improved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered without a zoning permit, unless specifically exempted by section 95-204, and without full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable local, county, and state regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0202, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-23. - Municipalities and state agencies regulated. 
    Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this Ordinance and obtain all required permits. State agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt from compliance when § 30.12(4)(a), Wis. Stats., applies. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0203, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-24. - Use regulations. 
    Only the following uses and their essential services may be allowed in any district: 
(a)  Principal uses and their essential services specified for a district are permitted. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures are permitted in any district but not until their principal structure is present or under construction. Accessory structures permitted in floodplains are limited to those allowed in sections 95-49, 95-50, and 95-51. Residential accessory uses shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade, or industry except home occupations and professional home offices as defined in this Ordinance. 
(c)  Conditional uses and their accessory uses are considered as special uses requiring review, public hearing, and approval by the village board in accordance with section 95-206. When a use is classified as a conditional use at the date of adoption of this Ordinance, it shall be considered a legal use without further action of the village board. Changes to or substitution of conditional uses shall be subject to review and approval by the village board in accordance with section 95-206. 
(d)  Principal uses not specified in this Ordinance and which are found to be similar in character to principal and accessory uses permitted in the district may be permitted by the village board after the village plan commission has made a review and recommendation. 
(e)  Conditional uses not specified in this Ordinance and which are found by the plan commission to be similar in character to conditional uses permitted in the district, may be permitted by the village board after review, public hearing, and approval in accordance with section 95-206 of this Ordinance. 
(f)  Temporary uses, such as real estate sales field offices or shelters for materials and equipment being used in the construction of a permanent structure, may be permitted by the village board after review, public hearing, and approval in accordance with the same process as used for conditional uses in section 95-206 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0204, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-25. - Site regulations. 
    No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is unsuitable for such use or structure by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, low percolation or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare of this community. The zoning administrator, in applying the provision of this section shall, in writing, recite the particular facts upon which he bases his conclusion that the land is not suitable for certain uses. The applicant shall have an opportunity to present evidence contesting such unsuitability if he or she so desires. Thereafter, the village plan commission may affirm, modify, or withdraw the determination of unsuitability. In addition: 
(a)  All lots shall abut upon a public street or other officially approved means of access for a frontage of at least 60 feet at the right-of-way, except those in the B-3 District shall have a frontage of at least 40 feet and those fronting on the radius of a cul-de-sac turnaround shall have a frontage of at least 30 [feet]. 
(b)  All principal structures shall be located on a lot, and only one principal structure shall be located, erected, or moved onto a lot in single-family and two-family residential districts. The plan commission may permit more than one structure per lot in other districts where more than one structure is needed for the orderly development of the parcel. Where additional structures are permitted, the plan commission may impose additional yard requirements, landscaping requirements, or parking requirements, or require a minimum separation distance between principal structures. 
(c)  No zoning permit shall be issued for a lot which abuts a public street dedicated to only a portion of its proposed width and located on the side of which the required dedication has not been secured. 
(d)  Lots abutting more restrictive district boundaries shall provide side and rear yards not less than those required in the more restrictive abutting district. 
(e)  A buffer yard shall be created and maintained around all business and industrial districts which abut a residential district and any multifamily residential district that abuts a single-family residential, two-family residential, business, or industrial district. The plan commission may also require a landscaped buffer yard around business and industrial districts abutting park and institutional districts. Such buffer yards are not required if the use on the subject site is planned in the adopted Village of Kewaskum comprehensive plan, or element thereof, to abut a use of similar intensity. Buffer yards shall screen such uses from adjoining lands in such a manner that: 
1.  If a buffer yard is composed mostly of plant materials, it shall be of sufficient depth and height, and contain sufficient plant species as to provide dense visual screening within 3 years and during all seasons of the year. Existing healthy plant material of desirable species may be used to meet the screening requirement. 
2.  Where architectural walls or fences are used, sufficient landscaping shall be used in conjunction with such wall or fence, except those in the B-3 District, to create an attractive view from the residential side, and from the single-family or two-family residential side where buffer yards are required for multifamily residential uses. Any wall or fence shall not be less than four or more than six and one-half feet in height and shall comply with the requirements set forth for fences in section 95-74 of this Ordinance. 
3.  Buffer yards shall be used only for landscaping, required screening, drainage facilities, utilities, fences, walls, and earth berms. Required buffer yards may be located with required setbacks, however, structures and parking lots which are permitted within required setbacks are not permitted in a buffer yard. 
4.  Where a buffer yard is located next to a parking lot on the same site, the buffer screen shall be sufficiently opaque to prevent the penetration of headlight glare. Overhead lighting installed in or adjacent to a buffer yard shall not direct any rays onto adjacent residential properties. 
5.  All landscaping shall be maintained by the owner or operator to the satisfaction of the plan commission. 
6.  No signs shall be permitted on or in any part of the buffer yard. 
7.  All buffer yards shall comply with the traffic visibility requirements set forth in section 95-61 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0205, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-26. - Shoreland regulations. 
    In addition to any other applicable use, site, or sanitary restrictions and regulations, any use on land annexed after May 7, 1982, which lies within shorelands, as defined in section 95-222 of this Ordinance, shall comply with the requirements of § 61.353, Wis. Stats. Said requirements shall be administered and enforced by the village. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0206, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 95-27. - Reduction or joint use. 
    No lot, yard, parking area, building area, or other space shall be reduced in area or dimensions so as not to meet the provisions of this Ordinance. No part of any lot, yard, parking area, or other space required for a structure or use shall be used for any other structure or use not otherwise permitted by this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0207, 5-25-04) 
Secs. 95-28-95-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 95-31. - Establishment. 
(a)  For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Village of Kewaskum is hereby divided into 16 basic zoning districts as follows: 
A-1 Agricultural/Transitional District 
RS-1 Single-Family Residential District 
RS-2 Single-Family Residential District 
RD-1 Two-Family Residential District 
RM-1 Multifamily Residential District 
B-1 Limited Business District 
B-2 Community Business District 
B-3 Central Business District 
B-4 General Business and Warehousing District 
M-1 Limited Manufacturing District 
M-2 General Manufacturing District 
M-3 Extractive District 
I-1 Institutional District 
P-1 Park and Recreation District 
C-1 Lowland Conservancy District 
C-2 Upland Conservancy District 
    In addition, there is hereby established within the Village of Kewaskum five overlay zoning districts as follows: 
FW Floodway Regulatory Area 
FC Floodplain-Conservancy Regulatory Area 
UF Urban-Floodplain Regulatory Area 
RBT Residential/Business Transition Overlay District 
PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District 
(b)  Boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the maps "Zoning Map of the Village of Kewaskum, Washington County, Wisconsin," and "Supplementary Floodland Zoning Map of the Village of Kewaskum, Washington County, Wisconsin," which accompany and are herein made a part of this Ordinance [and on file in the office of the village clerk]. All notations and references shown on the maps are as much a part of this Ordinance as though specifically described herein. This Ordinance hereby incorporates herein any future changes or any later zoning maps that may be adopted by Ordinance of the village board. 
    The boundaries of floodplain and shoreland areas for lands annexed to the village after January 3, 1989, are as shown on the composite Washington County Shoreland, Wetland, and Floodplain Zoning Map. 
(c)  The district boundaries in all districts, except the conservancy districts and the Floodplain Regulatory Areas, shall be construed to follow: corporate limits; U.S. Public Land Survey lines; lot or property lines; centerlines of streets, highways, alleys, easements, and railroad rights-of-way, or such lines extended; unless otherwise noted on the zoning map. 
(d)  [Reserved.] 
(e)  Boundaries of the C-1 Lowland Conservancy District were based on the wetland inventory maps prepared by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission on the Commission's Year 2000 one inch equals 400 feet scale orthophotographs, and include, but are not limited to, all shoreland-wetlands of five acres or greater in area shown on those maps. The C-1 District may also include wetlands shown on development plan approvals. Precise wetland delineations shall be made by field investigation prior to development to verify C-1 District boundaries. 
(f)  Boundaries of the C-2 Upland Conservancy District were based on the upland portion of the primary environmental corridors, secondary environmental corridors, and isolated natural resource areas delineated in the adopted Village of Kewaskum comprehensive plan, or element thereof, and refinements or updates to such corridors or areas prepared by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission and adopted by the village board. The C-2 District may also include buffers, significant natural areas, and conservation easements shown on development plan approvals. 
(g)  Vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause the land vacated to be automatically placed in the same district as the abutting side to which the vacated land reverts. 
(h)  Annexations to or consolidations with the village subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be placed in the A-1 Agricultural/Transitional District, unless the annexation ordinance temporarily places the land in another district that is in conformance with the adopted village comprehensive plan or component thereof. Within one year, the village plan commission shall evaluate and recommend a permanent classification to the village board. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0301, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 16-07, §§ 1, 2, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 95-32. - Zoning map. 
    Certified copies of the zoning map and the supplementary floodland zoning map shall be adopted and approved with the text as part of this Ordinance and shall bear upon its face the attestation of the village president and the village clerk and shall be available to the public in the office of the village clerk. Amendments to the zoning maps shall take effect upon adoption by the village board, and the filing of proof of posting or publication thereof in the office of the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0302, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-33. - A-1 Agricultural/Transitional District. 
    This district is intended to provide for the continuation of general farming or related uses in those areas of the village that are not yet committed to urban development. The district is further intended to protect such lands from urban development until their orderly transition into urban-oriented districts is warranted and/or necessary. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. 
1.  General farming, including agriculture, dairying, floriculture, horticulture, forestry, grazing, hay, nurseries, orchards, stables, truck farming, and viticulture (grape growing). 
2.  Keeping and raising of domestic stock for agribusiness, show, breeding, boarding, riding academy, or other purposes incidental to the principal use of the premises and subject to the following limitations: 
a.  The keeping and raising of hogs is prohibited. 
b.  Not more than one head of livestock or 20 head of poultry shall be permitted for each one acre. 
3.  General farm buildings including barns, silos, sheds and storage bins intended for permitted agricultural uses and sized to meet demonstrated agricultural needs. 
4.  Existing dwellings not accessory to any farm operation or dwellings remaining after consolidation of farms. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Private garages and carports. 
2.  Farm dwellings for those resident owners and laborers actually engaged in one or more of the activities listed as permitted principal uses. 
3.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
4.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Keeping and raising of domestic stock for agribusiness, show, breeding, boarding, riding academy, or other purposes incidental to the principal use of the premises that exceeds one head of livestock or 20 head of poultry for each one acre. 
2.  Seasonal establishments selling fruits, vegetables, and selected farm products. 
3.  Energy conversion systems as set forth in section 95-84. 
4.  Fish hatcheries. 
5.  Game farms and game management. 
6.  Veterinarian services. 
7.  Utility substations, municipal wells, pumping stations, and municipal towers. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lot area. Five acres. 
2.  Lot width. Two hundred feet. 
(e)  Building height. No farm dwelling or parts of a dwelling shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  All yards. Fifty feet from all lot lines and street right-of-way lines. 
2.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0303, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-34. - RS-1 Single-Family Residential District. 
    This district is intended to provide for single-family residential development at densities not exceeding 4.4 dwelling units per net acre, and served by municipal sewer and water facilities. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. 
1.  Single-family dwellings with a garage. 
2.  Community living arrangements, and community-based residential facilities (CBRF), which have a capacity for eight or fewer persons, subject to the limitations set forth in § 62.23(7)(i), Wis. Stats. 
3.  Foster family homes. 
4.  Family day care homes. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Private garages and carports. 
2.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
3.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Bed and breakfast establishments provided that: no more than four bedrooms are rented; adequate off-street parking and access to the parking is provided; no meals other than breakfast are served to only renters of the establishment; individual rental shall not exceed seven consecutive days in length; no retail sales, other than arts or crafts, shall occur; the owner shall reside in the establishment; no bedrooms shall be permitted to be in an accessory structure; all requirements set forth in § 254.74, Wis. Stats., and Ch. HFS 197, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be fully complied with; and necessary state permits and licenses have been secured. One exterior advertising sign, not exceeding four square feet in area and mounted flush against the dwelling, may be permitted. 
2.  Community living arrangements and community-based residential facilities (CBRF) which have a capacity for nine or more persons. 
3.  Freestanding solar energy systems as set forth in section 95-4. 
4.  Utility substations, municipal wells, pumping stations, and municipal towers. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lot area. Ten thousand square feet. 
2.  Lot width. Seventy-five feet. 
3.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height and area. 
1.  Height. Not to exceed 35 feet. 
2.  Floor area. Not less than a total of 1,200 square feet with a minimum first floor area of 750 square feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  Street yard. Thirty feet. 
2.  Side yard. An aggregate of 15 feet, with no single side yard less than seven feet. 
3.  Rear yard. Twenty-five feet. 
4.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0304, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-35. - RS-2 Single-Family Residential District. 
    This district is intended to provide for single-family residential development at densities not exceeding 6.1 dwelling units per net acre, and served by municipal sewer and water facilities. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. 
1.  Single-family dwellings with a garage. 
2.  Existing two-family dwellings provided the two-family structure existed as of April 1, 1978. 
3.  Conversion of an existing two-family dwelling into a single-family dwelling. Once the structure is converted to a single-family dwelling, said structure shall not be permitted to be reverted to a two-family dwelling. 
4.  Community living arrangements, and community-based residential facilities (CBRF), which have a capacity for eight or fewer persons, subject to the limitations set forth in § 62.23(7)(i), Wis. Stats. 
5.  Foster family homes. 
6.  Family day care homes. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Private garages and carports. 
2.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
3.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Bed and breakfast establishments provided that: no more than four bedrooms are rented; adequate off-street parking and access to the parking is provided; no meals other than breakfast are served to only renters of the establishment; individual rental shall not exceed seven consecutive days in length; no retail sales, other than arts or crafts, shall occur; the owner shall reside in the establishment; no bedrooms shall be permitted to be in an accessory structure; all requirements set forth in § 254.74. Wis. Stats., and ch. HFS 197, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be fully complied with; and necessary state permits and licenses have been secured. One exterior advertising sign, not exceeding four square feet in area and mounted flush against the dwelling, may be permitted. 
2.  Community living arrangements and community-based residential facilities (CBRF) which have a capacity for nine or more persons. 
3.  Freestanding solar energy systems as set forth in section 95-84. 
4.  Utility substations, municipal wells, pumping stations, and municipal towers. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lot area. Seven thousand two hundred square feet. 
2.  Lot width. Sixty feet. 
3.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height and area. 
1.  Height. Not to exceed 35 feet. 
2.  Floor area. Not less than a total of 1,000 square feet with a minimum first floor area of 600 square feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  Street yard. Twenty-five feet. 
2.  Side yard. An aggregate of 15 feet with no single side yard less than seven feet. 
3.  Rear yard. Twenty-five feet. 
4.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0305, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-36. - RD-1 Two-Family Residential District. 
    This district is intended to provide for two-family residential development at densities not exceeding 7.3 dwelling units per net acre. Single-family residential development may also occur in this district at densities not exceeding 7.3 dwelling units per net acre. All RD-1 residential developments shall be served by municipal sewer and water facilities. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. 
1.  Two-family dwellings with a garage. 
2.  Single-family dwellings with a garage. 
3.  Community living arrangements, and community-based residential facilities (CBRF), which have a capacity for eight or fewer persons, subject to the limitations set forth in § 62.23(7)(i), Wis. Stats. 
4.  Foster family homes. 
5.  Family day care homes. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Private garages and carports. 
2.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
3.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Conversion of a single-family dwelling into a two-family dwelling provided that: 
a.  The structure was in existence as of April 1, 1978; and 
b.  Each dwelling unit shall meet the minimum floor area requirements for the RD-1 District. 
2.  Bed and breakfast establishments provided that: no more than four bedrooms are rented; adequate off-street parking and access to the parking is provided; no meals other than breakfast are served to only renters of the establishment; individual rental shall not exceed seven consecutive days in length; no retail sales, other than arts or crafts, shall occur; the owner shall reside in the establishment; no bedrooms shall be permitted to be in an accessory structure; all requirements set forth in § 254.74, Wis. Stats., and ch. HFS 197, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be fully complied with; and necessary state permits and licenses have been secured. One exterior advertising sign, not exceeding four square feet in area and mounted flush against the dwelling, may be permitted. 
3.  Freestanding solar energy systems as set forth in section 95-74. 
4.  Community living arrangements and community-based residential facilities (CBRF) which have a capacity for nine or more persons. 
5.  Utility substations, municipal wells, pumping stations, and municipal towers. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lot area. Twelve thousand square feet. 
2.  Lot width. Ninety feet. 
3.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height and area. 
1.  Height. Not to exceed 35 feet. 
2.  Floor area. Not less than a total of 1,000 square feet per unit, with a minimum first floor area of 600 square feet per unit. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  Street yard. Twenty-five feet. 
2.  Side yard. An aggregate of 20 feet, with no single side yard less than eight feet. 
3.  Rear yard. Twenty-five feet. 
4.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0306, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-37. - RM-1 Multifamily Residential District. 
    This district is intended to provide for multifamily residential development at densities not exceeding 21.8 dwelling units per net acre for efficiency and one-bedroom apartments; or 14.5 dwelling units per net acre for two-bedroom apartments; or 12.4 dwelling units per net acre for three-bedroom or larger apartments; or a proportionate combination not to exceed the above ratios. Two-family residential development may also occur in this district at densities not exceeding 7.3 dwelling units per net acre. All RM-1 residential developments shall be served by municipal sewer and water facilities. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. 
1.  Multifamily dwellings. 
2.  Two-family dwellings. 
3.  Community living arrangements, and community-based residential facilities (CBRF), having a capacity for 15 or fewer persons, subject to the limitations set forth in § 62.23(7)(i), Wis. Stats. 
4.  Foster family homes. 
5.  Foster day care homes. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Private garages and carports. 
2.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
3.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Bed and breakfast establishment provided that: no more than four bedrooms are rented; adequate off-street parking and access to the parking is provided; no meals other than breakfast are served to only renters of the establishment; individual rental shall not exceed seven consecutive days in length; no retail sales, other than arts or crafts, shall occur; the owner shall reside in the establishment; no bedrooms shall be permitted to be in an accessory structure; all requirements set forth in § 254.74, Wis. Stats., and ch. HFS 197, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be fully complied with; and necessary state permits and licenses have been secured. One exterior advertising sign, not exceeding four square feet in area and mounted flush against the dwelling, may be permitted. 
2.  Community living arrangements and community-based residential facilities (CBRF) which have a capacity for 16 or more persons. 
3.  Housing for the elderly not exceeding 22 units per net acre. 
4.  Rest homes, nursing homes, clinics, and children's nurseries provided that all principal structures are not closer than 50 feet to a lot line. 
5.  Conversion of a single-family dwelling into a two-family dwelling provided that: 
a.  The structure was in existence as of April 1, 1978; and 
b.  Each dwelling unit shall meet the minimum lot and floor area requirements for two-family dwellings under the RM-1 District. 
6.  Freestanding solar energy systems as set forth in section 95-84. 
7.  Utility substations, municipal wells, pumping stations, and municipal towers. 
(d)  Lot area and width. 
1.  Minimums. Lots shall be no less than 12,000 square feet in area, and no dwelling unit shall have a lot area of less than the following: 
Dwelling Type Minimum 
Lot Area 
(sq. ft.) Minimum 
Lot Width 
(feet) Two-family 12,000 90 Multifamily, efficiency and one-bedroom 2,000 
per unit 100 Multifamily, two-bedroom 3,000 
per unit 100 Multifamily, three-bedroom or more 3,500 
per unit 100  
2.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height and area. 
1.  Height. Not to exceed 35 feet. 
2.  Floor area. Floor area as follows: 
Dwelling Type Minimum Floor Area 
(sq. ft.) Two-family 900 per unit; 
1,800 per building Multifamily, efficiency 450 per unit Multifamily, one-bedroom 500 per unit Multifamily, two-bedroom 650 per unit Multifamily, three-bedroom or more 800 per unit  
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  Street yard. Thirty feet. 
2.  Side yard. Side yard as follows: 
Dwelling Type Aggregate 
Side Yard 
(feet) Minimum Single 
Side Yard 
(feet) Two-family 20 8 Multifamily, 3-4 units 30 15 Multifamily, 5-8 units 40 20 Multifamily, 9 or more units 50 25  
3.  Rear yard. Twenty-five feet. 
4.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(h)  Plans and specifications to be submitted to plan commission. To encourage a multifamily residential environment that is compatible with the neighborhood character, zoning permits for uses allowed in the RM-1 Multifamily Residential District shall not be issued without review and approval by the Village of Kewaskum Plan Commission. Said review and approval shall be concerned with, but not limited to, the general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking, landscaping, and open space utilization in accordance with article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0307, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-38. - B-1 Limited Business District. 
    This district is intended to provide for individual or small groups of retail and service establishments serving primarily the convenience of a local neighborhood, and where character, appearance, and operation of which are reasonably compatible with the character of the surrounding area. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. The following retail sale and service establishments, but not including drive-through facilities and outdoor storage of products or merchandise: 
1.  Retail stores and shops offering convenience goods and services not exceeding 1,500 square feet of primary floor area and not including automobiles, large marine craft, and fuel and vehicle service stations. 
2.  Business and professional offices and studios not exceeding 1,000 square feet of primary floor area. 
3.  Civic, social, and fraternal associations. 
4.  Clothing and merchandise repair stores employing not more than five persons on any working shift, including small watercraft such as canoes and kayaks, but excluding automobile and large watercraft related repairs. 
5.  Meat markets, but not including slaughtering. 
6.  Self-service dry-cleaning and laundry establishments. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
2.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
3  Private garages or storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of a business. 
4.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following retail sale and service establishments, but not including drive-through facilities and outdoor storage of products or merchandise: 
1.  Retail stores and shops exceeding 1,500 square feet to a maximum of 10,000 square feet of primary floor area, excluding automobiles, large watercraft, and fuel and vehicle service stations. The maximum primary floor area shall be interpreted as the total floor area of all buildings on a lot regardless of whether or not the floor area includes a single building or multiple buildings (such as a mall setting). 
2.  Office and customer service facilities, such as, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Business, professional, medical, public service, banking, and savings and loan offices exceeding 1,000 square feet of primary floor area. 
b.  Restaurants, taverns, theaters, and other such commercial entertainment facilities. 
c.  Studios for commercial photography, advertising, art, music, dancing, and other such uses, including related schools, exceeding 1,000 square feet of primary floor area. 
3.  Animal hospitals and veterinary services, but not including the boarding of animals. 
4.  Antique and secondhand stores. 
5.  Bed and breakfast establishments provided that: no more than four bedrooms are rented; adequate off-street parking and access to the parking is provided; no meals other than breakfast are served to only renters of the establishment; individual rental shall not exceed seven consecutive days in length; no retail sales, other than arts or crafts, shall occur; the owner shall reside in the establishment; no bedrooms shall be permitted to be in an accessory structure; all requirements set forth in § 254.74, Wis. Stats., and ch. HFS 197, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be fully complied with; and necessary state permits and licenses have been secured. One exterior advertising sign, not exceeding four square feet in area and mounted flush against the dwelling, may be permitted. 
6.  Cellular towers, as set forth in section 95-83. 
7.  Commercial adult and child care centers. 
8.  Construction services. 
9.  Freestanding solar energy systems as set forth in section 95-84. 
10.  Funeral and crematory services. 
11.  Gymnasiums and athletic clubs. 
12.  Outdoor display of retail merchandise for sale. 
13.  Pet and pet grooming stores. 
14.  Roadside stands selling seasonal goods or services. 
15.  Sale of beer, wine, and distilled alcoholic beverages. 
16.  Utility substations, municipal wells, pumping stations, and municipal towers. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lot area. Ten thousand square feet. 
2.  Lot width. Ninety feet. 
3.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height. Not to exceed 35 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  Street yard. Twenty-five feet. 
2.  Side yard. Ten feet. 
3.  Rear yard. Twenty-five feet. 
4.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(h)  Plans and specifications to be submitted to plan commission. To encourage a business environment that is compatible with the neighborhood character of the village, zoning permits for uses allowed in the B-1 Limited Business District shall not be issued without review and approval by the Village of Kewaskum Plan Commission. Said review and approval shall be concerned with, but not limited to, the general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking, loading and unloading, landscaping, and open space utilization in accordance with article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0308, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-39. - B-2 Community Business District. 
    This district is intended to provide for the orderly and attractive grouping in appropriate locations of business activities of a more general nature serving a larger community trade area. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. The following retail sale and service establishments, but not including drive-through facilities and outdoor storage of products or merchandise: 
1.  All principal permitted uses allowed in the B-1 District. 
2.  Retail stores and shops not exceeding 10,000 square feet of primary floor area. The maximum floor area shall be interpreted as the total floor area of all buildings on a lot regardless of whether or not the floor area includes a single building or multiple buildings (such as a mall setting). 
3.  Office and customer service facilities such as, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Business, professional, medical, public service, banking, and savings and loan offices. 
b.  Restaurants, taverns, theaters, and other such commercial entertainment facilities. 
c.  Commercial photography, advertising, art, music, dancing, and other such uses, including related schools. 
4.  Automobile and marine craft rental, repair, and sales, including the sale of parts and other accessories, but not including junk and salvage yards. 
5.  Equipment rental and leasing services. 
6.  Hotels and motels. 
7.  Laundry and dry-cleaning establishments. 
8.  Outdoor display of retail merchandise for sale. 
9.  Pet and pet grooming stores. 
10.  Sale of beer, wine, and distilled alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
2.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
3.  Private garages or storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of a business. 
4.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following retail sale and service establishments: 
1.  Retail stores and shops in excess of 10,000 square feet of primary floor area. 
2.  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics provided that no services, including the boarding of animals, are offered outside an enclosed building. 
3.  Antique and secondhand stores. 
4.  Car washes. 
5.  Cellular towers as set forth in section 95-83. 
6.  Check cashing services. 
7.  Construction services and contractor shops. 
8.  Commercial adult and child care centers. 
9.  Dermagraphic services (tattoo shops). 
10.  Disinfecting and exterminating services. 
11.  Drive-through facilities. 
12.  Freestanding solar energy systems as set forth in section 95-84. 
13.  Fuel and automobile service stations. 
14.  Funeral and crematory services. 
15.  Gymnasiums and athletic clubs. 
16.  Outdoor storage of products or merchandise. 
17.  Radio and television transmitting and receiving stations. 
18.  Roadside stands selling seasonal goods or services. 
19.  Sale of guns, ammunitions, fireworks, fuel oil, and bottled gas. 
20.  Utility substations, municipal wells, pumping stations, and municipal towers. 
21.  Adult-oriented establishments. 
a.  The village board finds that adult-oriented establishments require special zoning restrictions in order to protect and preserve the public health, safety, welfare, and morals of the village. In recognition of the protections afforded to the citizens under the 1st and 14th Amendments, it is not the intent of this subsection to inhibit freedom of speech or the press, but rather to restrict the location of defined material and activities consistent with the village's interest in the present and future character of its community development. Accordingly, adult-oriented establishments are subject to the following: 
(i)  No building for an adult-oriented establishment or use, measured from the closest point of the structure or portion of the structure occupied or proposed for occupancy by the establishment or use, shall be located within 500 feet of the nearest property line of the premises of a hospital, residence, religious institution, school, funeral parlor, crematorium, day care center, restaurant, library, park, museum, playground, or any other public or private building or premises likely to be utilized by persons under the age of 18 years. 
(ii)  No building for an adult-oriented establishment or use shall be located within 500 feet of a building for another adult-oriented establishment or use. The distance between any two adult-oriented establishments shall be measured from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(iii)  No building for an adult-oriented establishment or use shall be located within 500 feet of the nearest property line of any area zoned residential or agricultural in the village or a contiguous town or municipality. 
(iv)  Required separation distances between an adult establishment and other uses, including another adult establishment, are to be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects. Presence of another municipality, county, or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this subsection. 
(v)  Advertisements, displays, pictures, or other promotional materials which are sexual in nature shall not be shown or exhibited on the premises in a manner which makes them visible from pedestrian ways or other public areas. All points of access into such establishments and all windows or other openings shall be located, constructed, covered, or screened in a manner that will prevent a view into the interior from any public area. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lot area. Ten thousand square feet. 
2.  Lot width. Seventy-five feet. 
3.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height. Not to exceed 35 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  Street yard. Twenty-five feet. 
2.  Side yard. Ten feet. 
3.  Rear yard. Twenty-five feet. 
4.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(h)  Plans and specifications to be submitted to plan commission. To encourage a business environment that is compatible with the community character of the village, zoning permits for uses allowed in the B-2 Community Business District shall not be issued without review and approval by the Village of Kewaskum Plan Commission. Said review and approval shall be concerned with, but not limited to, general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking, loading and unloading, landscaping, and open space utilization in accordance with article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0309, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-40. - B-3 Central Business District. 
    The district is intended to provide for the orderly continuation of the traditional central business district. The business activities in the district are of a general nature and are typically characterized by on-street parking and structures that abut the street right-of-way. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. All principal permitted uses allowed in the B-2 District, except retail stores and shops shall not exceed 1,500 square feet of primary floor area; business, professional, medical, public service, banking, and savings and loan offices shall not exceed 1,000 square feet of primary floor area; studios for commercial photography, advertising, art, music, dancing, and other such uses, including related schools, shall not exceed 1,000 square feet of primary floor area; and outdoor display of retail merchandise for sale and automobile and large marine craft (except small watercraft, such as canoes and kayaks, which are permitted uses) rental, repair, and sales shall be excluded. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
2.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
3.  Private garages or storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of a business. 
4.  Essential services. 
5.  Residential quarters for the owner or proprietor, condominiums, and rental apartments in the rear of a business establishment or on a nongroundfloor level provided that there shall be a minimum floor area of 300 square feet for an efficiency apartment, 420 square feet for a one-bedroom apartment, and 500 square feet for a two-bedroom apartment. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following retail sale and service establishments, but not including outdoor storage of products or merchandise: 
1.  All conditional uses allowed in the B-2 District, except adult-oriented establishments, and retail stores and shops not exceeding 10,000 square feet of primary floor area. 
2.  Office and customer service facilities such as, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Business, professional, medical, public service, banking, and savings and loan offices exceeding 1,000 square feet of primary floor area. 
b.  Studios for commercial photography, advertising, art, music, dancing, and other such uses, including related schools, exceeding 1,000 square feet of primary floor area. 
3.  Automobile and large marine craft rental, repair, and sales, including the sale of parts and other accessories, but not including junk and salvage yards. 
4.  Bed and breakfast establishments provided that: no more than four bedrooms are rented; adequate off-street parking and access to the parking is provided; no meals other than breakfast are served to only renters of the establishment; individual rental shall not exceed seven consecutive days in length; no retail sales, other than arts or crafts, shall occur; the owner shall reside in the establishment; no bedrooms shall be permitted to be in an accessory structure; all requirements set forth in § 254.74, Wis. Stats., and ch. HFS 197, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be fully complied with; and necessary state permits and licenses have been secured. One exterior advertising sign, not exceeding four square feet in area and mounted flush against the dwelling, may be permitted. 
5.  Drive-through facilities, excluding those for restaurants. 
6.  Housing for the elderly not exceeding 22 units per net acre. 
7.  Outdoor display of retail merchandise for sale. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lot area. Five thousand square feet. 
2.  Lot width. Forty feet. 
3.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height. Not to exceed 35 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  Street yard. None. 
2.  Side yard. None. 
3.  Rear yard. None. 
4.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(h)  Plans and specifications to be submitted to plan commission. To encourage a business environment that is compatible with the community character of the village, zoning permits for uses allowed in the B-3 Central Business District shall not be issued without review and approval by the Village of Kewaskum Plan Commission. Said review and approval shall be concerned with, but not limited to, the general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking, loading and unloading, landscaping, and open space utilization in accordance with article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0310, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-41. - B-4 General Business and Warehousing District. 
    This district is intended to provide for the orderly development of businesses conducting wholesale and retail business, as well as storage. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. The following wholesale and/or retail sales and warehousing establishments, but not including drive-through facilities and outdoor storage of products or merchandise: 
1.  Establishments for the wholesaling, retail sales, and warehousing of the following goods and materials within the confines of a building, other than flammable liquids and gaseous, vaporous, or explosive substances: 
a.  Automobile, marine craft, and related equipment, but not including junk or salvage yards. 
b.  Beer, wine, distilled alcoholic beverages, soda, and bottled water processing and storage. 
c.  Commercial and industrial machinery, equipment, and supplies. 
d.  Electrical appliances, computers, televisions, and stereos. 
e.  Electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning parts and equipment. 
f.  Equipment and supplies for service establishments. 
g.  Footwear, apparel, and accessories. 
h.  Food lockers. 
i.  Furniture and home furnishings. 
j.  Grain, fruits, and vegetables. 
k.  Groceries and household goods. 
l.  Hardware, paint, lumber, and construction materials. 
m.  Paper and paper products. 
n.  Transportation equipment and supplies. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
2.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
3.  Offices, power supply, and other uses normally auxiliary to the principal business operation. 
4.  Private garages or storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of the business. 
5.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following wholesaling and/or retail sales and warehousing establishments, but not including drive-through facilities and outdoor storage of products or merchandise: 
1.  Animal feeds, fertilizer, seeds, garden and lawn supplies, animal health products, and lawn equipment, including processing of feed prepared for animals and fowl. 
2.  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics provided that no services, including the boarding of animals, are offered outside an enclosed building. 
3.  Cellular towers as set forth in section 95-83. 
4.  Diary products and processing. 
5.  Fish and seafood. 
6.  Freight yards, freight terminals, and transshipment depots. 
7.  Freestanding solar energy systems as set forth in section 95-84. 
8.  Fuel oil, bottled gas, and ice dealers. 
9.  Hides, skins, wool, and mohair. 
10.  Meat and meat product, slaughtering and processing. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lot area. Ten thousand square feet. 
2.  Lot width. Ninety feet. 
3.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height. Not to exceed 35 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  Street yard. None. 
2.  Side yard. None. 
3.  Rear yard. None. 
4.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(h)  Plans and specifications to be submitted to plan commission. To encourage a business environment that is compatible with the community character of the village, zoning permits for uses allowed in the B-4 General Business and Warehousing District shall not be issued without review and approval by the Village of Kewaskum Plan Commission. Said review and approval shall be concerned with, but not limited to, the general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking, loading and unloading, landscaping, and open space utilization in accordance with article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0311, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-42. - M-1 Limited Manufacturing District. 
    This district is intended to provide for manufacturing, production, or fabrication operations of a limited nature and size, which, on the basis of physical and operational characteristics, would not be detrimental to the surrounding area or to the village as a whole by reason of smoke, noise, dust, odor, traffic, physical appearance, or other similar factors; and to establish such regulatory controls as will reasonably insure compatibility with the surrounding area in this respect. Also, the M-1 District is intended to provide for the orderly and attractive grouping, at appropriate locations, of wholesale business establishments. All uses in this district must meet the performance standards set forth in article IX. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. 
1.  All uses involving the manufacture, production, or fabrication of products within the confines of a building and in which any smoke, dust, flash, noise, or odor produced in the manufacturing or fabrication process is confined within a building. 
2.  All uses involving the provision of a service in which any smoke, dust, flash, noise, or odor produced by such service is confined within a building, and is either a manufacturing-related, production-related, or fabrication-related use confined within a building or is not permitted in business districts. 
3.  Establishments for the wholesaling, warehousing, or storage of goods and materials other than flammable liquids, and gaseous, vaporous, or explosive substances where such goods or materials are temporarily stored inside a building. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
2.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
3.  Offices, storage, power supply, and other uses normally auxiliary to the principal industrial operation. 
4.  Private garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of the business. 
5.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Aggregate, ready-mix, and asphalt plants. 
2.  Animal hospitals, veterinary services, and boarding of animals. 
3.  Book, newspaper, and magazine publishing, printing, and binding; binding devices. 
4.  Canneries. 
5.  Cellular towers as set forth in section 95-83. 
6.  Central composting site and related operations, such as wood shaving or brush collection sites. 
7.  Commercial greenhouses. 
8.  Commercial service facilities such as athletic clubs, day care centers, restaurants, financial institutions, and clinics, provided that all such services are oriented toward industrial district users and employees and that other users are only incidental customers. 
9.  Dairy products and processing. 
10.  Dimension hardwood flooring, veneer, and plywood manufacturing and processing. 
11.  Dispensing or sale of flammable and nonflammable liquids. 
12.  Energy conversion systems as set forth in section 95-84. 
13.  Experimental, testing, and research laboratories. 
14.  Forges, foundries, refineries, and smelters. 
15.  Freight yards, freight terminals, and transshipment depots. 
16.  Lumber yards, millwork, sawmills, and planing mills. 
17.  Machine and welding shops. 
18.  Meat processing and packaging plants. 
19.  Motor vehicle repair shop. 
20.  Outdoor storage. 
21.  Pleating, decorative, and novelty stitching and tucking for the trade. 
22.  Processing of seed or products from grain for animal feed, processing of animal health products, and storage of animal feeds, fertilizer, seeds, and animal health products. 
23.  Recycling center and/or transfer stations. 
24.  Self-service storage facilities (mini-warehousing). 
25.  Storage of explosive or flammable materials related to the permitted use. 
26.  Tanneries. 
27.  Utility substations, municipal wells, pumping stations, and municipal towers. 
28.  Vehicle fueling stations. 
29.  Adult-oriented establishments. 
a.  The village board finds that adult-oriented establishments require special zoning restrictions in order to protect and preserve the public health, safety, welfare, and morals of the village. In recognition of the protections afforded to the citizens under the 1st and 14th Amendments, it is not the intent of this subsection to inhibit freedom of speech or the press, but rather to restrict the location of defined material and activities consistent with the village's interest in the present and future character of its community development. Accordingly, adult-oriented establishments are subject to the following: 
(i)  No building for an adult-oriented establishment or use, measured from the closest point of the structure or portion of the structure occupied or proposed for occupancy by the establishment or use, shall be located within 500 feet of the nearest property line of the premises of a hospital, residence, religious institution, school, funeral parlor, crematorium, day care center, restaurant, library, park, museum, playground, or any other public or private building or premises likely to be utilized by persons under the age of 18 years. 
(ii)  No building for an adult-oriented establishment or use shall be located within 500 feet of another adult-oriented establishment or use. The distance between any two adult-oriented establishments shall be measured from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(iii)  No building for an adult-oriented establishment or use shall be located within 500 feet of the nearest property line of any area zoned residential or agricultural in the village or a contiguous town or municipality. 
(iv)  Required separation distances between an adult establishment and other uses, including another adult establishment, are to be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects. Presence of another municipality, county, or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this subsection. 
(v)  Advertisements, displays, pictures, or other promotional materials which are sexual in nature shall not be shown or exhibited on the premises in a manner which makes them visible from pedestrian ways or other public areas. All points of access into such establishments and all windows or other openings shall be located, constructed, covered, or screened in a manner that will prevent a view into the interior from any public area. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lots shall provide sufficient area for the principal structure and its accessory structures, off-street parking and loading/unloading areas, and required yards, but shall be no less than 10,000 square feet in area and 75 feet in width. 
2.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height. Not to exceed 45 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  Street yard. Twenty-five feet. 
2.  Side yard. Ten feet. 
3.  Rear yard. Twenty-five feet. 
4.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(h)  Plans and specifications to be submitted to plan commission. To encourage a manufacturing and industrial environment that is compatible with the community character of the village, zoning permits for uses allowed in the M-1 Limited Manufacturing District shall not be issued without review and approval by the Village of Kewaskum Plan Commission. Said review and approval shall be concerned with, but not limited to, the general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking, loading and unloading, landscaping, and open space utilization in accordance with article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0312, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-43. - M-2 General Manufacturing District. 
    This district is intended to provide the same type of manufacturing, production, and fabricating operations and uses as in the M-1 Limited Manufacturing District, plus more intensive uses. However, these operations and uses shall be provided in those areas where the relationships to surrounding land use would create fewer problems of compatibility. The M-2 District also permits those activities generally perceived as being of a nuisance nature or considered to be hazardous. All uses in this district must meet the performance standards set forth in article IX of this Ordinance. Such districts should not normally abut directly upon residential, commercial, or institutional districts. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. 
1.  All permitted uses allowed in the M-1 District. 
2.  All manufacturing, production, fabricating, and storage uses not permitted in any other industrial district (except the manufacture, production, or fabrication of explosives, flammable liquids, and gaseous or vaporous substances) provided that such permitted uses are confined within a building. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
2.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
3.  Offices, storage, power supply, and other uses normally auxiliary to the principal industrial operation. 
4.  Private garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of the business. 
5.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  All conditional uses as allowed in the M-1 District. 
(d)  Minimum lot and width. 
1.  Lot area. Twenty thousand square feet. 
2.  Lot width. One hundred feet. 
3.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height. Not to exceed 45 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  Street yard. Thirty-five feet. 
2.  Side yard. Twenty-five feet. 
3.  Rear yard. Forty feet. 
4.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(h)  Plans and specifications to be submitted to plan commission. To encourage a manufacturing and industrial environment that is compatible with the community character of the village, zoning permits for uses allowed in the M-2 General Manufacturing District shall not be issued without review and approval by the Village of Kewaskum Plan Commission. Said review and approval shall be concerned with, but not limited to, the general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking, loading and unloading, landscaping, and open space utilization in accordance with article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0313, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-44. - M-3 Extractive District. 
    This district is intended to provide for the conduct of quarries limited to extraction of nonmetallic onsite materials, to provide for related operations, and for the proper restoration of the extracted areas. These regulations provide for the restoration of quarries and extractive areas in a manner that will not deteriorate the natural environment, and are intended to be utilized in existing and planned quarry and extractive use areas. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. Essential services. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the M-3 Extractive District shall require a conditional use permit and shall be limited to those accessory uses listed in subsection (c) below and section 95-74. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Aggregate, ready-mix, and asphalt plants, when accessory to quarrying operations. 
2.  Manufacture of cement, concrete blocks, and other similar concrete products, when accessory to quarrying operations. 
3.  Peat and soil removal. 
4.  Processing, crushing, refining, washing, or stockpiling of gravel, minerals, sand, or stone, when accessory to quarrying operations. 
5.  Quarrying or other nonmetallic mining operations, including clay, gravel, and sand extractions. 
6.  Utility substations, municipal wells, pumping stations, and municipal towers. 
7.  Accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following uses where accessory to a conditional use: 
a.  Private garages for storage of vehicles and equipment. 
b.  Off-street parking and loading areas provided they are properly screened from public view. 
c.  Maintenance buildings and weighing scales. 
d.  Offices, storage, power supply, and other auxiliary uses. 
e.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
f.  Freestanding solar energy system as set forth in section 95-84. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lot area. Lots shall provide sufficient area for all permitted structures and accessory structures, the extractive operation, off-street parking and loading/unloading areas, and all required yards. 
2.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height. Not to exceed 45 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  Minimum. The extractive operation shall have a minimum yard of 200 feet from all lot lines and/or street right-of-way lines. 
2.  Setback. Accessory uses, such as offices, parking and loading/unloading areas, and stockpiles of extractive materials, shall be set back at least 100 feet from all lot lines and street right-of-way lines. 
3.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(h)  Application, operation plan, and restoration plan required. Application for a conditional use permit shall be made to the zoning administrator by the property owner. A completed application in accordance with section 95-206 and a fee paid in accordance with section 95-208 for one year of operation shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  Each applicant for a conditional use in the M-3 District shall submit an operation plan for approval by the village plan commission. The operation plan shall specify: 
a.  The name and address of the lessee or operator, if different from the property owner. 
b.  A timetable for operation of the quarry, including the date on which the quarrying, extractive, or other operation will begin and the planned date of the completion of the operation. 
c.  A phasing plan showing the location and timing of all proposed phases. 
d.  Hours and days of operation for the quarrying, extractive, or other operation. 
e.  The means by which noise, dust, and other potential nuisances will be controlled. 
f.  The means by which the applicant will control stormwater runoff and erosion to protect watersheds and groundwater aquifers. 
g.  Existing contours with intervals of no more than five feet, existing and proposed access roads, and the depth of all existing and proposed excavations. 
h.  The location, height, and type of all proposed fences. 
i.  All machinery and equipment to be used and/or stored during the quarrying, extractive, or other operation, and the location thereof. 
j.  A transportation plan identifying the mode of transportation to be used, the size and types of vehicles to be used, the number and frequency of trips to and from the site, and the routes to be used by trucks or locomotives. 
k.  The location and type of landscaping to be used to screen the quarrying operation from adjacent land uses and public rights-of-way. 
l.  Other information as required by the village plan commission. 
2.  The applicant shall submit to the village plan commission for approval a restoration plan that specifies the proposed land use after rehabilitation, proposed contours after filling or restoration; removal of roads no longer in use; depth of the restored topsoil; type of fill, planting, or reforestation; restoration commencement and completion dates including proposed timetables for completion of various stages of reclamation; and other information as required by the village plan commission. The applicant shall furnish the necessary fees to provide for the village's inspection and administration costs. The applicant shall furnish the necessary sureties, which will enable the village to perform the planned restoration of the site in event of default by the applicant. The amount of sureties shall be based upon cost estimates prepared by the village engineer, and the form and type of such sureties shall be approved by the village board. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0314, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-45. - I-1 Institutional District. 
    This district is intended to eliminate the ambiguity of maintaining, in unrelated use districts, areas which are under public or public-related ownership and where the use for public purpose is anticipated to be permanent. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. 
1.  Commercial adult and child care centers. 
2.  Churches, synagogues, and other places of worship. 
3.  Hospitals, sanatoriums, nursing homes, and clinics. 
4.  Libraries, community centers, museums, and public art galleries. 
5.  Lodges. 
6.  Post office and postal substations. 
7.  Public administrative offices, and public service buildings, including fire and police stations. 
8.  Public or private schools, colleges, and universities. 
9.  Public utility offices. 
10.  Water storage tanks and towers, municipal wells, and pumping stations. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
2.  Residential quarters for caretakers or clergy. 
3.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
4.  Private garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of a permitted principal use. 
5.  Service buildings and facilities normally accessory to the permitted principal use. 
6.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Cellular towers as set forth in section 95-83. 
2.  Cemeteries. 
3.  Funeral homes and crematory services. 
4.  Community living arrangements and community-based residential facilities (CBRF), subject to the limitations set forth in § 62.23(7)(i), Wis. Stats. 
5.  Housing for the elderly not exceeding 22 units per net acre. 
6.  Energy conversion systems as set forth in section 95-84. 
7.  Health clubs. 
8.  Recycling center and/or transfer stations. 
9.  Utility substations. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lot area. Ten thousand square feet. 
2.  Lot width. None. 
3.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height. Not to exceed 60 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  Street yard. Twenty-five feet. 
2.  Side yard. An aggregate of 15 feet with no single side yard less than seven feet. 
3.  Rear yard. Twenty-five feet. 
4.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(h)  Plans and specifications to be submitted to plan commission. To encourage an institutional use environment that is compatible with the neighborhood character, zoning permits for uses allowed in the I-1 Institutional District shall not be issued without review and approval by the Village of Kewaskum Plan Commission. Said review and approval shall be concerned with, but not limited to, the general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking, loading and unloading, landscaping, and open space utilization in accordance with article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0315, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-46. - P-1 Park and Recreation District. 
    This district is intended to provide for areas where open space and recreational needs, both public and private, of the residents can be met without undue disturbance of natural resources and adjacent uses. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. 
1.  Botanical gardens and arboretums. 
2.  Hiking, biking, and nature trails. 
3.  Outdoor skating rinks. 
4.  Parks with natural areas and other open space. 
5.  Wildlife and plant life preserves. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Buildings accessory to the permitted use. 
2.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
3.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Amphitheaters, arenas, field houses, and stadiums. 
2.  Amusement parks. 
3.  Archery ranges. 
4.  Boat rentals and boat mooring and access sites. 
5.  Campgrounds. 
6.  Cellar towers as set forth in section 95-83. 
7.  Country clubs, banquet halls, or restaurant facilities associated with a principal recreational use. 
8.  Energy conversion systems as set forth in section 95-84. 
9.  Exhibition and music halls. 
10.  Fairgrounds. 
11.  Game farms and game management. 
12.  Golf courses, golf driving ranges, and miniature golf. 
13.  Gymnasiums, fitness centers, and recreation centers. 
14.  Hunting and fishing clubs. 
15.  Indoor firearm ranges. 
16.  Museums. 
17.  Playgrounds and picnicking areas. 
18.  Playfields or athletic fields. 
19.  Polo fields and riding academies. 
20.  Public art galleries and exhibits. 
21.  Resorts. 
22.  Skate-boarding parks. 
23.  Sledding, skiing, tobogganing, and ski resorts. 
24.  Swimming beaches and pools. 
25.  Basketball, tennis, and volleyball courts. 
26.  Utility substations, municipal wells, pumping stations, and municipal towers. 
27.  Zoos. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lots shall provide sufficient area for the principal structure and its accessory structures, off-street parking and loading/unloading areas, and all required yards. 
2.  Lots in shorelands. See section 95-26. 
(e)  Building height. Not to exceed 35 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  All yards. Fifty feet from any lot lines or street right-of-way lines. 
2.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(h)  Plans and specifications to be submitted to plan commission. To encourage a recreational use environment that is compatible with the neighborhood character, zoning permits for uses allowed in the P-1 Park District shall not be issued without review and approval by the Village of Kewaskum Plan Commission. Said review and approval shall be concerned with, but not limited to, the general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking, loading and unloading, landscaping, and open space utilization in accordance with article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0316, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-47. - C-1 Lowland Conservancy District. 
    This district is intended to preserve, protect, and enhance the ponds, streams, shoreland-wetland, and non-shoreland-wetland areas of the Village of Kewaskum. The preservation, protection, and enhancement of these areas will serve to maintain safe and healthful conditions; maintain and improve water quality, both ground and surface; help prevent flood damage and control stormwater runoff; protect stream banks from erosion; protect groundwater recharge and discharge areas; protect wildlife habitat; protect native plant communities; avoid the location of structures on soils which are generally not suitable for such use; and protect the water-based recreation resources of the village. 
    C-1 district boundaries for wetland areas are based on wetland boundaries identified through air photo interpretation as part of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources Wetland Inventory. At the time a preliminary plat, certified survey map, or site plan for development not requiring a land division is prepared, wetlands shall be field-identified and the boundaries surveyed and shown on the plat, CSM, or development site plan. The village board may amend the zoning map to revise the C-1 district boundary to match the field-identified wetland boundary at no charge to the property owner. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. 
1.  Hiking, fishing, trapping, swimming, snowmobiling, and boating, unless prohibited by other laws or ordinances. 
2.  Harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits, and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops, and that does not involve filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, or excavating. 
3.  Silviculture, including the planting, thinning, and harvesting of timber, provided that no filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, or excavating is done except for temporary water level stabilization measures to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions which would have an adverse impact on silvicultural activities if not corrected. 
4.  Construction and maintenance of fences, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance. 
5.  Existing agricultural cultivation and pasturing provided such activities do not involve extension of cultivated areas, extension of or creation of new drainage systems, and further provided such activities do not substantially disturb or impair the natural fauna, flora, topography, or water regimen and can be accomplished without filling, flooding, or artificial drainage of the wetland. 
6.  Ditching, tiling, dredging, excavating, or filling done to maintain or repair an existing drainage system only to the extent necessary to maintain the level of drainage required to continue the existing use. 
7.  The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, observation decks, walkways, and bicycle and recreational trails provided that no filling, flooding, dredging, draining, ditching, tiling, or excavating is done, except limited filling and excavating necessary for the installation of pilings. 
8.  The maintenance, repair, replacement, and reconstruction of existing streets and bridges. 
(b)  Conditional uses. 
1.  The construction of streets and bridges if necessary for the continuity of the village street system, necessary for the provision of essential utility and public safety services, or necessary to provide access to permitted open space uses, provided that: 
a.  The street cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the lowland conservancy district; 
b.  The street is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland as listed in subsection 95-188(b); 
c.  The street shall be designed and constructed for the minimum cross-section practical to serve the intended use; 
d.  The street construction activities are to be carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only; and 
e.  Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, or excavating that is to be done must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the street. 
2.  The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings used solely in conjunction with raising of waterfowl, minnows, or other wetland or aquatic animals or used solely for some other purpose which is compatible with wetland preservation, provided that: 
a.  The building cannot as a practical matter be located outside the lowland conservancy district; 
b.  The building is not designed for human habitation and does not exceed 500 square feet in area; and 
c.  Only limited filling or excavating necessary to provide structural support is conducted. 
3.  The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, recreation trails, public boat access sites, natural and outdoor education areas, historic and scientific areas, wildlife refuges, game preserves, and private wildlife habitat areas, provided that: 
a.  Any private recreation or wildlife habitat area must be used exclusively for that purpose; 
b.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches, park shelters, or similar structures is allowed; 
c.  Construction and maintenance of streets necessary for permitted uses shall be in accordance with paragraph 1. of this subsection; and 
d.  Ditching, excavating, dredging, and dike and dam construction may be done in wildlife refuges, game preserves, and private wildlife habitat areas, but only for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance the value of wetlands or other natural resources. 
4.  The construction and maintenance of electric, gas, telephone, water, and sewer transmission and distribution lines and related facilities by public utilities and cooperative associations organized for the purpose of producing or furnishing heat, light, power, or water to members provided that: 
a.  The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities cannot as a practical matter be located outside the lowland conservancy district; and 
b.  Any filling, excavating, ditching, or draining that is to be done must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the utility, and must be done in a manner designed to minimize flooding and other adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the conservancy area. 
5.  The construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that: 
a.  The railroad lines cannot as a practical matter be located outside the lowland conservancy district; and 
b.  Any filling, excavating, ditching, or draining that is to be done must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the railroad lines, and must be done in a manner designed to minimize flooding and other adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the conservancy area. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. 
1.  Any use not listed as a permitted principal use or a conditional use is prohibited unless the C-1 District lands concerned are first rezoned into another district. 
2.  The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable water is prohibited. 
(d)  Conservancy lands used for meeting lot requirement of adjoining use districts. See section 95-81. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0317, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 95-48. - C-2 Upland Conservancy District. 
    This district is intended to preserve, protect, enhance, and restore all significant woodlands, wildlife habitat area, areas of steep topography, and related scenic areas. Regulation of these areas will serve to control erosion and sedimentation and will promote and maintain the natural beauty of the village. 
(a)  Permitted principal uses. 
1.  Forest management. 
2.  Hiking, fishing, and trapping, unless prohibited by other laws or ordinances. 
3.  Park and recreation areas. 
4.  Preservation of scenic, historic, and scientific areas. 
5.  Recreational trails. 
6.  Single-family dwellings with a garage on not more than a 20,000 square foot building site, provided that the dwelling shall provide for a minimum disturbance of the natural resource features as determined by the plan commission. 
7.  Wildlife and plant life preserves. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of section 95-74 and may also include the following: 
1.  Private garages and carports. 
2.  Building-mounted solar collectors which do not detract from the appearance of the structure provided that the location of the collector is approved by the plan commission, and a professional engineer certifies that the structure is adequate to support the load. 
3.  Essential services. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Clustered residential developments provided that the development shall not exceed a density of one dwelling unit per five acres and shall comply with section 95-52. 
2.  Fish hatcheries. 
3.  Game farms and game management. 
4.  Bed and breakfast establishments provided that: no more than four bedrooms are rented; adequate off-street parking shall be provided; no meals other than breakfast are served to only renters of the establishment; individual rental shall not exceed seven consecutive days in length; no retail sales, other than arts or crafts, shall occur; the owner shall reside in the establishment; no bedrooms shall be permitted to be in an accessory structure; all requirements set forth in § 254.74, Wis. Stats., and ch. HFS 197, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be fully complied with; and necessary state permits and licenses have been secured. One exterior advertising sign, not exceeding four square feet in area and mounted flush against the dwelling may be permitted. 
5.  Freestanding solar energy systems as set forth in subsection 95-84(b). 
6.  Utility substations, municipal wells, pumping stations, and municipal towers. 
7.  Earth movements involving the disturbance of more than 10,000 square feet in area on slopes of 12 percent or more, provided that the village plan commission determines that such earth moving is not in conflict with the public interest, will not result in undue negative impact on the natural resource base, and that the plan commission has approved a development plan submitted by the petitioner that will serve to minimize erosion and sedimentation and preserve the natural beauty of the site. The plan commission shall require the applicant to furnish a surety to enable the village to carry out land restoration work in the event of default by the applicant in carrying out the approved operational plan. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. 
1.  Lot area. Not more than a 20,000 square foot building site within a minimum five-acre parcel. 
2.  Lot width. Two hundred feet. 
(e)  Building height and area. 
1.  Height. Not to exceed 35 feet. 
2.  Floor area. The total minimum floor area shall be 1,400 square feet with a minimum first floor area of 900 square feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards. 
1.  All yards. Fifty feet from all lot lines and street right-of-way lines. 
2.  Shore yard. See section 95-26. 
(g)  Tree cutting and shrubbery clearing prohibited. Except for the permitted 20,000 square foot building site and a driveway area, lands lying within the C-2 District shall not be clear-cut of trees, shrubbery, or underbrush. No more than ten percent of the natural vegetation may be removed from a parcel in any one calendar year. Normal pruning, trimming, and shearing of vegetation; removal of invasive, dead, diseased, or insect-infested vegetation; and silvicultural thinning conducted under the recommendation of a forester shall be exempt from this restriction. 
(h)  Earth movements limited. No fill, excavating, or topsoil removal shall be permitted which involves the disturbance of an area exceeding 10,000 square feet on slopes of 12 percent or more except by the granting of a conditional use permit in accordance with section 95-206. 
(i)  Erosion control. See article X. 
(j)  Conservancy lands used for meeting lot area requirements of the adjoining use district. See section 95-81. 
(k)  Plans and specifications to be submitted to plan commission. Every applicant for a principal use in the C-2 District shall, before a zoning permit is issued, present detailed plans and specifications of the proposed use or structure to the Village of Kewaskum Plan Commission, who will approve said plans only after determining that the proposed use or building will not be contrary to the purpose and intent of the C-2 District. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0318, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-49. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed § 95-49, which pertained to FW Floodway Regulatory Area, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0319, adopted May 25, 2004. 
Sec. 95-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed § 95-50, which pertained to FC Floodplain-Conservancy Regulatory Area, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0320, adopted May 25, 2004. 
Sec. 95-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed § 95-51, which pertained to UF Urban-Floodplain Regulatory Area, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0321, adopted May 25, 2004. 
Sec. 95-52. - RBT Residential/Business Transition Overlay District. 
    Application of this overlay district is intended to reflect the village's desire that lands within this district eventually be redeveloped for business uses in accordance with the adopted village comprehensive plan or elements thereof. Accordingly, lands within this district may eventually be rezoned into a business zoning district classification. Existing residential uses may continue, but no new single-family or two-family residential uses should be established. The village will also consider the redevelopment or conversion of existing residential uses or parcels within this district to business uses. Parcels to be developed for business use should be rezoned to a business district. Lands within this district should be reviewed at least once every five years to determine if existing and adjacent development warrants rezoning to a business district. 
(a)  Permitted principal and accessory uses. Existing single-family and two-family dwellings and associated accessory uses that existed prior to the adoption date of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Conditional uses. 
1.  As per underlying basic zoning district. 
2.  All existing uses or structures that are extended, enlarged, reconstructed, substituted, moved, or structurally altered except when required to do so by law or order or so as to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. This shall apply to all building construction and improvements, expansions, and/or changes of use or expansion of parking areas. Excepted from this requirement are ordinary maintenance repairs and exterior changes that do not increase the square footage of the building or change the building footprint. Ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, and paneling; the replacement of doors, windows, and other nonstructural components; and the maintenance, repair, or replacements of existing sewage systems, water supply systems, or connections to public utilities. 
3.  New accessory uses associated with existing single-family and two-family dwellings. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. New single-family and two-family dwellings. 
(d)  Minimum lot area and width. As per underlying basic zoning district. 
(e)  Building height. As per underlying basic zoning district. 
(f)  Minimum yards. As per underlying basic zoning district. 
(g)  Erosion control. As per underlying basic zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0322, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-53. - PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District. 
    This district is intended to allow, as a conditional use, developments that will, over a period of time, be enhanced by coordinated area site planning, diversified location of structures, diversified building types, and/or mixing of compatible uses. Such developments are intended to provide a safe and efficient system for pedestrian and vehicle traffic; to provide attractive recreation and open spaces as integral parts of the developments; to enable economic design in the location of public and private utilities and community facilities; and to ensure adequate standards of construction and planning. The PUD Overlay District under this Ordinance will allow for flexibility in the design of overall developments, with benefits from such design flexibility intended to be derived by both the developer and the community, while at the same time maintaining insofar as possible the land use density and other standards or use requirements set forth in the underlying basic use zoning district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. All uses shall be conditional upon the determination as to their appropriateness within the context of the village's comprehensive plan or element thereof, their conformance with the provisions of the PUD Overlay District, and subject to such conditions as may be established as part of final plan approval. Any use permitted in an underlying basic use zoning district may be permitted as a conditional use in a planned unit development. Individual structures shall comply with the minimum building floor area and maximum height requirements of the underlying use basic zoning district as applicable to the uses within the structures. All open space and parking requirements of the underlying basic use zoning district shall be complied with either individually or by providing the combined open space and parking space required for the entire development in one or more locations within the development. 
(b)  Minimum area requirements. Unless the plan commission makes a finding that it is in the best interest of the village to apply the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District to a smaller area, including an individual parcel, an area designated as a PUD shall be under single or corporate ownership or control and shall contain a minimum area of: 
Principal Uses Minimum Area of PUD 1. Residential PUD  3 acres 2. Business PUD 5 acres 3. Manufacturing PUD 10 acres 4. Mixed Compatible Uses  5 acres  
(c)  Procedural requirements. 
1.  Prepetition conference and general conceptual development plan. Prior to the official submission of the petition for approval of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District, the owner or his agent making such petition shall meet with the village plan commission or its staff to discuss the scope and proposed nature of the contemplated development. At the prepetition conference, the owner or his agent shall present a general conceptual development plan including drawings and sketches of the proposed development and figures or calculations that are pertinent to the development using as a general guideline the requirements set forth in subsection 2.b., of this section. 
2.  Petition. Following the prepetition conference, the owner or his agent may file a petition with the village clerk for approval of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District. Such petition shall be accompanied by a review fee, as required by the Village of Kewaskum pursuant to section 95-208, and the following information: 
a.  A statement which sets forth the relationship of the proposed PUD to the village's adopted comprehensive plan, or any adopted element thereof, and the general character of and the uses to be included in the proposed PUD, including the following information: 
(i)  Total area to be included in the PUD, area of open space, residential density computations, proposed number of dwelling units, population analysis, availability of or requirements for municipal services, and any other similar data pertinent to a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed development. 
(ii)  A general summary of the estimated value of structures and site improvement costs, including landscaping and special features. 
(iii)  A general outline of the organizational structure of a property owner's or management association, which may be proposed to be established for the purpose of providing any necessary private services. 
(iv)  Any proposed departures from the standards of development as set forth in the village zoning regulations, other Village regulations or ordinances, or other applicable guidelines. 
(v)  The expected date of commencement of physical development as set forth in the proposal. 
b.  A detailed development plan including: 
(i)  A legal description of the boundaries of the subject property included in the proposed PUD and its relationship to surrounding properties. 
(ii)  Existing zoning on the subject property and adjacent properties. 
(iii)  The location of public and private streets, driveways, and parking facilities. 
(iv)  The size, arrangement, and location of any individual building sites and proposed building groups on each individual site. 
(v)  The location of institutional, recreational, and open space areas and areas reserved or dedicated for public uses, including schools, parks, and drainageways. 
(vi)  The type, size, and location of all structures. 
(vii)  General landscape treatment. 
(viii)  Architectural plans, elevation, and perspective drawings and sketches illustrating the design and character of proposed structures. 
(ix)  The existing and proposed location of public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities. 
(x)  The existing and proposed location of all private utilities or other easements. 
(xi)  Characteristics of soils related to contemplated specific uses. 
(xii)  Existing topography on the site with contours at no greater than two-foot intervals. 
(xiii)  Anticipated uses of adjoining lands in regard to streets, surface water drainage, and compatibility with existing adjacent land uses. 
(xiv)  Any other data or information requested at the prepetition conference. 
3.  Referral to plan commission. The petition for a Planned Unit Development Overlay District shall be referred by the village clerk to the Village of Kewaskum Plan Commission for its review and recommendations, which may include additional conditions or restrictions deemed necessary or appropriate. 
4.  Public hearing. The village board shall hold a public hearing pursuant to the requirements of articles XII and XIII. Notice for such hearing shall include reference to the development plans filed in conjunction with the requested Planned Unit Development Overlay District. As soon as is practical following the hearing, the village board shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny the petition. 
(d)  Basis for approval of petition. The village plan commission, in making its recommendation, and the village board, in making its determination, shall consider: 
1.  That the petitioners for the proposed Planned Unit Development Overlay District have indicated that they intend to begin the physical development of the PUD within 12 months following the approval of the petition and that the development will be carried out according to a reasonable construction schedule satisfactory to the village. 
2.  That the proposed Planned Unit Development Overlay District is consistent in all respects to the purpose of the section and to the spirit and intent of this Ordinance; that the development is in conformity with the goals, objectives, policies, and recommendations of the adopted village comprehensive plan or any adopted element thereof; and that the development would not be contrary to the general welfare and economic prosperity of the community. 
3.  The village plan commission in making its recommendation, and the village board in making its determination, shall further find that: 
a.  The proposed site shall be provided with adequate drainage facilities for surface and storm water. 
b.  The proposed site shall be accessible from public streets that are adequate to carry the traffic that can be expected to be generated by the proposed development. 
c.  No undue constraint or burden will be imposed on public services and facilities, such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, and maintenance of public areas by the proposed development. 
d.  The streets and driveways on the site of the proposed development shall be adequate to serve the residents of the proposed development and shall meet the minimum standards of all applicable ordinances or administrative regulations of the village. 
e.  The proposed site shall be provided with adequate public sanitary sewerage and water distribution facilities. 
f.  The entire parcel of land to be included in a Planned Unit Development Overlay District shall be held under single ownership, or if there is more than one owner, the petition for such Planned Unit Development Overlay District shall be considered as one lot or parcel, and the legal description must define said PUD as a single lot or parcel and be so recorded with the register of deeds for Washington County. 
4.  That the size, quality, and architectural design of all buildings in the project will be compatible with the general character of the village and specifically to the surrounding neighborhood; and that the architectural design, landscaping, control lighting, and general site development will result in an attractive and harmonious development compatible with and not aversely affecting the property values of the surrounding neighborhood. 
5.  That in the case of a proposed residential Planned Unit Development Overlay District: 
a.  Such development will create an attractive residential environment of sustained desirability and economic stability, including structures in relation to terrain, consideration of safe pedestrian flow, ready access to recreation space, and coordination with overall plans for the community. 
b.  The total net residential density within the Planned Unit Development Overlay District will be consistent with and not exceed the intensity and density that would be permitted in the underlying basic zoning district were the planned unit development process not utilized. When the underlying basic zoning district includes more than one residential district, the density for the land occupied by each district shall be calculated and the final maximum density for the planned unit development shall be the sum total of the number of units calculated for each district. The total net residential density within the Planned Unit Development Overlay District shall be compatible with the village comprehensive plan or element thereof. 
c.  Where a parcel zoned PUD is located partially within a floodplain and/or a conservancy district, the floodplain and/or conservancy district lands may be used to fulfill the area requirements set forth in subsection (b), above, provided at least 50 percent of the area otherwise required per dwelling unit under the basic district and utilized in the calculation of density is located outside of the floodplain and/or conservancy district in accordance with sections 95-81 and 95-82. 
d.  Clustering of residential development is permitted provided that permanent common open space is set aside so that the overall density of development permitted in the underlying basic zoning district is complied with. 
e.  Provision has been made for the installation of adequate public facilities and the continuing maintenance and operation of such facilities. 
f.  Adequate, continuing fire and police protection is available. 
g.  The population composition of the development will not have an adverse effect upon the community's capacity to provide needed school or other municipal service facilities. 
h.  Adequate guarantee is provided for permanent preservation of open space areas as shown on the approved site plan either by private reservation and maintenance or by dedication to the public. 
i.  In the case of private reservation, the open area to be reserved shall be protected against building development by conveying to the village, as part of the conditions for project approval, open space deed restrictions or easement restricting such areas against any future building or use except as is consistent with that of providing natural or landscaped open space contributing to the environmental enhancement of the development. Buildings or uses for noncommercial recreational or cultural purposes compatible with the open space may be permitted upon approval by the village board. 
j.  The village shall have the right to carry out any maintenance in privately reserved open space which it feels necessary, if it is not otherwise taken care of to the satisfaction of the village. The costs of such maintenance may be recouped by the village in the form of an assessment against each property in the planned unit development. The manner of assuring maintenance and assessing such cost to the individual properties shall be determined prior to final plan approval and shall be included in the title to each property. 
k.  Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservation areas shall be established in a manner acceptable to the village and made a part of the conditions of the PUD approval. 
6.  That in the case of a proposed business Planned Unit Development Overlay District: 
a.  The proposed development will be adequately served by offstreet parking and truck service facilities. 
b.  The proposed development shall be adequately provided with and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and facilities such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, and maintenance of public areas. 
c.  The locations for vehicular entrances and exits have been designated to prevent unnecessary interference with the safe and efficient movement of traffic on surrounding streets, and the development will not create an adverse effect upon the general traffic pattern of the surrounding neighborhood. 
d.  The architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting, and general site development will result in an attractive and harmonious service area compatible with and not adversely affecting the property values of the surrounding neighborhood. 
7.  That in the case of a proposed manufacturing Planned Unit Development Overlay District: 
a.  The operational character, physical plant arrangement, and architectural design of buildings will be compatible with the latest in performance standards and industrial development design and will not result in an adverse effect upon the property values of the surrounding neighborhood. 
b.  The proposed development shall be adequately provided with and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and facilities, such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, and maintenance of public areas. 
c.  The proposed development will include adequate provisions for offstreet parking and truck service areas and will be adequately served by rail and/or arterial highway facilities. 
d.  The proposed development is properly related to the total transportation system of the community and will not result in an adverse effect on the safety and efficiency of the public streets. 
8.  That in the case of a proposed mixed-use Planned Unit Development Overlay District: 
a.  The proposed mixture of uses produces a unified composite which is compatible within the underlying districts and which, as a total development entity, is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
b.  The various types of uses conform to the general requirements as hereinbefore set forth, applicable to projects of such use and character. 
c.  The proposed development shall be adequately provided with and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and facilities, such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, and maintenance of public areas. 
(e)  Determination. The village board, after due consideration, may deny the petition, approve the petition as submitted, or approve the petition subject to additional conditions and restrictions. The approval of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District shall be based upon and include as conditions thereto the building, site, and operational plans for the development as approved by the village board. 
(f)  Changes and additions. 
1.  Any subsequent change or addition to the plans or uses shall first be submitted for approval to the village plan commission and if, in the opinion of the plan commission, such change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration of the original plan, a public hearing before the village board shall be required and notice thereof be given pursuant to the provisions of article XIII, and said proposed alterations shall be submitted to the plan commission for review and recommendation, and to the village board for approval. 
2.  Without limitations as to the village plan commission's right to determine what constitutes a substantial change, a change from that shown in the approved plan in any of the following respects may be construed to be substantial: 
a.  An increase or decrease in the number of dwelling units. 
b.  A significant change in the size, value, or type of structure(s). 
c.  The addition of any principal uses not previously shown. 
d.  A change in the site plan that would significantly alter the relationship of uses or open spaces to adjoining properties. 
(g)  Subsequent land division. The division of any land or lands within a Planned Unit Development Overlay District for the purpose of change or conveyance of ownership shall be accomplished pursuant to the land division regulations of the village and when such division is contemplated, a preliminary plat of the lands to be divided shall accompany the petition for PUD approval. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0323, 5-25-04) 
Secs. 95-54-95-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC, LOADING, PARKING AND ACCESS 

Sec. 95-61. - Traffic visibility. 
(a)  No substantial obstructions by such features as structures, parking, or vegetation shall be permitted in any district between the heights of two and one-half feet and ten feet above the plane through the mean curb grades within the triangular space formed by any two existing or proposed intersecting nonarterial street (alleys, collector streets, and minor streets) right-of-way lines and a line joining points on such lines located a minimum of 20 feet from their intersection (see Illustrations No. 1 and No. 2); except that necessary utility poles and traffic, directional, and street name signs approved by a public agency may be permitted within such triangular area. Open fences not exceeding a height of three feet with less than 25 percent opaqueness may be allowed within the triangular area and in accordance with section 95-74(d) of this Ordinance. Single poles (not exceeding 12 inches in width) and single trunk trees (not exceeding 24 inches in diameter) may also be allowed provided that they are located as far away from the intersection as possible (see Illustration No. 2) and that the bottom of the tree canopy and the sign face are at least ten feet above the adjacent mean curb grade. Trees, when planted, shall be pruned of branches lower than about five feet above grade; thereafter, all trees shall be pruned of branches from the trunk to below the upper height limit when feasible in relation to tree size. In establishing the vision triangle, the planned or ultimate right-of-way lines shall be used. These restrictions may be modified in the B-3 District on a case-by-case basis, when, in the opinion of the plan commission, such modifications would further the objectives of the district. 
(b)  In the case of arterial streets intersecting with other arterial streets or railways, the corner cutoff distances establishing the triangular vision clearance space shall be increased to 50 feet (see Illustrations No. 1 and 2). 
(c)  Vision triangles at intersections with state trunk highways or county trunk highways shall meet the vision corner requirements of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation or Washington County, respectively, but in no case shall they be less than those specified in subsections (a) and (b), above. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0401, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-62. - Loading requirements. 
    On every lot, except in the B-3 District, on which a business, trade, or industrial use is hereafter established, space with access to a public street or alley shall be provided as indicated below for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public right-of-way. 

(a)  Number of loading and unloading spaces required. 
Gross Floor Area of 
Building in Square Feet Number 
of Spaces 5,000-24,999 1 25,000-49,999 2 50,000-99,999 3 100,000-174,999 4 175,000-249,999 5  
For each additional 75,000 square feet (or fraction thereof) of gross floor area, one additional loading and unloading space shall be provided. 
(b)  Loading and unloading space. Each loading and unloading space shall have access to a publicly dedicated street or alley. 
(c)  Minimum area. The minimum area for each loading and unloading space, excluding the area needed to maneuver, shall be 250 square feet. 
(d)  Entension into right-of-way. At no time shall any part of a truck or van be allowed to extend into the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare while the truck or van is being loaded or unloaded. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0402, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-63. - Parking requirements. 
    In all districts, and in connection with every use, except the B-3 District unless otherwise specified, there shall be provided at the time any use or building is erected, enlarged, extended, or increased, off-street parking stalls for all vehicles in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Adequate access. Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each parking space, and driveways shall be at least ten feet wide for one-family and two-family dwellings, and a minimum of 24 feet at the property line for all other uses. 
(b)  Minimum dimensions. The minimum dimensions of each parking space shall be ten feet by 18 feet, exclusive of the space required for access drives or aisles and except for spaces provided for use by physically disabled persons. 
(c)  Parking spaces for use by physically disabled persons. All open off-street parking areas providing more than 25 parking spaces, except for parking areas restricted to use by employees only, shall provide parking spaces for use by motor vehicles which transport physically disabled persons in accordance with the following minimum standards: 
1.  One parking space shall be provided in parking areas containing 26 to 49 spaces. 
2.  Two percent of the total number of spaces shall be provided in parking areas containing 50 to 1,000 spaces. 
3.  In addition to the number of spaces required in subsection (c)2., above, one percent of each 1,000 spaces over the first 1,000 spaces shall be provided for properly signed physically disabled parking spaces in parking areas containing more than 1,000 spaces. 
4.  The minimum dimensions for all parking spaces provided for use by physically disabled persons shall be at least 12 feet wide by 18 feet in length. 
5.  Parking spaces provided for the use of physically disabled persons shall be located as close as possible to an entrance which allows such persons to enter and leave the parking area without assistance. 
6.  All parking spaces provided for the use of physically disabled persons shall be marked by a sign which includes the international symbol for barrier-free environments and a statement informing the public that the parking space is reserved for use by physically disabled persons. Such signs shall comply with the requirements of §§ 346.50, 346.503, and 346.505, Wis. Stats. 
(d)  Location of parking spaces. Location of parking spaces is to be on the same lot as the principal use or not more than 400 feet from the principal use. Parking spaces for business and industrial uses shall not be located in a residential district. 
(e)  Surfacing. All off-street parking areas, including those provided within the B-3 District, shall be graded and surfaced with an asphalt or concrete pavement so as to provide a durable and dust-free surface, and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water. Any parking area for more than five vehicles shall have the aisles and spaces clearly marked. 
(f)  Interior landscaping. All off-street parking areas which serve 15 vehicles or more and are created or redesigned and rebuilt subsequent to the adoption of this Ordinance shall be provided with accessory landscape areas totaling not less than five percent of the surfaced area. The size of each landscape area shall not be less than 120 square feet in area or six feet in width or length. Any landscape areas less than the minimum size requirements shall not be counted toward the five percent required landscaping. Trees shall be provided at the rate of one deciduous tree at least two inches in caliper measured at chest height (approximately five feet above adjacent grade) for every 15 parking spaces and shall be provided in the landscaped areas within the parking lot. Location of landscape areas, type and size of plant materials, protection affording the plantings, including curbing, and provision for maintenance shall be subject to approval by the plan commission. Landscape areas shall be disbursed throughout the off-street parking area and should be located at the ends of parking rows and aisles; around light poles, signs, existing trees, or hydrants; or along entryways. All plans for such proposed parking areas shall include a topographic survey or grading plan which shows existing and proposed grades and location of improvements. The preservation of existing trees, shrubs, and other natural vegetation in the parking area may be included in the calculation of the required minimum landscaped area. 
(g)  Parking lot screening. 
1.  All parking areas which serve 15 or more spaces, except in the A-1 Agricultural/Transitional District and the single-family and two-family residential districts, adjoining a public right-of-way or a residential district shall be screened from such areas by an earth berm, a solid wall, fence, evergreen planting of equivalent visual density, or other effective means determined acceptable by the plan commission. Where walls or fences are used, sufficient landscaping shall be provided in conjunction with such wall or fence to create an attractive view from the street or residential side. The screening between a parking lot and a street right-of-way shall attain a height of at least three feet measured above the parking surface within three years, with a minimum height of 18 inches at the time of installation, and may consist of a combination of landscaping materials including fencing, walls, berms, or plantings on top of berms or in planters. The screening between a parking lot and an adjoining residential district shall be a minimum of six feet in height at the time of installation. The plan commission may waive or reduce the screening requirement due to grade differences between adjoining properties, and may require greater screening requirements for parking of large trucks, semi-trailers, large equipment, and for screening overhead doors, and truck loading areas and docks. 
2.  All fencing shall be placed on the property or properties being screened and shall not project into a public right-of-way, shall not obstruct the vision clearance triangle, and shall not extend over side or rear property lines. Planted fences shall be located away from the property line in locations where natural growth will not extend beyond the property lines, or the plantings shall be maintained at these lines. 
(h)  Curbs, wheel stops, or other barriers. Curbs, wheel stops, or other barriers shall be installed in parking areas serving more than five vehicles at least five feet from a property line so as to prevent the parked vehicles from extending over any lot line; and a minimum of three feet from fences, walls, shrubs, or trees so as to prevent damage to the structure or landscaping. 
(i)  Minimum number of parking spaces required. The following guide specifies the minimum number of parking spaces required. Reference to "largest shift" means the largest number of full-time or part-time employees present at the facility at any one time. For example, the largest work shift may be a particular day of the week, or a lunch or dinner period in the case of a restaurant. Reference to "maximum capacity" means the maximum number of persons which may be accommodated by the use as determined by its design or by applicable building ordinance regulations, whichever is greater. In the case of structures or uses not specified herein, the number of spaces specified as the general standard for the use class or the number of spaces specified for a similar use shall apply. In developments involving the establishment or addition of two or more uses on one lot or parcel, the cumulative number of spaces required for each use shall determine the total number of spaces required. 
1.  Residential uses: 
a.  Single-family and two-family dwellings: Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
b.  Multifamily dwellings: Two spaces per dwelling unit, plus one-tenth space per dwelling unit for guest parking. 
c.  Housing for the elderly: One space per dwelling unit and open space on the subject site shall be reserved which could accommodate an additional one space per dwelling unit plus one-tenth space per dwelling unit for guest parking (300 square feet of open space per parking space). The plan commission may reduce the parking requirement for elderly housing when assisted care is provided, and may require one parking space per employee on the largest shift plus one-tenth space per dwelling unit for guest parking. 
2.  Retail sales and customer service uses, and places of entertainment: 
a.  General standard for the above uses: One space per 150 square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
b.  Animal veterinary clinics and hospitals: Three patron parking spaces per doctor, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
c.  Auto body repair, motor vehicle repair, maintenance, and service stations: Two spaces per indoor service bay, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
d.  Barber and beauty shops. One space per 150 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
e.  Bed and breakfast establishments: One space per bedroom. 
f.  Convenience grocery stores: One space per 150 square feet of floor area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
g.  Car washes: One space per employee on the largest shift, plus sufficient space for four waiting vehicles at each washing stall and sufficient space for drying two vehicles after each washing stall. 
h.  Any business or organization which provides drive-through facilities shall provide sufficient space for four waiting vehicles (not inclusive of the vehicle presently being served) at each drive-through service lane. 
i.  Financial institutions: One space per 300 square feet of customer floor area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
j.  Funeral homes: One space per five patrons at the maximum capacity, or 25 spaces per chapel unit, whichever is greater. 
k.  General merchandise repair services, other than auto repair: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
l.  Grocery stores or supermarkets: One space per 150 square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
m.  Hotels and motels: One space per room or suite, plus one space per two employees on the largest shift, plus one space per three persons, based on maximum capacity, for each public meeting and/or banquet room. 
n.  Lodges and clubs: One space per three persons based on the maximum capacity of the facility. 
o.  Motor vehicle sales establishments: Two customer parking spaces per salesperson, plus one employee parking space per employee (including salespersons) on the largest shift. 
p.  Personal services: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
q.  Plant nurseries and garden and lawn supply sales establishments: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area of inside sales or display, plus one space per 500 square feet of gross outside sales or display area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
r.  Restaurants, standard: one space per 150 square feet of gross dining area, or one space per two seats at maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
s.  Restaurants, drive in and drive-through or fast-food: One space per 100 square feet of gross dining area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
t.  Restaurant, pick up: Restaurants with little or no seating capacity, such as takeout sandwich shop or pizza parlor, shall provide one space per 100 square feet of service area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
u.  Taverns, dance halls, night clubs, and lounges: One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
v.  Theaters, auditoriums, and other places of public assembly: One space per three patrons based on the maximum capacity of the facility. 
w.  Shopping centers with a gross leaseable area of at least 30,000 square feet: Five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leaseable area. 
3.  Offices: 
a.  Medical, dental and similar professional health service offices: Five patron parking spaces per doctor, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
b.  Government, professional and business offices: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
4.  Commercial-recreational uses: 
a.  General standard: One space per five patrons based on the maximum capacity of the facility, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
b.  Bowling alleys: Five spaces for each lane, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
c.  Golf courses: Fifty-four spaces per nine holes, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
d.  Miniature golf course: One and one-half spaces per hole, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
e.  Indoor tennis, racquetball and handball courts: Three spaces per court, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
f.  Skating rinks, ice or roller: One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
g.  Volleyball courts: Fifteen spaces per court plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
5.  Industrial and related uses: 
a.  Manufacturing, processing, and fabrication operations: One space per employee on the largest shift, plus sufficient visitor parking spaces as determined by the plan commission. 
b.  Wholesale business: One space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees, plus one space per 2,500 square feet of gross floor area, plus sufficient visitor parking spaces as determined by the plan commission. 
c.  Warehousing: One space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees, plus one space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
d.  Mini-warehousing: One space per employee on the largest shift, plus adequate loading and access space for each storage cubicle. 
6.  Institutional and related uses: 
a.  Churches: One space per five seats based on the maximum capacity of the facility. 
b.  Libraries: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area or one space per five seats based on maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
c.  Museums: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
d.  Rooming and boarding houses, fraternity and sorority houses, and dormitories and rectories: One space per bed. 
e.  Nursing homes, community-based residential facilities, and assisted care facilities: One space per four patient beds, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
f.  Hospitals: Two spaces per three patient beds, plus one space per employee on the largest shift. 
g.  Schools: 
(i)  Elementary, middle and high schools: During the highest class attendance period, one space per employee, plus one space per each five students 16 years of age or older. 
(ii)  Colleges, universities and trade schools: During the highest class attendance period, one space per employee, plus one space for each two students, excluding students housed in dormitories. 
(iii)  Children's nursery schools and commercial child care centers: During the highest class attendance period, one space per employee, plus one space per six students. 
(j)  Uses not listed. In the case of structures or uses not mentioned, the provision for a use which is similar shall apply. 
(k)  Combination of uses. Combinations of any of the above uses shall provide the total of the number of stalls required for each individual use. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0403, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-64. - Modification of parking requirements. 
(a)  Modifications. The village plan commission may reduce the parking requirements set forth in sections 95-62 and 95-63 of this Ordinance when it is determined that the use will need fewer spaces because employees will be working off-site, or because of cooperative/shared parking arrangements with different peak parking demands, or because of alternative transportation such as public transit, van pool operations, carpooling, and bicycles, or because of other evidence that indicates parking demand will be less than Ordinance requirements. The plan commission may also adjust the parking dimensions due to significant site constraints, parking lots with one-way traffic aisles (no less than 12 feet wide), designated spaces for compact cars, or common access aisles shared between parking spaces for the disabled. The petitioner shall submit written documentation and data to the satisfaction of the plan commission that the operation will require less parking spaces or different dimensions than the Ordinance requires. 
(b)  Space to be set aside for reduced parking. In case of default, the site plan for the proposed use shall be designed to provide at least 300 square feet of open space for each parking space not required to be constructed on the subject site to accommodate the additional parking spaces otherwise required by this Ordinance. Sufficient open space shall be provided which, if converted to parking spaces, would provide off-street parking to meet the full requirements of this Ordinance at the time of application. The plan commission may place conditions upon the granting of reduced parking requirement and may require that the parking area not required upon the granting of the waiver be landscaped in addition to the minimum landscaping requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0404, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-65. - Parking and storage of recreational vehicles and equipment. 
    No person shall park or store recreational vehicles and associated equipment on a lot in a residential district except within a fully enclosed structure or as provided herein. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a recreational vehicle and associated equipment such as trailers shall include boats, motor homes, motor coaches, pop-up campers, camping trailers, travel trailers, fifth wheel trailers, large utility trailers, race cars, snowmobiles, jet skis, all-terrain vehicles, sports aircraft, canoes, kayaks, tent campers, folding camper, utility trailers, carnival equipment, cases or boxes used to transport recreational vehicles or equipment, and similar vehicles and equipment. 
(b)  General rules. 
1.  A recreational vehicle shall be located not closer than three feet to any lot line (front, side, and rear lot lines) and five feet to an alley right-of-way line. 
2.  The recreational vehicle shall be maintained and be in good condition and safe for effective performance for the function for which it was intended. The exterior of the vehicle shall be intact. 
3.  Recreational vehicles shall be roadworthy or readily transportable. Vehicles that require a license shall be properly licensed. 
4.  No recreational vehicle or equipment shall be parked or stored in any open space outside a building unless such vehicle or equipment is wholly owned by the property owner who shall be in residence at the property in question. If the property is rented, such parking or storage shall be permitted for the tenant only provided that such vehicle or equipment is owned by the tenant and permission has been granted by the landlord. 
5.  All parking or storage of recreational vehicles or equipment may be required to be located on an improved surface such as gravel, concrete, or asphalt. 
6.  All recreational vehicle and equipment shall be parked or stored as inconspicuously as possible on the property. The area around the vehicle or equipment shall be kept free of weeds and accumulation of other storage material. NOTE: If said area is not properly maintained, the village may order the removal of such vehicle or equipment, or the placement of an improved surface as stated. 
(c)  Outside parking or storage. Outside parking or storage of recreational vehicles and equipment for longer than 24 hours is subject to the following provisions: 
1.  No more than two recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored outside a fully enclosed structure in any yard area on the lot. 
2.  Additional recreational vehicles and equipment shall be parked or stored on the lot only within a fully enclosed structure. 
3.  No recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored in the front yard except in the driveway serving the residence. 
(d)  Parking or storage of additional vehicles. The plan commission and village board may, by conditional use permit, permit the outdoor parking or storage of more than two recreational vehicles or alter other criteria as specified within this Ordinance when it determines that the lot is large enough to accommodate such additional vehicles; when such recreational vehicles are appropriately screened from view by neighboring properties; and when the plan commission or village board determines that the recreational vehicle parking or storage will not adversely affect the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties. Parking or storage of recreational vehicles shall be limited to recreational vehicles owned and used by the property owner or tenant. Conditional use permits to store recreational vehicles shall be reviewed pursuant to section 95-206 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0405, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-66. - Driveways. 
    All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced, or extended after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Islands. Islands between driveway openings shall be provided with a minimum of six feet between all driveways and three feet at all lot lines. The plan commission may modify this requirement where lots are so narrow as to require a shared driveway between adjacent properties. To foster B-3 District linkages, no separation shall be required between parking lots in that district and joint driveways may be permitted without plan commission approval. 
(b)  Driveways located on cul-de-sacs. Driveways located on cul-de-sacs and curved streets shall not extend beyond the lot line extended to the curb line or pavement edge, unless otherwise permitted by the plan commission (see Illustration No. 3). 
(c)  Driveway openings. Driveway openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall not exceed 24 feet at the right-of-way line and 30 feet at the roadway in residential districts; and shall not exceed 30 feet at the right-of-way line and 35 feet at the roadway in all other districts. The village plan commission may permit a wider opening, only after a recommendation by the village engineer, to prevent a traffic hazard that would otherwise be caused by a driveway meeting these requirements. 
(d)  Number of driveway openings. No more than one driveway shall be permitted for any property, except that additional driveways may be permitted for commercial, industrial, governmental, institutional, or multifamily residential developments and as otherwise authorized herein. The village plan commission may permit circular driveways for lots containing sufficient width and area or additional driveways in any district where such a grant is necessary to prevent a traffic hazard. 

(e)  Vehicular entrances and exits. Vehicular entrances and exits to drive-in theaters, banks, and restaurants; motels; funeral homes; vehicular sales, service, washing and repair stations; or garages shall be not less than 200 feet from any pedestrian entrance or exit to a school, college, university, church, hospital, park, playground, library, public emergency shelter, or other place of public assembly. 
(f)  Surfacing. Surfacing for driveways shall be an asphalt or concrete pavement so as to provide a durable and dust-free surface, and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0406, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-67. - Street access. 
    No direct private access (driveway) shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-ways of expressways, or to any controlled-access arterial street, or highway, without permission from the state or Washington County highway agency that has access control jurisdiction. Direct public or private access to streets under village jurisdiction shall be permitted in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Driveways on arterial streets. Driveways on arterial streets shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from a street intersection unless the lot width is insufficient or the lot contains site limitations in which case the plan commission shall determine the driveway location. Said setback shall be measured from the intersection of the rights-of-way of the two streets. 
(b)  Driveways on nonarterial (collector or minor) streets. Driveways on nonarterial (collector or minor) streets shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from a street intersection unless the lot width is insufficient or contains site limitations, in which case the plan commission shall determine the driveway location. Said setback shall be measured from the intersection of the rights-of-way of the two streets. 
(c)  Access barriers. Access barriers, such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping, or other topographic barriers, shall be erected to prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the above specified streets or highways. 
(d)  Temporary access. Temporary access to the above rights-of-way may be granted by the village board after review and recommendation by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be temporary, revocable, and subject to any conditions required and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0407, 5-25-04) 
Secs. 95-68-95-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 95-71. - General. 
    The zoning administrator, in reviewing zoning permits, may grant modifications to the terms of this Ordinance as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0501, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-72. - Height. 
    The district height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this Ordinance may be exceeded, but such modification shall be in accord with the following: 
(a)  Increase in building height. An increase in building height may be granted by the plan commission for principal and accessory buildings when, in the opinion of the plan commission, the increase is intended to accommodate an attractive roof or facade design that is also compatible with the general character of the neighborhood and is not detrimental to adjacent properties. However, an increase in building height for the express purpose of adding another livable or useable floor level than would typically be realized under the standard height requirement of the basic zoning district, is prohibited. 
(b)  Architectural projections. Architectural projections, such as spires, steeples, belfries, parapet walls, cupolas, domes, flues, and chimneys are exempt from the height limitations of this Ordinance. 
(c)  Special structures. Special structures, such as elevator penthouses, gas tanks, grain elevators, observation towers, scenery lofts, manufacturing equipment and necessary mechanical appurtenances, cooling towers, fire towers, substations, and smokestacks, are exempt from the height limitations of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Essential services. Essential services, utilities, water towers, electric power and communication transmission lines are exempt from the height limitations of this Ordinance. 
(e)  Communication structures. Communication structures, such as radio and television transmission and relay towers, and radio and television receiving antennas, not including ground and building-mounted satellite dish antennas, shall not exceed in height three times their distance from the nearest lot line, up to a maximum of 80 feet, with the exception of government-owned communications structures. 
(f)  Agricultural structures. Agricultural structures, such as barns and silos, shall not exceed in height twice their distance from the nearest lot line. 
(g)  Public or semipublic facilities. Public or semipublic facilities, such as schools, churches, hospitals, monuments, sanatoriums, libraries, governmental offices and stations, may be erected to a height of 60 feet, provided all required yards are increased not less than one foot for each foot the structure exceeds the district's maximum height requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0502, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-73. - Yards. 
    The yard requirements stipulated elsewhere in this Ordinance may be modified as follows: 
(a)  Uncovered stairs, landings, and fire escapes. Uncovered stairs, landings, and fire escapes may project into any yard but shall not exceed six feet nor be closer than three feet to any lot line. 
(b)  Architectural projections. Architectural projections, such as chimneys, flues, sills, eaves, belt courses, and ornaments, may project into any required yard, but such projection shall not exceed three feet. 
(c)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking is permitted in all yards of all districts but no vehicles shall be closer than three feet to any lot line, except when adjacent to an alley right-of-way line. 
(d)  Exemptions from yard requirements. Landscaping and vegetation are exempt from the yard requirements of this Ordinance provided that such landscaping and vegetation shall not interfere with the vision clearance triangle as set forth in section 95-61 of this Ordinance. 
(e)  Essential services. Essential services, utilities, electric power and communication transmission lines are exempt from the yard and distance requirements of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0503, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-74. - Accessory use regulations. 
    Accessory uses are permitted in any district as may be specified in the appropriate district regulations or herein. An accessory use building permit shall be required where specifically noted in this section. Accessory uses are permitted only after their principal structure is present or under construction. The use and/or location requirements stipulated elsewhere in this Ordinance may be modified for accessory uses as follows: 
(a)  Accessory uses and detached accessory structures. Accessory uses and detached accessory structures shall be permitted in the rear yard only, unless otherwise specified. Accessory structures shall not occupy more than 20 percent of the rear yard in all districts except the business and manufacturing district where such structures shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the rear yard. 
1.  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings, such as garages, playhouses, garden or utility sheds, or gazebos, may be permitted upon the issuance of a building permit and subject to the following restrictions. 
a.  Accessory structures shall be located at least ten feet from any other structure, except those not containing flammable materials, constructed of fireproof materials, or containing fire walls may be located no less than five feet from any other structure; shall be located not closer than three feet to any lot line nor five feet to an alley right-of-way line; and shall not exceed 15 feet in height. An increase in height may be granted by the plan commission when, in the opinion of the plan commission, it is appropriate for the use and is not detrimental to the adjacent properties and the general character of the neighborhood. 
b.  All accessory buildings accommodating motor vehicles shall be placed on a concrete floor or pad. 
c.  No single accessory building in a single-family or two-family residential district shall exceed 720 square feet in area. 
d.  Accessory buildings shall be constructed of materials compatible with those of the principal building on the site so as not to, in the judgment of the plan commission, cause substantial depreciation in the property values of neighboring properties. 
2.  Patios. Patios, installed at or below yard grade, may be constructed, without a permit, adjacent to the principal structure, and shall be located not closer than three feet to a lot line. 
3.  Decks. Decks located adjacent to a principal structure shall be considered to be part of the principal structure and shall be located no closer to a lot line than the required side yard and rear yard requirements for the district in which they are located and shall require the issuance of a building permit. Freestanding decks or decks surrounding private swimming pools separated from the principal structure shall be located at least ten feet from the principal structure and shall be regulated in the same manner as an accessory garage, toolshed, or gazebo. 
4.  Private swimming pools. Private swimming pools, upon the issuance of a building permit, provided that: 
a.  All private swimming pools shall be surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four feet or more than six and one-half feet in height designed to prevent unguarded entry to the pool. There shall be no opening in said fence or wall larger than six square inches. The space between the bottom of a fence and the surface underneath shall not exceed four inches. Sidewalls of aboveground pools which are at least four feet high may be used in lieu of a fence. 
b.  Access to private swimming pools shall be controlled to prevent unguarded entry into a pool. Access to inground pools shall be controlled by a self-closing and self-latching gate and all such gates shall be kept securely closed and locked at all times when the pool is unattended. Latches shall be located at least three and one-half feet above ground, deck, or stairs. When not completely fenced, all ladders, steps, or other means of access to an aboveground pool shall be removed and/or designed to prevent access, such as a tip-up ladder, when the pool is unattended. 
c.  Swimming pools shall not be constructed directly under or over electric transmission lines or within 15 feet of such lines. If the electric lines are underground, this separation distance may be reduced to five feet. All electrical connections to a swimming pool shall be properly grounded so that no electrical current can be discharged into any part of the swimming pool or surrounding fence. All electrical installations shall comply with the National Electric Code or these regulations, whichever are more restrictive. 
d.  No water drained from swimming pools shall be discharged onto adjacent properties without written consent of the owner, or into a municipal sanitary sewerage system, or directly into a navigable body of water. 
e.  Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water. No gaseous chlorination shall be permitted. 
f.  No lighting installed around swimming pools shall throw any rays onto adjacent properties. 
g.  Heating units, pumps, and filter equipment shall be adequately housed and muffled in such a manner as not to create a nuisance. Such equipment shall be located no closer than ten feet to a lot line. 
h.  There shall be an unobstructed areaway around all pools of at least three feet in width. 
i.  No private swimming pool shall be located closer than ten feet to a lot line and detached structures, with the exception of air conditioners, playsets, patios, and compost bins. The zoning administrator may grant a waiver from the requirement that a swimming pool be located at least ten feet from a structure and permit such swimming pool within five feet of the structure. The zoning administrator shall consider the health, safety, general welfare, and aesthetics of the proposed construction before granting such a waiver. 
j.  Private swimming pools, together with other accessory structures regulated by section 95-74, shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the rear yard area. 
5.  Private tennis and volleyball courts. Private tennis and volleyball courts accessory to a residential use may be placed in the rear yard in any residential district provided that the use is located not closer than three feet to any rear or side lot line; and provided that no lighting installed around a private recreation facility shall throw rays onto adjacent property. The plan commission may permit the construction of a fence around the court when it is determined that such a fence is needed for safety purposes or to prevent the court from being a nuisance to neighbors. 
(b)  Accessory uses permitted in any yard. The following accessory uses and structures may be placed in any yard without a zoning or building permit provided that such use does not interfere with the vision clearance triangle as set forth in section 95-61 of this Ordinance; shall not be located closer than three feet to any lot line; and shall not exceed 15 feet in height (except for flagpoles): basketball hoops, birdbaths, flagpoles (flagpoles shall not exceed the height limitation for the district in which they are located), fountains, lawn furniture, sundials, religious statues, wishing wells, and other similar items determined to be appropriate by the plan commission. 
(c)  Occasional sales. Occasional sales, such as all sales entitled "rummage", "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "flea market," or other similar sales, shall comply with sections 70-31 to 70-35 of the Municipal Code of the Village of Kewaskum. 
(d)  Fences. Fences are a permitted accessory use in any district provided that fences shall not disturb any survey monuments upon installation, and shall comply with the traffic visibility requirements set forth in section 95-61 of this Ordinance and the following requirements: 
1.  Electric and barbed wire fences. Electric and barbed wire fences are prohibited in all districts except the A-1 and C-2 Districts and as provided in subsection 4., below, for security fences. 
2.  Residential fences. Residential fences, are permitted up to the property lines in residential districts but shall not exceed a height of six and one-half feet in the side and rear yards; shall not exceed a height of three feet in the street yard; and shall not be closer than three feet to any street right-of-way line and five feet to any alley right-of-way line. Residential fences may be "solid fences" as defined in section 95-222 of this Ordinance except in the street yard in which only decorative open fences are permitted. Fences may be permitted in the second street yard of double-frontage lots in accordance with section 95-79. 
3.  Construction and maintenance. Finished side of fences shall face the neighboring property with the structural and support components of the fence facing away from adjacent properties. All fences shall be maintained in a structurally sound and attractive condition. The space between the bottom of a solid fence and the surface underneath shall not exceed four inches. 
4.  Security fences. Security fences are permitted up to the property lines in all districts, except residential districts, but shall not exceed ten feet in height; shall not be closer than three feet to any street right-of-way line and five feet to any alley right-of-way line; and shall be an "open fence" as defined in section 95-222 of this Ordinance when located in the street yard. Security fences may be permitted in the second street yard of double-frontage lots in accordance with section 95-79. In certain cases, the plan commission may require slats to be inserted in chain-link fences for screening purposes. Such slats shall be properly maintained. Security fences may include up to three strands of barbed wire on the top of the fence, provided that the barbed wire is stretched and not rolled and is at least eight feet above grade with the vertical supports for the barbed wire either extending vertically or slanting inward away from the property line. 
5.  Fences in floodways. Fences in floodways are allowed provided that such fences are of a breakaway design. 
(e)  Antennas. Terrestrial and satellite dish antennas are permitted as accessory uses in any district subject to the following regulations. To protect the health and safety of all citizens, as well as the aesthetic values embodied in this Ordinance, the following regulations shall apply to all terrestrial and satellite dish antennas, except dish antennas that are one meter (39.0 inches) or less in diameter are exempt from these requirements. Satellite dish antennas that are two meters (78.0 inches) or less in diameter, which are located or proposed to be located in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-1, M-2, or M-3 Districts, are also exempt from these requirements. 
1.  Location. 
a.  Terrestrial antennas and satellite dish antennas may be located in the rear yard only or on the roof of the principal structure in all districts, except that antennas mounted on the roof shall not be permitted in the B-3 District, unless they are fully screened. 
b.  In recognition of the negative aesthetic impact satellite dish antennas may have on the architecture of a building and the overall character of a neighborhood, satellite dish antennas shall be located and designed to reduce their visual impact on surrounding properties. Landscaping, fences, and architectural elements of buildings may be used for this purpose. In a residential district, no satellite dish antenna shall be mounted on the front of a building, unless it is fully screened in a manner compatible with the architecture of the building. 
c.  In the event a property owner determines and documents that the placement of an antenna in a rear yard or on the roof would prevent its use for its intended purpose, or would unreasonably escalate the costs of installing, maintaining, or using the antenna, the property owner may apply to the board of Zoning Appeals for a variance to allow for the installation of the antenna in a side or front yard location or elsewhere on the building. Such placement in the front or side yard or elsewhere on the building shall be screened to the greatest extent possible to minimize any detrimental aesthetic effects the antenna may have on neighboring properties or the neighborhood in general. The procedure for issuing the variance shall follow the procedure set forth in article XI of this Ordinance. 
2.  Display of advertising or identification. No form of advertising or identification may be displayed on the dish or framework of any antenna other than the customary manufacturer's identification plates. 
3.  Number limits. Not more than one terrestrial and one satellite dish antenna per dwelling unit shall be permitted on a lot or parcel in a residential zoning district. 
4.  Height and size. 
a.  No freestanding terrestrial antenna or roof antenna shall exceed the maximum height requirements for the district in which they are located, except as provided in section 95-72 of this Ordinance. 
b.  Groundmounted satellite dish antennas shall not exceed 15 feet in height or 12 feet in diameter. 
5.  Setbacks. 
a.  All terrestrial antennas shall be located not less than one foot from a lot line for each three feet of height above the surrounding grade, with the exception of government-owned structures (see Illustration No. 4). 
b.  All satellite dish antennas shall be located not less than three feet from any lot line or five feet to any alley right-of-way line provided that the antenna and its component parts do not exceed 15 feet in height (see Illustration No. 4). 

6.  Construction. 
a.  All antennas shall be constructed and anchored in such a manner to withstand winds of not less than 80 miles per hour and such installations shall be constructed of noncombustible and corrosive resistant materials. 
b.  All cable used to conduct current or signals from the antenna to the receivers shall be installed underground. 
c.  An antenna support structure shall be erected in accordance with manufacturer's specifications. 
d.  The installation of a satellite dish antenna shall require a building permit. The property owner shall submit, to the building inspector, plans which indicate the appearance, proposed location, and installation method of the dish antenna. 
e.  All satellite dish antennas must conform to the village building and electrical regulations. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a building-mounted satellite dish antenna, the applicant shall submit a plan or document prepared by a registered professional engineer which certifies that the proposed dish antenna installation is structurally sound. 
7.  Satellite dish antennas should be shielded and/or filtered to prevent the emission and/or reflection of electromagnetic radiation that would interfere with radio and television reception on adjacent properties. In the event that harmful interference is caused subsequent to the installation of an antenna, the owner of the antenna shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
8.  Portable or trailer-mounted antennas are not permitted with the exception of temporary installation for on-site testing and demonstration purposes for a period not to exceed two days at any one location. 
(f)  Home occupations and professional home offices. Home occupations and professional home offices are permitted accessory uses in any residential district, not requiring a zoning permit, provided that: 
1.  The use of the residential dwelling for the home occupation or professional home office shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its residential use and shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the area of each floor. 
2.  No home occupation or professional home office shall be located in or conducted in an accessory structure, except in the upper level of detached garages. 
3.  No more than one full-time person, or any equivalent thereof, may be employed other than member of the family residing on the premises in such home occupation or professional home office. 
4.  Retail sales shall be prohibited except for the retail sales of products or goods produced or fabricated on the premises as a result of the home occupation. 
5.  No traffic, parking, noise, odor, smoke, lighting or glare generated by the home occupation or professional home office shall be greater in volume or intensity than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. 
6.  No materials which decompose by detonation shall be allowed in conjunction with a home occupation. 
7.  No outdoor storage of equipment or product shall be permitted. 
8.  The home occupation or professional office use shall not require external alteration or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling. 
9.  Home occupations, which comply with the conditions set forth above, may include, but are not limited to designing, canning, crafts, desktop publishing and other computer services, dressmaking, insurance agencies, laundering, piano teaching, telephone marketing, word processing, and other similar uses. 
10.  Home occupations shall not include auto body or engine repair, barbering, beauty shops, construction trades, dance studios, pet boarding, and other similar uses, with the exception of office bookkeeping associated with such operations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0504, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-75. - Compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
    Modifications to requirements of this Ordinance may be granted by the village plan commission for the purpose of complying with the requirements of Title II, Public Services, and Title III, Public Accommodations and Commercial Facilities, of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Such compliance may require the waiving or modifications to setback and yard requirements; parking requirements; sign requirements; and site design and landscaping requirements. Modifications granted by the plan commission shall be limited to the minimum extent necessary to make structures and uses accessible and barrier free. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0505, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-76. - Average street yards. 
    The required street yard may be increased or decreased in any district as follows: 
(a)  New buildsings. For new buildings, the required street yards may be decreased in any residential or business districts to the average of the existing street yards of the abutting structures on each side but in no case less than 15 feet in any residential district and five feet in any business district except the B-3 and B-4 Districts. 
(b)  Additions. For additions in the street yard of existing structures, the additions shall not project beyond the average of the existing street yards on the abutting lots or parcels. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0506, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-77. - Measuring setbacks from cul-de-sacs, curved streets, and easements. 
    The required setback on cul-de-sacs and curved streets shall be determined by measuring the required setback from the arc of the street right-of-way resulting in a setback line parallel to the arc of the street right-of-way (see Illustration No. 5). The required setback for lots containing easements for private streets and pedestrian or trail access shall be determined by measuring the required setback from the edge of the easement. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0507, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-78. - Corner lots. 
    Structures shall provide a street yard as required by this Ordinance on the street that the structure faces. A second street yard shall be provided on the side of the structure abutting a second public or private street. The second front yard setback shall be the same as the street yard required by the zoning district. The remaining yards shall be a side yard and a rear yard. The zoning administrator shall determine which yard is the side yard and which yard is the rear yard. The rear yard shall generally be the yard directly behind the front entrance to the structure and the side yard shall be the remaining yard. 
    Corner lots that are also a double frontage lot shall provide three street yards, one on each side of the structure facing a street. The remaining yard shall be a side yard. 

(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0508, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-79. - Double frontage lots. 
    Double frontage lots are generally prohibited, except in the case of reverse frontage lots where necessary to provide separation of development from arterial traffic or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. Lots abutting two opposite streets shall provide the front yard setback required by the district in which the lot is located from each street upon which the lot abuts. All other yards shall be side yards, except for corner lots which shall meet the provisions of section 95-78. 
    Accessory structures may be located in the street yard, including those for corner double-frontage lots, that abuts the arterial street from which no access is taken provided that they comply with the minimum setback requirement for the principal structure in the district in which they are located. Residential fences, with a height not to exceed six and one-half feet, and security fences may be solid fences permitted in said street yard up to the street right-of-way line; however, such solid fences for corner double-frontage lots shall not be permitted in the other two street yards that do not abut the arterial street from which no access is taken (see Illustration No. 6). 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0509, 5-25-04) 

Sec. 95-80. - Existing substandard lots. 
    See section 95-115. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0510, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-81. - Conservancy lands eligible for meeting lot area requirements. 
    Where a lot is located partially within a C-1 Lowland Conservancy District or a C-2 Upland Conservancy District and partially within an adjoining use district, that portion of the lot in the conservancy district may be used to meet the minimum area requirements of the adjoining use district provided that: 
(a)  Not more than 50 percent of the minimum lot area requirement may be met by the use of C-1 or C-2 District lands and that sufficient area is provided outside of the C-1 and C-2 District lands to accommodate the principal structure and its accessory structure, driveways, off-street parking areas, and all required yards, as reviewed and approved by the plan commission. In no case shall the lot area in said adjoining use district be less than 4,200 square feet. 
(b)  The C-1 or C-2 District area must be contiguous, adjoining, under the same ownership, and be made a permanent part of the development. 
(c)  A specific conservancy area can only be used one time and count toward one property for the purpose of calculating lot area and open space requirements. 
(d)  The village encourages the private preservation of sensitive environmental areas and desires that environmental open space and buffers be utilized whenever possible in all developments and projects; however, the assemblage or acquisition of C-1 or C-2 District lands for the express purpose of boosting or increasing the density of development is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0511, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-82. - Floodplains eligible for meeting lot area requirements. 
    Where a lot contains floodplains, the floodplains may be used to meet the area requirements of the underlying use district provided that at least 50 percent of the minimum lot area required by the underlying use district is provided outside the floodplain, and that sufficient area is provided outside the floodplain to accommodate the principal structure and its accessory structure, driveways, off-street parking areas, and all required yards, as reviewed and approved by the plan commission. No less than 4,200 square feet of lot area shall be located outside the floodplain. The presence of floodplains on a lot shall not be considered grounds for the reduction of the setback and other yard requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0512, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-83. - Cellular towers. 
    Cellular and digital communication antennas and towers may be permitted as a conditional use in the B-1, B-2, B-4, M-1, M-2, I-1, and P-1 Districts provided that: 
(a)  Overall plan. The developer shall prepare a plan showing the number and potential location of all antenna sites needed in the village to complete the communications network. 
(b)  Use of existing structures. All antennas shall be constructed on existing structures, such as, but not limited to water towers, public buildings, existing utility towers, farm silos, barns, or other communication towers unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the village plan commission that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Such evidence may consist of any of the following: 
1.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
2.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
3.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
4.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
5.  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
6.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(c)  Co-location. If it is determined by the village plan commission that such antennas cannot be co-located on existing structures, freestanding tower structures may be permitted, but such structures shall be designed to support the proposed antennas and three additional sets of communication antennas. The developer shall agree, in writing, to make the structure available for co-location of similar communication equipment operated by other companies at a reasonable return. 
(d)  Setbacks and height. 
1.  Towers shall be located on the lot so that the distance from the base of the tower to any adjoining property line or supporting structure of another tower is at least 50 feet or 105 percent of the fall zone of the tower, whichever is greater. 
2.  Any storage building associated with a cellular tower shall meet the setback requirements for principal buildings in the district in which it is located. A storage building shall not be classified as an "accessory use" or "accessory building." 
3.  The plan commission shall determine the maximum height permitted based on, but not limited to, data required to be submitted by the applicant that indicates the lowest height at which the system can adequately operate. 
(e)  Structural standards. New or modified towers shall be certified by a registered professional engineer to be in accordance with structural standards for antennas by the Electronics Industry Association. 
(f)  Parking. When a cellular tower facility is regularly staffed, a parking space for each on-site staff person shall be provided. 
(g)  Abandonment. Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers shall be removed within 18 months of the cessation of operations at the site. In the event that a tower is not removed within 18 months of cessation of operations at a site, the tower may be removed by the village and the costs of removal assessed against the property. The replacement of portions of a tower previously removed requires the issuance of a new conditional use permit. 
(h)  Appearance and illumination. 
1.  Towers shall be of an unguyed monopole design. Lattice towers and guyed towers shall be prohibited unless the plan commission determines that the lattice appearance or an alternative design would better blend in with the surrounding environment. 
2.  For towers not regulated by the Wisconsin Division of Aeronautics or the Federal Aviation Administration, a surface paint or finish shall be used so as to reduce the visual obtrusiveness and blend into the surrounding natural setting or built environment. 
3.  Towers shall not be illuminated and shall not display strobe lights except as required by the Wisconsin Division of Aeronautics or the Federal Aviation Administration. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached to the tower. However, such lights shall be directional and shall not produce glare into residential areas. 
4.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(i)  Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited. 
(j)  Interference with public safety telecommunications. No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. All applications for new service shall be accompanied by an intermodulation study which provides a technical evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference problems. Before the introduction of new service or changes in existing service, telecommunication providers shall notify the village at least ten calendar days in advance of such changes and allow the village to monitor interference levels during the testing process. 
(k)  Landscaping and building materials. Landscaping shall be installed or existing vegetation shall be maintained for the purpose of screening the base of towers and their associated buildings. Building materials shall blend with the surrounding environment. The following regulations shall apply: 
1.  In residential zoning districts, support buildings in association with cellular towers shall be constructed of natural materials such as wood, brick, or stone and shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with the exterior of the residential buildings in the neighborhood. Pitched, not flat, roofs shall be used. In no case shall metal exteriors on buildings be permitted. 
2.  For all towers, a buffer area at least 25 feet in width shall be provided along all property lines, including street lines. 
a.  In all nonresidential districts, for each 100 linear feet of property line, the following plant material shall be provided: 
(i)  One canopy tree with a caliper size of at least two inches in diameter at chest height (about five feet above adjacent grade); 
(ii)  Two medium height trees with a caliper size of at least one and one-half inches in diameter at chest height; 
(iii)  Two evergreen trees with a height of at least six feet; and 
(iv)  Five evergreen or deciduous shrubs with a height of at least 18 inches. 
b.  In all residential districts, for each 100 linear feet of property line, the following plant material shall be provided: 
(i)  One canopy tree with a caliper size of at least two inches in diameter at chest height; 
(ii)  Two medium height trees with a caliper size of at least one and one-half inches in diameter at chest height; 
(iii)  Five evergreen trees with a height of at least six feet; and 
(iv)  Ten evergreen or deciduous shrubs with a height of at least 18 inches. 
c.  Trees and shrubs in the vicinity of guy wires shall be of a type that would not exceed 20 feet at mature height or, should they be uprooted, would not affect the stability of the guys, and shall not obscure visibility of the guy anchor from the transmission building or security facilities and staff. 
d.  All plants shall meet the minimum standards of the most recent issue of the American Standard for Nursery Stock, by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc. 
3.  The plan commission may allow the use of an alternate plan or require a more restrictive plan providing for landscape and screening, including plantings, fences, walls, and other features. The alternate plan shall accomplish the same degree of screening for tower(s) and associated buildings achieved above, except where lesser requirements are desirable for security purposes and for continued operation of existing agricultural and forest uses, including produce farms, nurseries, and tree farms. 
4.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The site plan shall show any existing native vegetation to be removed and shall indicate the type and location of native vegetation to be replanted. 
(l)  Additional submittal requirements. In addition to the information required elsewhere in this Ordinance, development applications for towers shall include the following supplemental information: 
1.  A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which: 
a.  Describes the tower height and design including a cross section and elevation; 
b.  Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas; 
c.  Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate; 
d.  Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunications; 
e.  Includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and 
f.  Includes all other information necessary to evaluate the request. 
2.  Documentation that the proposed tower meets the Federal Communications Commission radiation emission standards. 
3.  For all commercial wireless telecommunication service towers, a letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use. 
4.  Before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy permit, the following supplemental information shall be submitted: 
a.  Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
b.  A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which demonstrates the tower's compliance with the aforementioned structural and electrical standards. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0513, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-84. - Energy conversion systems. 
    The following energy conversion systems are conditional uses and may be permitted as specified: 
(a)  Wind energy systems. Wind energy systems, commonly referred to as "windmills," which are used to provide electrical power may be permitted as a conditional use in the A-1, I-1, P-1, M-1, and M-2 Districts provided that the following information, requirements, and standards shall apply: 
1.  Application. Applications for the erection of a wind energy system shall conform to the conditional use application and approval procedure set forth in section 95-206, and shall be accompanied by a plat of survey for the property to be served showing the location of the generating facility and the means by which the facility will provide power to structures, or connect to a utility company grid. If the system is intended to provide power to more than one premises, the plat of survey shall show all properties to be served and the means of connection to the wind energy system. A copy of all agreements with system users off the premises shall accompany the application. The application shall further indicate the level of noise to be generated by the system, and provide assurances as to the safety features of the system. In addition, the application shall include a copy of any wind energy access easements obtained from adjacent property owners. 
2.  Appearance and construction. All wind energy systems shall be of an unguyed monopole design. Lattice towers and guyed towers shall be prohibited unless the plan commission determines that such a lattice appearance or an alternative design would better blend in with the surrounding environment. Wind energy systems shall be constructed and anchored in such a manner to withstand wind pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square foot in area. 
3.  Noise. The maximum level of noise permitted to be generated by a wind energy system shall not exceed the limits set forth in section 95-136. 
4.  Electromagnetic interference. Wind energy system generators and alternators shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission of radio-frequency energy that would cause any harmful interference with radio and/or television broadcasting or reception. In the event that harmful interference is caused subsequent to the granting of a conditional use permit, the operator of the wind energy system shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
5.  Location and height. Wind energy systems may be located in the rear yard only and shall meet all setback and yard requirements for the district in which they are located and, in addition, shall be located not closer to a property boundary than a distance equal to their height. The plan commission shall determine the maximum height permitted based on, but not limited to, data required to be submitted by the applicant that indicates the lowest height at which the system can operate without significantly increasing the cost of the system or significantly decreasing its efficiency; however, all such systems over 75 feet in height shall submit plans to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to determine whether the system is subject to FAA restrictions. A copy of any FAA restrictions imposed shall be included as part of the wind energy system conditional use permit application. 
6.  Fence required. All wind energy systems shall be surrounded by a security fence not less than six feet in height, but shall comply with the requirements set forth in sections 95-61 and 95-74(d) A sign shall be posted on the fence warning of high voltages. 
7.  Utility company notification. The appropriate electric power company shall be notified, in writing, of any proposed interface with that company's grid prior to installing said interface. Copies of comments by the appropriate utility company shall accompany and be part of the application for a conditional use permit. 
8.  Compliance with electrical code. The electrical portion of the installation shall comply with all provisions of the electrical code of the village. 
(b)  Solar energy systems. Solar energy systems, commonly referred to as "solar collectors" and "active" or "passive" solar energy systems that are freestanding systems may be permitted as a conditional use in any district except the C-1 and FW Districts provided that the following information, requirements, and standards shall apply: 
1.  Application. Applications for the erection of a solar energy system shall conform to the conditional use application and approval procedure set forth in section 95-206, and shall be accompanied by a plat of survey for the property to be served showing the location of the system and the means by which the energy will be provided to the structure or structures. In addition, the application shall include a copy of any solar energy access easements obtained from adjacent property owners. 
2.  Construction. Solar energy systems shall be constructed and installed in conformance with all applicable state and local building and zoning codes, and a registered engineer shall certify that the building is adequate to support the load. 
3.  Location and height. Solar energy systems may be located in the side or rear yard only and shall meet all setback and yard requirements for the district in which they are located. Solar energy systems shall conform to all height requirements of this Ordinance unless otherwise provided in the conditional use permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0514, 5-25-04) 
Secs. 95-85-95-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS 

Sec. 95-91. - Purpose and intent. 
    The intent of this Ordinance is to provide for and regulate the location and safe construction of signs in a manner to ensure that signs are compatible with surrounding land uses, are well maintained, express the identity of individual proprietors and the village as a whole, preserve and protect property value, provide against undue concentrations of signs which distract and endanger traffic safety and traffic flow, and avoid uncontrolled proliferation of signs. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0601, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-92. - Compliance. 
(a)  No sign shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered without first obtaining a permit reflecting conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, except for those signs allowed without a permit under section 95-93. 
(b)  No signs shall be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility, and all signs shall comply with the traffic visibility requirements set forth in section 95-61. 
(c)  All sign permits, unless otherwise specified, shall be issued by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0602, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-93. - Signs permitted in all districts without a permit. 
    The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts without a permit, subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Real estate signs not to exceed eight square feet in area which advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which said signs are temporarily located. 
(b)  Personal name and warning signs not to exceed two square feet in area and located on the premises. 
(c)  Home occupation and professional home office signs not to exceed two square feet in area. Such signs shall not be internally illuminated; and shall be mounted flush against the dwelling. 
(d)  Election campaign signs provided that permission shall be obtained from the property owner, renter or lessee; such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area in any nonresidential zoning districts; shall not exceed 20 square feet in area in any residential zoning districts unless the sign is affixed to a permanent structure and does not extend beyond the perimeter of the structure nor obstruct a window, door, fire escape, ventilation shaft, or other area which is required by the municipal building code to remain unobstructed; shall not be erected prior to the first day of the "election campaign period" as defined in § 12.04, Wis. Stats.; and shall be removed within four days following that election. 
(e)  Temporary rummage sale and garage sale signs not exceeding eight square feet in area may be erected on the premises for a period not to exceed seven days twice in any calendar year. Off-premises rummage sale and garage sale signs are prohibited on public properties and street rights-of-way except where the sign design and location have been approved by the zoning administrator. Rummage sale and garage sale signs shall be removed within 24 hours following the sale. 
(f)  Bulletin boards for public, charitable, or religious institutions not to exceed 32 square feet in area and located on the premises. 
(g)  Memorial signs, tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal and affixed flat against a structure. 
(h)  Official signs, such as traffic control, parking restrictions, information, and notices. 
(i)  Driveway ingress/egress and direction signs to identify parking lot entrances and exits, or direct customer to drive-in windows, may be placed adjacent to driveways provided that no ingress/egress sign shall be placed in the street right-of-way; and no ingress/egress sign face shall exceed four square feet in area. 
(j)  Certain temporary signs as set forth in section 95-97. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0603, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-94. - Signs permitted in all residential districts with a permit. 
    The following signs are permitted in any residential district and are subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Permanent real estate development signs placed at the entrance to a subdivision or development shall contain only the name of the subdivision or development and shall be set back at least five feet from a street right-of-way or side or rear lot line. The plan commission may permit a permanent real estate development sign closer to or within a street right-of-way or median after determining that the sign will have no adverse impact on public safety. The plan commission shall determine the appropriate size of the sign based on the design of the sign and its compatibility with adjacent land uses. 
(b)  Temporary development signs for the purpose of designating a new building or development, or for the promotion of a subdivision may be permitted for a limited period of time provided that the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area on one side, and 64 square feet in area on all sides, and shall not be closer than five feet from a street right-of-way or side or rear lot line. The plan commission shall specify the period of time the sign may remain based on the size of the development, allowing a reasonable amount of time to market the development. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0604, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-95. - Signs permitted in all business, manufacturing, and extractive districts with a permit. 
    Signs are permitted in all business, manufacturing, and extractive districts subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  Wall signs placed against the exterior walls of buildings shall not extend more than 12 inches outside of a building's wall surface; shall not exceed one square foot of area for every one linear foot of building face width on which it is mounted; shall not extend above the second floor window nor 20 feet in height above the mean centerline street grade, whichever is lower, in the B-3 District; and, in all other districts, shall not extend above the roofline of a building, unless it is erected on a parapet wall or fascia that extends above the roofline of a flat roof on at least three sides of a building, nor exceed 20 feet in height above the mean centerline street grade, whichever is lower. Roof signs are prohibited. 
(b)  Projecting signs fastened to, suspended from, or supported by structures shall not exceed one sign per site or 25 square feet per face on any one premises containing no more than two business establishments. A premises having three or more business establishments may have one projecting sign which collectively advertises or identifies the businesses, persons, activities, goods, products, or services located on the premises, provided that such sign shall not exceed a sign area of 100 square feet. No projecting signs shall extend more than four feet into any required yard; and shall not extend more than four feet from the building to which it is attached and such extension may occur into any public right-of-way. A projecting sign shall not extend beyond a point three feet back from the vertical plane formed by the street curb line; shall not be less than three feet from all side lot lines; shall not exceed a height of 20 feet above the mean centerline street grade or extend beyond the height of the roofline or above the second floor window, whichever is lower; and shall not be less than ten feet above the sidewalk nor 15 feet above a driveway or an alley. 
(c)  Marquee, awning, or canopy signs affixed flat to the surface of a marquee, awning, or canopy are permitted provided that the sign face does not exceed a height of two feet nor extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of said marquee, awning, or canopy and need no permit. In addition a marquee, awning, or canopy shall not be less than eight feet above the sidewalk nor less than 15 feet above a driveway or alley and an awning or canopy shall not extend more than four feet nor a marquee extend more than eight feet from a building which they are attached. A name sign not exceeding two square feet in area located immediately in front of the entrance to an establishment may be suspended from the marquee, awning, or canopy provided that the name sign shall be at least eight feet above the sidewalk. 
(d)  Monument (ground) signs shall not exceed eight feet in height, shall be set back at least five feet from front, side, or rear lot lines for the district in which it is located, except the B-3 District, and shall not exceed 40 square feet on one side nor a total of 80 square feet for all sides for any one premises. No monument sign located in a B-3 District shall extend into the street right-of-way or beyond a lot line. 
(e)  Freestanding pole or pylon signs shall not exceed 20 feet in height above the base of the sign location or the adjacent mean centerline street grade only if the sign location is below the street grade, whichever is higher, and shall not exceed 40 square feet on one side nor a total of 80 square feet for all sides for any one premises. Except in the B-3 District, pole or pylon signs, including the sign face, shall be set back at least five feet from a street right-of-way or a side or rear lot line. The sign face and supporting structure of a pole or pylon sign in a B-3 District shall not extend beyond a side or rear lot line; however, the sign face, excluding the supporting structure, may extend into the street right-of-way but shall not exceed a point three feet back from the vertical plane formed by the street curb line. The sign face of pole or pylon signs shall not be less than ten feet above a sidewalk or less than 15 feet above a driveway or parking lot grade. 
(f)  Window signs, except for painted signs or decals, shall be placed only on the inside of buildings, shall not be placed on glass doors or window areas that will impede pedestrian safety or prohibit view by police, and shall be placed behind clear glazed window openings and not on unglazed openings. 
(g)  Combinations of signs. Combinations of any of the above signs shall meet all the requirements for the individual sign. The total number of signs on any premises shall be limited as follows: 
1.  One monument or freestanding pole/pylon sign per principal building or arterial street frontage, unless otherwise specified herein. 
2.  One wall, canopy, or fascia sign per principal building, unless otherwise specified herein. 
3.  Multitenant buildings may provide a tenant directory as one of the two signs permitted. 
4.  Separate individual wall, canopy, or fascia signs may be allowed for each tenant in a shopping center subject to review and approval by the plan commission of an overall coordinated sign plan for the shopping center. The size of signs approved in this manner shall be calculated using the width of the bay occupied by each tenant. No individual wall, canopy, or fascia sign may exceed 40 square feet in area, with a maximum height of two feet for the sign face. 
5.  Up to two advertising signs may be permitted per building but no more than one freestanding sign unless permitted in accordance with subsection (g)6., below. Owners may elect for them to be any combination of wall, canopy, fascia, monument, or freestanding signs, not exceeding a total of two, and approved by the plan commission. 
6.  Large developments containing a floor area of 25,000 square feet or greater and multiple-street frontages may have an additional wall, monument, or pole/pylon sign to identify the development, upon plan commission review and approval. 
7.  Price signs for gasoline or diesel fuel sales as required by law shall not be subject to limitation on number of signs; however, such price signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. 
8.  Directional signs less than six square feet in area shall not be subject to limitations on number of signs, but shall require zoning administrator approval. incidental signs include, but shall not be limited to, those that read "enter," "exit," "do not enter," "shipping," and "receiving". 
9.  Menu boards and changeable copy reader boards may be added to a wall sign or pole sign, upon plan commission review and approval, without reducing the size of the wall sign or pole sign; however, such reader boards shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0605, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 2005-01, 95.0605, 1-24-05) 
Sec. 95-96. - Signs permitted in all institutional and park and recreation districts with a permit. 
    The following signs are permitted in the I-1 and P-1 Districts subject to approval by the village plan commission: 
(a)  Private institutional and park name signs. 
(b)  Public institutional and park name signs. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0606, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-97. - Temporary portable signs and searchlights. 
    The plan commission may permit the temporary use of a portable sign or searchlight for advertising purposes, including banners, pennants, and/or balloons, in any district provided that the portable sign or searchlight will not be located in any public right-of-way, will not be closer than ten feet to an adjacent property line, and will not cause a hazard to traffic or adjoining properties. The plan commission, after review and approval, may allow a portable sign or searchlight to extend into the public right-of-way. Sandwich-board signs located on public sidewalks may be permitted subject to plan commission review and approval. The plan commission may specify the maximum size of any sign and the period of time the sign or searchlight may remain, to a maximum of seven consecutive days unless extended by prior authorization by the plan commission. The permit required in section 95-104 shall be required for searchlights, banners exceeding 25 square feet in area, and large advertising balloons. Portable signs shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0607, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-98. - Prohibited signs and facing. 
(a)  No sign shall be erected on or over the roof of a building. 
(b)  Outdoor off-premises billboard signs are prohibited. Other off-premises business signs may be permitted only on adjacent properties with proper permission from said property owner(s) and subject to plan commission review and approval. Official signs, temporary rummage and garage sale signs, and signs located at village boundaries identifying civic or other nonprofit community service organizations located within the village are exempt from this provision. 
(c)  No sign, except those permitted in sections 95-93 and 95-94, shall be permitted to face a residential or park district within 100 feet of such district boundary. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0608, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-99. - Landscaping. 
    All permanent freestanding signs, except those in the B-3 District, shall be set in a landscaped base of appropriate size to provide flowers, groundcover, ornamental grasses, shrubs, and other base plantings, except turf grass, that will enhance and complement the sign. The landscape area shall be at least the same size as the area of the sign copy. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0609, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-100. - Lighting and color. 
    Signs shall not resemble, imitate, or approximate the shape, size, form, or color of railroad or traffic signs, signals, or devices. Signs shall not obstruct or interfere with the effectiveness of railroad or traffic signs, signals, or devices. Signs shall not be placed in such a way as to cause glare or impair driver visibility upon public ways. Signs may be illuminated and, other than public traffic control signs, shall have no elements that are flashing, blinking, moving, rotating, or pulsating. Signs that include electronic message boards and those that give cyclical time and temperature information shall not be considered flashing or pulsating signs. Signs in residential districts shall not be internally illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0610, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-101. - Construction and maintenance standards. 
(a)  Wind pressure and dead load requirements. All signs and other advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square foot of area; and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the village building code or other ordinance. 
(b)  Protection of the public. The temporary occupancy of a sidewalk, street, or other public property during construction, removal, repair, alteration, or maintenance of a sign is permitted provided the space occupied is roped off, fenced off, or otherwise isolated. 
(c)  Maintenance standards. 
(1)  The owner of any sign shall keep it in good maintenance and repair which includes restoring, repainting, or replacement of a worn or damaged legally existing sign to its original condition; and shall maintain the premises on which the sign is erected in a clean and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish, weeds, and grass. Restoration or painting which changes the name, size, or location of a sign will require a new permit. Banners, pennants, and balloons used for advertising shall be securely attached to a building or other stable sign support, and torn, deflated or damaged signs shall be promptly repaired or removed. 
(2)  The owner of any sign shall be required to have all parts and supports of a sign properly painted as directed by the Zoning Administrator, unless they are galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust and deterioration. 
(3)  The sign owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the sign. If the sign ownership should transfer, the new owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the sign. 
(d)  Supporting member or braces. Supporting member or braces of all signs shall be constructed of galvanized iron, properly treated wood, steel, copper, brass, or other noncorrosive incombustible material. Every means or device used for attaching any sign shall extend through the walls of the building should the building inspector determine that the safe and permanent support of such sign so requires and shall be securely anchored by wall plates and nuts to the inside of the walls in accordance with instructions given by the building inspector. Small flat signs containing less than ten feet of area may be attached to a building by the use of lag bolts or other means to the satisfaction of the building inspector. 
(e)  Prohibited attachments or mountings. No signs or any part thereof or sign anchors, braces, or guide rods shall be attached, fastened, or anchored to any fire escape, fire ladder, or standpipe and no sign or any part of any such sign or any anchor, brace, or guide rod shall be erected, put up, or maintained so as to hinder or prevent ingress or egress through such door, doorway, or window or so as to hinder or prevent the raising or placing of ladders against such building by the fire department of the village, as necessity therefore may require. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0611, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-102. - Existing nonconforming signs. 
    Signs lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance may be continued even though the use, size, or location may not conform to this Ordinance. Such signs shall be deemed nonconforming uses or structures, and the provisions of article VII shall apply. 
    When a business or other use changes, thereby requiring a new sign message, the sign shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance, including an application for a sign permit if required. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0612, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-103. - Abandoned signs. 
    All signs or sign messages shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which a sign is located when the business it advertises is no longer conducted, or is dilapidated or beyond repair under the provisions of § 66.0413, Wis. Stats. If the owner or lessee fails to remove such signs, the Zoning Administrator shall give the owner a 30-day written notice by certified mail to remove said sign. Upon failure to comply with the first notice, the zoning administrator shall, by certified mail, send a second notice giving the owner an additional 48 hours to remove the sign. Upon failure to comply with the second notice, the village may cause removal to be executed, the expenses of which will be assessed as a special tax to the property on which the abandoned sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0613, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-104. - Sign permit. 
    Applications for a sign permit shall be made on forms provided by the zoning administrator or village clerk and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(a)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected. 
(b)  Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the sign. 
(c)  Written consent of the owner or lessee of the building, structure, or land to which or upon which the sign is to be affixed. 
(d)  A scale drawing of such sign indicating the dimensions, the square footage, the height of top and bottom of sign above grade, the materials to be used, the type of illumination, if any, and the method of construction and attachment. 
(e)  A scale drawing indicating the location and position of such sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures. 
(f)  Copies of any other permit required and issued for said sign, including the written approval by the electrical inspector, in the case of illuminated signs, who shall examine the plans and specifications, reinspecting all wiring and connections to determine if the same complies with the Village of Kewaskum Electrical Code. 
(g)  Additional information as may be required by the zoning administrator or village plan commission. 
(h)  Fee receipt from the village clerk in the amount specified in section 95-208 of this Ordinance. 
(i)  Sign permit applications shall be filed with the zoning administrator, who shall review the application for its completeness and accuracy and approve or deny, in writing, the application within 30 days of receipt from the applicant unless the time is extended by written agreement with the applicant. A sign permit shall become null and void if work authorized under the permit has not been completed within six months of the date of issuance. 
(j)  Inspection. The sign owner shall call the zoning administrator for an inspection upon completion of all permit requirements and installation. 
(k)  Appeals. An applicant may appeal the decision of the plan commission to the village board for determination. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0614, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-105. - Measuring signs. 
    In calculating the area of a sign to determine whether it meets the requirement of this Ordinance, the zoning administrator shall include the sign copy and any border or frame surrounding that copy. Supporting members of a sign shall be excluded from the area calculation. If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all areas will be totaled. Any irregular shaped sign area shall be computed using the actual sign face surface. In the case of individual letters, the area of the copy will be squared off and used. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0615, 5-25-04) 
Secs. 95-106-96-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS 

Sec. 95-111. - Existing nonconforming uses. 
    The lawful nonconforming use of land or water; or a lawful nonconforming use in a conforming or nonconforming structure; or a lawful nonconforming use on a conforming or nonconforming lot which existed at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance may be continued although the use does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance; however: 
(a)  Only that portion of the land or water in actual use may be so continued and the use may not be extended, enlarged, substituted, or moved; and the structure may not be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, substituted, moved, or structurally altered except when required to do so by law or order or so as to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Total lifetime structural repairs or alterations to a structure with a nonconforming use shall not exceed 50 percent of the municipality's equalized assessed value of the structure unless it is permanently changed to conform to the use provisions of this Ordinance. Figure 1 describes the method by which the zoning administrator shall determine when modifications to nonconforming uses and structures are equal to 50 percent. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications, or additions. Such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, and paneling; the replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components; and the maintenance, repair, or replacement of existing sewage systems, water supply systems, or connections to public utilities. 
(c)  Substitution of new equipment may be permitted by the board of zoning appeals if such equipment will reduce the incompatibility of the nonconforming use with the neighboring uses. 
(d)  Discontinuance. If such nonconforming use is discontinued or terminated for a period of 12 months, any future use of the structure, land, or water shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(e)  Abolishment or destruction. When a structure with a nonconforming use is damaged by fire, explosion, flood, the public enemy, or other calamity to the extent of more than 50 percent of its current equalized assessed value, it shall not be restored except so as to comply with the use provisions of this Ordinance, including the requirements of section 95-117 for nonconforming uses and structures in the FW, FC, and UF Regulatory Areas. 
Figure No. 1 
IS IT 50 PERCENT YET? 
    Sample Problem : Let's assume that the owner of a nonconforming house wishes to add a room to the house. If the house had an equalized assessed value of $60,000.00, the property owner would be able to make improvements valued at 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the house or $30,000.00. The improvement would have to be built to zoning standards. Any further additions or structural alterations could not be allowed unless the entire structure was changed to meet the requirements for a new structure. 
    Additions and modifications which are permitted are based upon a time period over the life of the structure as shown above. Therefore, if, in the example above, the property owner constructed a $30,000.00 addition, no further additions could be allowed because the 50 percent improvement limit had been reached. However, let's assume that the addition was valued at $12,000.00 or 20 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure ($60,000.00). Five years later, the property owner again comes in wishing to add an attached greenhouse. In the meantime, the present equalized assessed value of the house has increased from $60,000.00 to $80,000.00. The value of the greenhouse is $8,000.00 or ten percent of the current equalized assessed value of the structure. The property owner has now accumulated 20 percent plus ten percent or 30 percent of the allowable additions. 
    Finally, three years later, when the equalized assessed value of the house is $100,000.00, the property owner again comes in wishing to modify his house to the extent of $25,000.00. $25,000.00 is 25 percent of $100,000.00 therefore, the property owner could not make the modification since he had already accumulated 30 percent and an additional 25 percent would be greater than the 50 percent allowed. However, the property owner could make modifications equal to 20 percent of the current equalized assessed value of the home, or $20,000.00. 
    This example is further clarified in the following table: 
NOTE: The base for calculation is not the original value of the home at the time the ordinance is enacted, but is the equalized assessed value of the home at each time the home is modified. 
Year Equalized Assessed 
Value of Home Value of 
Modification Percent of 
Modification Cumulative 
Percentage 1977 $ 60,000 $12,000 20% 20% 1982 $ 80,000 $ 8,000 10% 30% 1985 $100,000 
$100,000 $25,000 
$20,000 25% 
20% 55% 
50%  
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0701, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-112. - Conforming structures on nonconforming lots. 
    The conforming use of a conforming structure outside the FW, FC, and UF Regulatory Areas existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance may be continued although the lot area or lot width does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(a)  Additions and enlargements to such structures are permitted and shall conform to the established building setback lines along streets and the yard, height, parking, loading, and access provisions of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Existing conforming structures on nonconforming lots which are damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, flood, or other calamity, may be reconstructed provided they conform with the established building setback lines along streets and the yard, height, parking, loading, and access provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0702, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-113. - Nonconforming structures on a conforming or nonconforming lot. 
    The conforming use of a nonconforming structure outside the FW, FC, UF Regulatory Areas existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance may be continued although the structure's size or location does not conform to the established building setback line along streets or the yard, height, parking, loading, and/or access provisions of this Ordinance. 
(a)  Additions and enlargements to existing nonconforming structures with a conforming use are permitted if they conform with the established building setback lines along streets and the yard, height, parking, loading, and access provisions of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Existing nonconforming structures with a conforming use which are damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, flood, or other calamity may be reconstructed and insofar as is practicable shall conform with the established building setback lines along streets and the yard, height, parking, loading, and access provisions of the Ordinance. 
(c)  Existing nonconforming structures may be moved and shall conform with all zoning regulations applicable to the location to which they are moved. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0703, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-114. - Changes and substitutions. 
    Once a nonconforming use or structure has been changed to conform, it shall not revert back to a nonconforming use or structure. The board of zoning appeals may permit the substitution of a more restrictive nonconforming use for an existing nonconforming use. Once the board of zoning appeals has permitted the substitution of a more restrictive nonconforming use, the existing use shall lose its status as a legal nonconforming use and the substituted use shall become subject to all the conditions required by the board of zoning appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0704, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-115. - Existing nonconforming lots. 
(a)  In any residential or agricultural district, a one-family detached dwelling and its accessory structures may be erected on any legal lot of record in the Washington County Register of Deeds Office existing before the effective date or amendment of this Ordinance, provided that the lot or parcel is in separate ownership from any abutting lots, and provided such lot or parcel meets all the following minimum requirements: 
Lot Width Minimum 40 feet Area Minimum 4,000 square feet Building Area Minimum 800 square feet Height Maximum 35 feet Yards Street Minimum 25 feet from lot line Rear Minimum 25 feet from lot line Side Minimum 16 percent of the frontage, but not less than 5 feet from the lot line  
(b)  A lot located in a business, manufacturing, institutional, or park district which does not contain sufficient area to conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance may be used as a building site provided that the lot is a lot of record in the county register of deeds office prior to the effective date or amendment of this Ordinance; provided the use is permitted in the zoning district; and provided that the lot or parcel is in separate ownership from any abutting lot. Buildings on nonconforming lots granted permits under this section shall be required to meet the setback and other yard requirements of this Ordinance. 
(c)  If two or more lots with continuous frontage, one or more of which contains less land area or width than required by this Ordinance and which have the same ownership as of the effective date or amendment of this Ordinance, the lots involved shall be considered to be an individual parcel for the purpose of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0705, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-116. - Wetland nonconforming uses. 
    Notwithstanding § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling, or expansion of a legal nonconforming structure, or any environmental control facility related to a legal nonconforming structure, located in a shoreland C-1 Lowland Conservancy District and in existence at the time of adoption or subsequent amendment of this Ordinance is permitted, pursuant to § 61.351(5), Wis. Stats. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0706, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-117. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed § 95-117, which pertained to nonconforming uses and structures in the FW, FC, and UF Regulatory Areas, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0707, adopted May 25, 2004. 
Secs. 95-118-95-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SITE PLAN AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW 

Sec. 95-121. - Purpose and intent. 
    For the purpose of promoting compatible development, stability of property values, and to prevent impairment or depreciation of property values, no person shall commence any use or erect any structure, with the exception of single-family and two-family dwellings, without first obtaining the approval of the plan commission of detailed site and architectural plans as set forth in this section. 
    The zoning administrator shall review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, utilization of landscaping and open space areas as deemed appropriate for all development in the A-1 Agricultural/Transitional District and the RS-1, RS-2, and RD-1 Single-Family and Two-Family Residential Districts. 
    The plan commission shall review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, loading and unloading areas, highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage, sewerage and water systems, utilization of landscaping and open space, and the proposed operation in all districts except the A-1 Agricultural/Transitional District and the RS-1, RS-2, and RD-1 Single-Family and Two-Family Residential Districts. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0801, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-122. - Principles. 
    To implement and define criteria for the purposes set forth in section 95-121, the following principles are established to apply to all new structures and uses and to changes or additions to existing structures and uses. 
(a)  The proposed use(s) shall conform to the uses permitted in the applicable zoning district. 
(b)  The dimensional arrangement of buildings and structures shall conform to the required area, yard, setback, and height restrictions of the Ordinance. 
(c)  The relative proportion of the scale and mass of a building to neighboring existing buildings, to pedestrians or observers, or to other existing buildings shall be maintained or enhanced when new buildings are built or when existing buildings are remodeled or altered. 
(d)  The visual continuity of roof shapes, rooflines, and their contributing elements (e.g. parapet walls, coping, and cornices) shall be maintained in building development or redevelopment. 
(e)  No building shall be permitted if the design or exterior appearance will be of such unorthodox or abnormal character in relation to its surroundings as to be unsightly or offensive to generally accepted taste and community standards. 
(f)  No building shall be permitted if the design or exterior appearance will be so similar to those adjoining as to create excessive monotony or drabness. 
(g)  No building shall be permitted where any exposed facade will be constructed or faced with finished material which is not aesthetically compatible with nearby facades of surrounding buildings or presents an unattractive appearance to the public and to surrounding properties. 
(h)  The facade of commercial, industrial, governmental, institutional, recreational, and multifamily residential buildings which face upon a street right-of-way shall be finished with an aesthetically pleasing material. A minimum of 30 percent of a facade facing an existing or future street shall be finished with brick, wood, fieldstone, decorative masonry material, decorative glass panels, or decorative precast concrete panels, except where the building style requires a different material. Attractive aluminum or vinyl siding which has the appearance of wood siding, a "brushed" surface, or other compatible attractive material may, however, be permitted. Such finished material shall extend for a distance of at least 20 feet along the sides of the structure, except those in the B-3 District. All buildings on corner and double-frontage lots shall have the required finished facade facing each street. No plain concrete block building or metal-faced building, except those with an attractive finished surface mentioned above, shall be permitted. 
(i)  Colors. Since the selection of building colors has a significant aesthetic and visual impact upon the public and neighboring properties, colors shall be selected to be in general harmony with existing neighborhood buildings. The use of bright colors should be limited and used only as an accent such as, for example, on trims. 
(j)  Accessory buildings shall be built with materials compatible with those of the principal building on the same site. 
(k)  No overhead door or loading dock for commercial, manufacturing, institutional, or park buildings shall face a public street. The plan commission may permit overhead doors and docks to face a public street when it has made a finding that there is no feasible alternative location for such doors or docks and, insofar as is practicable, such doors and docks facing public streets are screened. 
(l)  Outside storage areas for inventory, materials, equipment, supplies, scrap, and other materials utilized in the day-to-day operation of the principal use shall be paved, as determined by the plan commission, and screened from view from public streets with appropriate vegetation or fencing or wall of a material compatible with the principal structure and the surrounding area. The plan commission may permit the outdoor display of products or merchandise when it makes a finding that such a display is essential to a business or industrial use, such as a landscape-nursery or car-sales business, and attractive periphery landscaping is provided. 
(m)  Mechanical equipment, such as heating, air conditioning, and ventilating equipment, at grade level and on rooftops, shall be screened from public view or located in a manner that is unobtrusive. 
(n)  No building or sign shall be permitted to be sited on the property in a manner which would unnecessarily destroy or substantially damage the natural beauty of the area, particularly insofar as it would adversely affect values incidental to ownership of land in that area, or which would unnecessarily have an adverse effect on the beauty and general enjoyment of existing buildings on adjoining properties. 
(o)  No building or use shall be permitted that would have a negative impact on the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions in the village. 
(p)  Building and uses shall maintain existing topography, drainage patterns, and vegetative cover insofar as is practical to prevent indiscriminate or excessive earth moving or clearing of property, disfiguration of natural land forms, and disruption of natural drainage patterns. 
(q)  Traffic circulation. Buildings and uses shall provide for safe traffic circulation and safe driveway locations. 
(r)  Parking. Buildings and uses shall provide adequate parking and loading areas. 
(s)  Appropriate buffers shall be provided between dissimilar uses in accordance with section 95-25(e) of this Ordinance. 
(t)  Appropriate erosion control measures shall be utilized in all new development. 
(u)  Services. Buildings and uses shall be provided with adequate public services as approved by the appropriate utility. 
(v)  Refuse and recycling areas shall be screened by completely enclosing such areas with a wall or fence of a material compatible with the principal structure and surrounding area. The wall or fence, excluding those in the B-3 District, shall be surrounded with a landscape bed at least three feet wide consisting of plants, except at the gate. 
(w)  No buildings shall impair the enjoyment of historic attractions and areas of significant historic interest. 
(x)  Buildings on-premises which have historic significance shall be identified by a plaque to be provided by the village and should be encouraged to be maintained or restored, insofar as is practicable, in a manner which will protect its historic significance in accordance with the standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of the Interior for historic preservation projects. 
(y)  Development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the public goals, objectives, principles, standards, policies, and urban design guidelines set forth in the adopted village comprehensive plan or element thereof, including those within the B-3 Central Business District. 
(z)  Open space. Buildings and uses shall make appropriate use of open spaces. The zoning administrator or plan commission may require appropriate landscaping and planting screens. A landscaping maintenance program, together with appropriate assurances, shall be submitted. 
(aa)  Other principles deemed appropriate in the Village of Kewaskum or in the vicinity of the project may be imposed by the plan commission. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0802, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-123. - Administration. 
    Plan data shall be submitted to the zoning administrator who shall review all applications in the A-1, RS-1, RS-2, and RD-1 Districts. The zoning administrator shall transmit all applications and their accompanying plans in other districts to the plan commission for their review. Plan data to be submitted with all plan review applications shall include the following: 
(a)  Site plan drawn to a recognized engineering scale. 
(b)  Name of project. 
(c)  Owner's and/or developer's name and address. 
(d)  Architect's and/or engineer's name and address. 
(e)  Date of plan submittal. 
(f)  Scale of drawing, north arrow, and site size information (area in square feet or acres). 
(g)  Existing and proposed topography shown at contour intervals of two feet or less. Topography shall extend 40 feet onto adjacent property or to the building on the adjacent lot, whichever is greater. 
(h)  The characteristics of soils related to contemplated specific uses. 
(i)  Total number and location of parking spaces. 
(j)  All building and yard setback lines. 
(k)  Where applicable, both the 100-year recurrence interval floodplain and the floodway; environmental corridors and isolated natural resource areas; and wetland areas. 
(l)  The type, size, and location of all existing and proposed structures with all building dimensions shown. 
(m)  The height of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures. 
(n)  Existing and proposed street names. 
(o)  Existing and proposed public rights-of-way and widths. 
(p)  Existing and general location of proposed sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers, and other drainage facilities and features. 
(q)  Proposed stormwater management facilities, including detention/retention areas. 
(r)  Proposed location and type of all signs to be placed on the site. 
(s)  The location and type of all outdoor lighting. 
(t)  Existing isolated, individual trees and the boundary of woodlands. 
(u)  Location, extent, and type of proposed plantings. 
(v)  Location of pedestrian sidewalks and walkways, and bicycle lanes or paths. 
(w)  A graphic outline of any development staging. 
(x)  Architectural plans, elevations, and perspective drawings and sketches illustrating the design and character of proposed structures. 
(y)  Other data as required by the plan commission. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0803, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-124. - Review and findings. 
    The plan commission shall review the referred plans within a reasonable period of time following their submittal, but not more than 60 days following their submittal. The plan commission shall not approve any plans unless they find after viewing the application that the structure or use, as planned, will not violate the intent and purpose of this Ordinance. The plan commission will approve said plans only after determining the proposed building or buildings will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of fire, traffic congestion, or otherwise endanger the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0804, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-125. - Sureties. 
    The plan commission may impose time schedules for the completion of buildings, parking areas, open space utilization, and landscaping. The plan commission may require appropriate sureties to guarantee that improvements will be completed on schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0805, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-126. - Appeals. 
    Any person or persons aggrieved by any decisions of the plan commission related to plan review may appeal the decision to the board of zoning appeals. Such appeal shall be filed with the village administrator within 30 days after filing of the decision with the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0806, 5-25-04) 
Secs. 95-127-95-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 95-131. - Compliance. 
    This Ordinance permits specific uses in specific districts, and these performance standards are designed to limit, restrict, and prohibit the effects of those uses outside their premises or district. All structures, lands, air, and waters shall hereafter, in addition to their use and site regulations, comply with the following performance standards. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0901, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-132. - Air pollution. 
    No person or activity shall emit any fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists, or gases in such quantities so as to substantially contribute to exceeding established state or federal air pollution standards or constitute a nuisance to surrounding property owners. Dust and other types of pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads, and the like, within lot boundaries shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, fencing, or other acceptable means. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0902, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-133. - Fire and explosive hazards. 
    All activities involving the manufacturing, utilization, processing, or storage of flammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and with adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices that are standard in the industry. All materials that range from active to intense burning shall be manufactured, utilized, processed, and stored only in completely enclosed buildings which have incombustible exterior walls and an automatic fire extinguishing system. The above-ground storage capacity of materials that produce flammable or explosive vapors shall not exceed the following: 
Closed Cup Flash Point Gallons Over 187°F 400,000 105°F to 187°F 200,000 Below 105°F 100,000  
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0903, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-134. - Glare and heat. 
    No activity shall emit glare or heat that is visible or measurable outside its premises except activities which may emit direct or sky reflected glare which shall not be visible outside their district. All operations producing intense glare or heat shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so as not to be visible outside their premises. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0904, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-135. - Water quality protection. 
    No activity shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of any treated, untreated, or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or temperature that might run off, seep, percolate, or wash into surface or subsurface waters so as to contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters or cause nuisances such as objectionable shore deposits, floating or submerged debris, oil or scum, color, odor, taste, or unsightliness or be harmful to human, animal, plant, or aquatic life. 
    In addition, no activity shall withdraw water or discharge any liquid, or solid materials so as to exceed, or contribute toward the exceeding of, the minimum standards set forth in ch. NR 102, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0905, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-136. - Noise. 
(a)  No activity in an M-2 General Manufacturing District shall produce a sound level outside the district boundary that exceeds the following sound level measured by a sound level meter and associated octave band filter: 
Octave Band Frequency 
(cycles per second) Sound Level 
(decibels) 0 to 75 79 75 to 150 74 150 to 300 66 300 to 600 59 600 to 1,200 53 1,200 to 2,400 47 2,400 to 4,800 41 Above 4,800 39  
(b)  No activity in any other district shall produce a sound level outside its premises that exceeds the following: 
Octave Band Frequency 
(cycles per second) Sound Level 
(decibels) 0 to 75 72 75 to 150 67 150 to 300 59 300 to 600 52 600 to 1,200 46 1,200 to 2,400 40 2,400 to 4,800 34 Above 4,800 32  
(c)  All noise shall be so muffled or otherwise controlled as not to become objectionable due to intermittence, duration, beat frequency, impulse character, periodic character or shrillness. 
(d)  All sirens, whistles, and bells which are maintained and utilized solely to serve a public purpose are exempt from the sound level standards of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0906, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-137. - Odors. 
    No activity shall emit any odorous matter of such nature or quantity as to be offensive, obnoxious, or unhealthful outside their premises. The guide for determining odor measurement and control shall be § NR 429.03, Wis. Adm. Code, and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0907, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-138. - Radioactivity and electrical disturbances. 
    No activity shall emit radioactivity or electrical disturbances outside its premises that are dangerous or adversely affect the use of neighboring premises. All applicable state and federal regulations shall be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0908, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-139. - Vibration. 
    No activity in any district shall emit vibrations which are discernible without instruments outside its premises. No activity shall emit vibrations which exceed the following displacement measured with a three-component measuring system: 
Frequency 
(cycles per 
second) Displacement (inches) Outside 
the 
Premises Outside 
the 
District 0 to 10 .0020 .0004 10 to 20 .0010 .0002 20 to 30 .0006 .0001 30 to 40 .0004 .0001 40 to 50 .0003 .0001 50 and Over .0002 .0001  
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0909, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-140. - Lighting. 
    No exterior lighting used for parking lots, recreational facilities, product display, or security shall be permitted to spill over on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and uses of land in the vicinity of the light source. These requirements shall not apply to lighting placed in a public right-of-way for public safety. 
(a)  Type. Shielded luminaries, or luminaries with cutoff optics, and careful fixture placement shall be required so as to facilitate compliance with this Section. 
(b)  Orientation. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be oriented so that the lighting element (or a transparent shield) does not throw rays onto neighboring properties. Light rays shall not be directed into street rights-of-way or upward into the atmosphere. 
(c)  Lighting standards. All areas designated on approved site plans for vehicular parking, loading, or circulation and used for any such purpose after sunset shall provide artificial illumination, exclusive of approved anti-vandal lighting, in such areas in accordance with the standards established in the most recent edition of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America's document RP-20, "Lighting for Parking Facilities." These standards shall not apply to properties in agricultural, single-family residential, and two-family residential districts. 
(d)  Intensity of illumination. The intensity of illumination on properties containing intense uses abutting less intense uses, measured at the property line, shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles. 
(e)  Flashing, flickering, and other distracting lighting. Flashing, flickering, and other distracting lighting which may distract motorists is prohibited. 
(f)  Nuisances. Lighting which creates or becomes a public nuisance is not permitted. 
(g)  Accent lighting and low voltage lighting. Accent lighting and low voltage lighting (12 volts or less) is exempt from these requirements. 
(h)  Nonconforming lighting. All lighting fixtures approved prior to the adoption of this Ordinance shall be treated as and regulated as legal nonconforming uses. (See section 95-111.) 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0910, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-141. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed § 95-141, which pertained to floodproofing and derived from Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.0911, adopted May 25, 2004. 
Secs. 95-142-95-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-07, § 3, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed Art. X, §§ 95-151-95-157, which pertained to construction site erosion control and derived from Ord. No. 2004-04, §§ 95.1001-95.1007, adopted May 25, 2004. 

Secs. 95-151-95-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 

Sec. 95-161. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established a board of zoning appeals for the Village of Kewaskum for the purpose of hearing appeals and applications, and granting variances and exceptions to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1101, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-162. - Membership. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the village president and approved by the village board. 
(a)  Terms shall be for staggered three-year periods, except that of those first appointed: one shall serve for one year, two for two years, and two for three years. 
(b)  Chairman shall be designated by the village president. 
(c)  Two alternate members shall be appointed by the village president for a term of three years and shall act only when a regular member is absent or refuses to vote because of conflict of interest. The second alternate member may act only when the first alternate is unable to act or is already sitting. 
(d)  Secretary shall be the village administrator or a designee from the office of the village administrator. 
(e)  The zoning administrator shall attend all meetings for the purpose of providing technical assistance when requested by the board of zoning appeals. 
(f)  Official oaths shall be taken by all members in accordance with § 19.01, Wis. Stats., within ten days of receiving notice of their appointment. 
(g)  Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as appointments for a full term. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1102, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-163. - Organization. 
    The village board shall adopt rules for the conduct of the business of the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The board of zoning appeals may adopt further rules as necessary. 
(a)  Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and shall be open to the public. 
(b)  Minutes of the proceedings and a record of all actions shall be kept by the secretary, or other designated person, showing the vote of each member upon each question, the reasons for the board's determination, and its finding of facts. These records shall be immediately filed in the office of the village administrator and shall be a public record. 
(c)  The concurring vote. If a quorum is present, the concurring vote of a majority of the members present shall be necessary to correct an error, grant a variance, make an interpretation, and permit a substituted use. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1103, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 2005-11, 95.1103, 12-12-05) 
Sec. 95-164. - Authority. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall have the following authority: 
(a)  Errors. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirements, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  Variances. To hear and grant appeals for variances where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. Such variance shall not be contrary to the public interest and shall be so conditioned that the spirit and purposes of this Ordinance shall be observed and the public safety, welfare, and justice secured. 
(c)  Interpretations. To hear and decide applications for interpretations of the zoning regulations and the location of the boundaries of the zoning districts after the village plan commission has made a review and recommendation. 
(d)  Substitutions. To hear and grant applications for substitution of more restrictive nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming uses provided no structural alterations are to be made and the village plan commission has made a review and recommendation. Whenever the board permits such a substitution, the use may not thereafter be changed without application. 
(e)  Permits. The board may reverse, affirm wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may direct the issuance of a permit. 
(f)  Assistance. The board may request assistance from other vllage officers, departments, commissions, and boards. 
(g)  Oaths. The chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1104, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-165. - Appeals and applications. 
    Appeals to the board of zoning appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the village affected by the decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeals shall be filed in the office of the zoning administrator within 30 days after the date of written notice of the decision or order of the zoning administrator. Applications may be made by the owner or lessee of the structure, land, or water to be affected at any time and shall be filed in the office of the zoning administrator. Such appeals and application shall include the following: 
(a)  Name and address of the appellant or applicant and all abutting and opposite property owners of record. 
(b)  Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or other map drawn to scale and approved by the village zoning administrator, showing all of the information required under section 95-203 for a zoning permit. 
(c)  Additional information required by the village zoning administrator, the board of zoning appeals, or the village plan commission. 
(d)  Fee receipt from the village treasurer or zoning administrator in accordance with section 95-208 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1105, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-166. - Hearings. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for the hearing, shall give public notice thereof as specified in article XIII of this Ordinance, and shall give due notice to the parties in interest, the zoning administrator, and the village plan commission. At the hearing the appellant or applicant may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1106, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-167. - Notice to DNR. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall transmit a copy of each application for a variance to conservancy regulations in a shoreland, or to floodplain regulations, and a copy of all shoreland and floodplain appeals, to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) for review and comment at least ten days prior to the public hearing. Final action on the application shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR has made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions relating to variances to conservancy regulations in a shoreland or to floodplain regulations, and a copy of all decisions to shoreland and floodplain appeals, shall be transmitted to the DNR within ten days of the date of such a decision. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1107, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-168. - Shoreland, wetland, and floodplain boundary disputes. 
(a)  Shoreland disputes. Whenever the board of zoning appeals is asked to interpret the location of a shoreland boundary, the zoning administrator shall make the initial determination of navigability or ordinary high-water mark location. When questions arise, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate regional office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high-water mark location. 
(b)  Wetland disputes. Whenever the board of zoning appeals is asked to interpret a C-1 Lowland Conservancy District boundary where an apparent discrepancy exists between the village's final wetland inventory map and actual field conditions, the village shall contact the DNR, or other appropriate authority, to determine if the wetland inventory map is in error. If the DNR staff, or the staff of another appropriate authority, concurs that the particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the board of zoning appeals shall direct the village plan commission to initiate appropriate action to rezone the property within a reasonable amount of time. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1108, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 95-169. - Findings. 
    No variance to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be granted by the board unless it finds upon a preponderance of evidence presented that all the following facts and conditions exist and so indicates in the minutes of its proceedings. 
(a)  Preservation of intent. No variance shall be granted that is not consistent with the purpose and intent of the regulations for the district in which the development is located. No variance shall have the effect of permitting a use in any district that is not a stated permitted use, accessory use, or conditional use in that particular district. 
(b)  Exceptional circumstances. There must be exceptional, extraordinary, or unusual circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or parcel, structure, use, or intended use that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same district and the granting of the variance would not be of so general or recurrent nature as to suggest that the Zoning Ordinance should be changed. 
(c)  Economic hardship and self-imposed hardship not grounds for variance. No variance shall be granted solely on the basis of economic gain or loss. Self-imposed hardships shall not be considered as grounds for the granting of a variance. 
(d)  Preservation of property rights. The variance must be necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other properties in the same district and same vicinity. 
(e)  Absence of detriment. No variance shall be granted that will create substantial detriment to adjacent property or that will materially impair or be contrary to the purpose and spirit of this Ordinance or the public interest. 
(f)  Additional requirements in floodplain districts. Nonconforming uses and structures in the FW Floodway Regulatory Area, FC Floodplain-Conservancy Regulatory Area, and UF Urban-Floodplain Regulatory Area shall comply with the provisions of section 95-117. No variance shall be granted in such Floodplain Regulatory Areas where: 
1.  Filling and development contrary to the purpose and intent of the FW and FC Regulatory Areas would result. 
2.  A change in the boundaries of the FW, FC, or UF Regulatory Areas would result. 
3.  A lower degree of flood protection than a point two feet above the 100-year recurrence interval flood for the particular area would result. 
4.  Any action contrary to the provisions of ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, would result. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1109, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-170. - Decision. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall decide all appeals and applications within 30 days after the final hearing and shall transmit a signed copy of the board's decision to the appellant or applicant and the zoning administrator. 
(a)  Conditions may be placed upon any zoning permit ordered or authorized by this board. 
(b)  Variances, substitutions or use permits granted by the board shall expire within six months unless substantial work has commenced pursuant to such grant. 
(c)  Applicants receiving variances in floodplains. Pursuant to federal regulations [44 CFR Part 60.6(5)], applicants receiving variances in floodplains shall be notified, in writing, by the board of zoning appeals that increased flood insurance premiums and increased threat to life and property may result from the granting of the variance. The board shall keep a record of the notification in its files. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1110, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-171. - Review by court of record. 
    Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning appeals may present to the court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1111, 5-25-04) 
Secs. 95-172-95-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 95-181. - Authority. 
    Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice require, the village board of tustees may, by Ordinance, change the district boundaries or amend, change, or supplement the regulations established by this Ordinance or amendments thereto. Such change or amendment shall be subject to the review and recommendation of the village plan commission. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1201, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-182. - Initiation. 
    A change or amendment may be initiated by the village board, village plan commission, or by a petition of one or more of the owners or lessees of property within the area proposed to be changed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1202, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-183. - Petitions. 
    Petitions for any change to the district boundaries or amendments to the regulations shall be filed with the village administrator, describe the premises to be rezoned or the regulations to be amended, list the reasons justifying the petition, specify the proposed use, and have attached the following: 
(a)  Plot plan drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet showing the area proposed to be rezoned, its location, its dimensions, the location and classification of adjacent zoning districts, and the location and existing use of all properties within 200 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. 
(b)  Owners' names and addresses of all properties lying within 200 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. 
(c)  Additional information required by the village plan commission or village board. 
(d)  Fee receipt from the village treasurer in accordance with section 95-206 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1203, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-184. - Review and recommendations. 
    The village plan commission shall review all proposed changes and amendments within the corporate limits and shall recommend that the petition be granted as requested, modified, or denied. The recommendation shall be made at a meeting subsequent to the meeting at which the petition is first submitted and shall be made in writing to the village board. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1204, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-185. - Hearings. 
    The village board shall hold a public hearing upon each proposed change or amendment recommended by the village plan commission, giving public notice thereof as specified in article XIII of this Ordinance, listing the time, place, and the changes or amendments proposed. The village board shall also give at least ten days prior written notice to the clerk of any municipality within 1,000 feet of any land to be affected by the proposed change or amendment. The village board may delegate to the village plan commission the responsibility to hold public hearings as required under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1205, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-186. - Village board action. 
    Following such public hearing and after careful consideration of the village plan commission's recommendations, the village board shall act on the petition either approving, modifying and approving, or disapproving of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1206, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-187. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed § 95-187, which pertained to Floodplain Regulatory Area boundary changes limited, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1207, adopted May 25, 2004. 
Sec. 95-188. - Shoreland C-1 amendments. 
    Changes to shoreland C-1 Districts shall be limited in accordance with the following regulations: 
(a)  Notice to DNR. The village shall transmit a notice of any change (text or map) in the C-1 Lowland Conservancy District if such change affects land in the shoreland, as defined in section 95-222 of this Ordinance, to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR). Notice requirements shall be as follows: 
1.  A copy of every petition for a text or map change mailed within five days of filing with the village clerk. 
2.  At least ten days prior notice of any public hearing on a shoreland C-1 zoning amendment. 
3.  Notice of a village plan commission recommendation no later than ten days following the recommendation. 
4.  Notice of a village board decision no later than ten days following the decision. 
(b)  Review standards. No wetland in a shoreland C-1 District shall be rezoned if the rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact on storm or floodwater storage capacity; maintenance of dry season streamflow, the discharge of groundwater from the wetland to another area, or the flow of groundwater through a wetland; filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters; shoreline protection against soil erosion; fish spawning, breeding, nursery, or feeding grounds; wildlife habitat; or areas of special recreational, scenic, or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types. 
(c)  DNR objections. If the DNR has notified the village plan commission that an amendment to the shoreland portion of the C-1 District may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in the subsection (b), above, that amendment, if approved by the village board, shall contain the following provision: 
"This amendment shall not take effect until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the village board's approval of this amendment was mailed to the Department of Natural Resources. During that 30-day period, the Department of Natural Resources may notify the village board that it will adopt a superseding shoreland ordinance for the village, pursuant to § 61.351, Wis. Stats. If the Department does so notify the village board, the effect of this amendment shall be stayed until the § 61.351, Wis. Stats., adoption procedure is completed or otherwise terminated." 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1208, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-189. - Protest. 
    In the event of a protest against such district change or amendment to the regulations of this Ordinance, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the areas of the land included in such proposed change, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such changes or amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the full village board membership. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1209, 5-25-04) 
Secs. 95-190-94-194. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS 

Sec. 95-195. - Notice of public hearings. 
(a)  Notice of any public hearing which the village board, plan commission, or board of zoning appeals is required to hold under the terms of this Ordinance shall specify the date, time, place, and matter to be presented at the hearing. Pursuant to ch. 985, Wis. Stats., the notice shall be published as a class 2 notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village of Kewaskum at least once each week for two consecutive weeks, the last publication of which shall be at least one week before the public hearing. 
(b)  Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to all parties-in-interest at least ten days before the hearing. Parties-in-interest shall be defined as the petitioner, the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any lands included in the petition and the owners of all lands included in the petition and all lands lying within 200 feet of lands included in the petition. The failure to give any notice to any property owner shall not invalidate the action taken by one of the aforementioned bodies. Notice of all public hearings on amendments, rezonings, or conditional use applications for the FW Floodway Regulatory Area, FC Floodplain-Conservancy Regulatory Area, UF Urban-Floodplain Regulatory Area, or the shoreland portion of the C-1 Lowland Conservancy District, shall be transmitted to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources not less than ten days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1301, 5-25-04) 
Secs. 95-196-95-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 95-201. - Plan commission. 
    The village plan commission shall have the duties of making reports and recommendations relating to the planning and development of the village to public officials, agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations, and citizens. The plan commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys. In general, the plan commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its function and promote municipal planning. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1401, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-202. - Zoning administrator. 
    The village zoning administrator is hereby designated as the administrative and enforcement officer for the provisions of this Ordinance. The duty of the zoning administrator shall be to interpret and administer this ordinance and to issue, after onsite inspection if needed, all permits required by this Ordinance. The zoning administrator shall further: 
(a)  Assist the village administrator to maintain records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved, and other official actions. 
(b)  Record the lowest floor elevations of all structures erected, moved, altered, or improved in the floodplain areas. 
(c)  Establish that all necessary permits that are required for floodplain uses and wetland uses by state and federal law have been secured. 
(d)  Inspect all structures, lands, and waters as often as necessary to assure compliance with this Ordinance. 
(e)  Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures and the use of structures, lands, and waters, give notice of all violations of this Ordinance to the owner, resident, agent, or occupant of the premises, and report uncorrected violations to the village attorney in a manner specified by him. 
(f)  Assist the village attorney in the prosecution of Ordinance violations. 
(g)  Be permitted access to premises and structures during reasonable hours to make those inspections as deemed necessary by him to ensure compliance with this Ordinance. If, however, he is refused entry after presentation of his identification, he may procure a special inspection warrant in accordance with § 66.0119. Wis. Stats., except in cases of emergency. 
(h)  Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land, or water until he has inspected and approved such use or erection. 
(i)  Request assistance and cooperation from the village police department and village attorney as deemed necessary. 
(j)  Recommend to the village board and plan commission any additional regulations deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1402, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-203. - Zoning permit. 
    No structure shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or structurally altered until after the owner or his agent has secured a zoning permit from the zoning administrator, unless otherwise exempted pursuant to section 95-204 of this Ordinance. Applications for a zoning permit shall be made in triplicate to the zoning administrator on forms provided by the zoning administrator or village administrator and shall include the following where applicable: 
(a)  Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional engineer, and contractor. 
(b)  Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded subdivision, or metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; existing and proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees; and the zoning district within which the subject site lies. 
(c)  Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or other map drawn to scale and approved by the village zoning administrator showing the location, boundaries, dimensions, uses, and sizes of the following: subject site; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed easements, streets, and other public ways; off-street parking, loading areas, and driveways; existing highway access restrictions; wetland, high water, channel, floodway, and floodplain boundaries; and existing and proposed street, side, and rear yards. 
(d)  Additional information as may be required by the village plan commission, village engineer, or zoning administrator. 
(e)  A zoning permit shall be granted or denied in writing by the zoning administrator within 30 days after application. The permit shall expire within six months unless substantial work has commenced, and within 18 months if the structure for which the permit was issued is not substantially completed. Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be null and void. 
(f)  Fee receipt from the village treasurer in accordance with section 95-208 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1403, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-204. - Uses not requiring a zoning permit. 
    No zoning permit shall be required for any of the following cases: 
(a)  For building an accessory building less than 80 square feet in area, and any minor structures such as pethouses, play equipment, arbors, walls, and fences. 
(b)  For any improvement or nonstructural alteration to an existing building less than 100 square feet in area which does not effect a change in use. 
(c)  For repairs that do not alter the size or position of an existing structure on a lot. Such repairs shall not include the replacement or alteration of bearing walls. 
(d)  However, no structure or development in a conservancy district or a floodplain district shall be exempt from obtaining a zoning permit. Furthermore, any work that qualifies for an exemption under this section shall be required to comply with the applicable setback, yard, height, and other requirements set forth in this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1404, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-205. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  No vacant land that has been permitted to be developed; and no building or premises that has been permitted to be erected, altered, or moved, or create a change in use; and no nonconforming use that has been permitted to be renewed, changed, or extended in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy permit has been issued by the zoning administrator. Such certificate shall show that the building or premises or part thereof is in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Such certificate shall be applied for at the time of occupancy of any land or building. 
(b)  No land within the floodplain districts shall be occupied or used, and no structure hereafter erected, altered, or moved within the floodplain districts shall be occupied until the applicant submits to the zoning administrator a certification by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor that the floodplain regulations set forth in this Ordinance have been fully complied with. Such certification shall include the first floor elevation of any structure erected on the site. 
(c)  Application for a certificate of occupancy permit shall be made through the zoning administrator on forms provided by the zoning administrator or village administrator. 
(d)  A fee receipt from the village treasurer shall be obtained in accordance with section 95-208 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1405, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-206. - Conditional use permits. 
    The village board may authorize the zoning administrator to issue a conditional use permit for conditional uses after review and a public hearing, provided that such conditional uses and structures are in accordance with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance and are found to be not hazardous, harmful, offensive, or otherwise adverse to the environment or the value of the neighborhood or the community. 
(a)  Applications for conditional use permits. Applications for conditional use permits shall be made in duplicate to the zoning administrator on forms furnished by the village administrator and shall include the following where pertinent and necessary for proper review by the village plan commission. 
1.  Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional engineer, contractor, and all opposite and abutting property owners within 200 feet of the site. 
2.  Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees; and the zoning district within which the subject site is located. 
3.  Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or other map drawn to scale and approved by the zoning administrator, showing all of the information required under section 95-203(c) for a zoning permit. In addition, the plat of survey shall show the location, elevation, and use of any abutting lands and their structures within 40 feet of the subject site; slopes and ground surface elevations; mean and historic high-water lines, on or within 40 feet of the subject premises, and existing and proposed landscaping when so required by the village plan commission. 
4.  In areas subject to inundation by floodwaters, the plat of survey shall also include first floor elevations, utility elevations, historical and probable future floodwater elevations, depth of inundation, floodproofing measures, and plans for proposed structures giving dimensions and elevations pertinent to the determination of the hydraulic capacity of the structures or its effects on flood flows. Where floodproofing is required, the applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor, that the floodproofing measures are adequate to withstand the flood forces and velocities associated with the 100-year recurrence interval flood. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy permit, the applicant shall also submit a certification by the registered professional engineer or land surveyor that the finished floodproofing measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
5.  Additional information as may be required by the village board, village plan commission, village engineer, or the zoning administrator. 
6.  Fee receipt from the village treasurer in accordance with section 95-208 of this Ordinance. Costs incurred by the village board in retaining legal, planning, engineering, and other technical and professional advise in connection with the review of conditional use applications and the preparation of conditions to be imposed on such uses shall be charged to the applicant. 
(b)  Plan commission review and recommendation. The village plan commission shall review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation and circulations, drainage, sewerage and water systems, and the proposed plan of operation. The plan commission shall report its findings and recommendations to the village board and may further recommend conditions, such as landscaping, architectural design, type of construction, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties, lighting, fencing, planting screens, operational control, hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions, highway access restrictions, increased yards, or parking requirements where such conditions are deemed necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. 
(c)  Compliance with all other provisions. Compliance with all other provisions of this Ordinance, such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking, loading, traffic, highway access, and performance standards, shall be required of all conditional uses. Variances shall only be granted as provided in section 95-169 of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Public hearing. The village board shall hold a public hearing upon each application recommended by the village plan commission, giving public notice as specified in article XIII of this Ordinance. 
(e)  Notice to DNR. The village board shall transmit a copy of each application for a conservancy conditional use in the shoreland portion of the C-1 District, and a copy of each application for a floodplain conditional use, to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) at least ten days prior to the public hearing. Final action on the application shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR has made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all shoreland conservancy conditional use decisions and all floodplain conditional use decisions shall be transmitted to the DNR within ten days following the decision. 
(f)  Village board action. Following the public hearing and after consideration of the village plan commission's recommendations, the village board may issue the conditional use permit as applied for or with appropriate conditions, deny the permit with reasons, or require the submittal of a modified application. 
(g)  Amendments. Changes subsequent to the initial issuance of a conditional use permit which would result in a need to change the initial conditions shall require an amendment to the conditional use permit. Enlargement of a conditional use shall be considered an amendment. The process for amending a permit shall generally follow the same procedures as those required for granting a conditional use permit as set forth in this section. 
(h)  Revocations of conditional use permit. Should a permit applicant, his heirs or assigns fail to comply with the conditions of the permit issued by the village board or should the use, or characteristics of the use be changed without prior approval by the village board, the conditional use permit may be revoked by the village board upon ten days' notice to the permit holder. The permit holder shall be entitled to a hearing before the plan commission on the question of revocation of the conditional use permit and approval of the plan commission shall be required for the reinstatement of any conditional use permit. The process for revoking a permit shall generally follow the same procedures as those required for granting a conditional use permit as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1406, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-207. - Other permits. 
    It is the responsibility of permit applicant to secure all other necessary permits required by any state, federal, or local agency. This includes, but is not limited to, a water use permit pursuant to ch. 30, Wis. Stats., a wetland fill permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, and/or a Water Quality Certification from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1407, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-208. - Permit fees. 
    All persons, firms, or corporations performing work which by this Ordinance requires the issuance of a permit shall pay a fee for such permit to the village treasurer to help defray the cost of administration, investigation, advertising, and processing of permits and variances. The permits for which a fee is required are the zoning permit, conditional use permit, sign permit, planned unit development review, land disturbing permit, and certificate of occupancy permit. A fee shall also be required for a zoning text or map amendment, and a zoning appeal or variance. All fees shall be established by separate resolution by the village board from time-to-time as deemed appropriate. Permit fees do not include and are in addition to permit fees established by the village building code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1408, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-209. - Double fee. 
    A double fee shall be charged by the zoning administrator if work is started before a permit is applied for and issued, or if a building or the premises are occupied prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy permit. Such double fee shall not release the applicant from full compliance with this Ordinance nor from prosecution for violation of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1409, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-210. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land, or to use water or air in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance. Failure to secure the necessary permits prior to commencing construction shall also constitute a violation. In case of any violation, the village board, the zoning administrator, the village plan commission, or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation may institute appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of this Ordinance or cause a structure to be vacated or removed. 
(b)  Every structure, fill, or development placed or maintained within any floodplain area in violation of this Ordinance is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the state, the county, the village, or any citizen thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1410, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-211. - Remedial action. 
    Whenever an order of the zoning administrator has not been complied with within 30 days after written notice has been mailed to the owner, resident agent, or occupant of the premises, the village board, the zoning administrator, or the village attorney may institute appropriate legal action or proceedings to prohibit such owner, agent, or occupant from using such structure, land, or water. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1411, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-212. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance or any order of the zoning administrator issued in accordance with this Ordinance or resists enforcement shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-11 of the Municipal Code of the Village of Kewaskum. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1412, 5-25-04) 
Secs. 95-213-95-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 95-221. - General definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words or phrases shall have meanings that either vary somewhat from their customary dictionary meanings or are intended to be interpreted to have a specific meaning. Words used in the present tense in this Ordinance include the future. The word "person" includes a firm, association, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. The word "he" includes the word "she". The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "should" is advisory, and the word "may" is permissive. Any words not defined in this Ordinance shall be presumed to have their customary dictionary definitions. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1501, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-222. - Specific words and phrases. 
    Abut. For the purpose of this Ordinance, abut refers to properties that are next to each other and share a common property line. Properties separated from each other by a street or railway right-of-way are not considered abutting properties. 
    Accessory use or structure. A use or detached structure subordinate to the principal use of a structure, land, or water and located on the same lot or parcel serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use or principal structure. 
    Adult-oriented establishment. Commercial establishments in which a significant portion of the business is to (a) display, sell, have in their possession for sale, offer for view, publish, disseminate, give, lease, or otherwise deal in any written or printed matter, pictures, films, sound recordings, machines, mechanical devices, models, facsimiles, or other material and paraphernalia depicting sexual conduct or nudity and which exclude minors by reason of age; and/or (b) which display for viewing any film or pictures depicting sexual conduct or nudity and which exclude minors by reason of age; and/or (c) in which any person appears or performs in a manner depicting sexual conduct or involving nudity and from which minors are excluded by reason of age. 
    Alley. A special public right-of-way affording only secondary access to abutting properties. 
    Antenna. A device designed to receive or send broadcasts either as over-the-air signals from transmitters, including fixed television, telecommunication, or radio signals, or microwave signals from earth-orbiting communication satellites. 
    Antenna, satellite dish. A dish-shaped antenna designed to receive television broadcasts relayed by microwave signals from earth-orbiting communication satellites. 
    Antenna, terrestrial. Any antenna designed to receive television, telecommunication, or radio signals relayed from one ground location to another ground location. Such antennas are typically mounted on a tower or support on the rooftop of a structure, or on freestanding towers. 
    Antique store. A retail store where objects such as furniture, glassware, coins, and other objects prized for their rarity, style, or historic period are sold. For the purpose of this Ordinance, antiques are generally objects that are at least 20 years old. 
    Arterial street. See "Street, Arterial." 
    A Zones. Areas of potential flooding shown on the village's "flood insurance rate map" which would be inundated by the regional flood as defined herein. These numbers may be numbered as A0, A1 to A99, or be unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
    Baby sitting. The act of providing care and supervision for fewer than four children at one time. This definition does not apply when the baby sitter is related to the child, or when more than four children in one household are related. 
    Banner. A bunting or flexible sign characteristically supported at two or more points and usually fastened to a building or otherwise suspended down or along its face, or across streets. The banner may or may not include copy or other graphic symbols. 
    Base flood. See "Regional Flood." 
    Basement. That portion of any structure which is below grade, or which is partly below and partly above grade but so located that the vertical distance from the grade to the basement floor is greater than the vertical distance from the grade to the basement ceiling. 
    Bed and breakfast establishment. Any place of lodging that provides four or fewer rooms for rent for more than seven nights in a twelve-month period; is the owner's personal residence; is occupied by the owner at the time of rental; and in which the only meal served to guests is breakfast. 
    Boardinghouse. A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals or lodging are regularly furnished by prearrangement for compensation for four or more persons not members of a family, but not exceeding 12 persons and not open to transient customers. 
    Boathouse. As defined in § 30.121, Wis. Stats., means a permanent structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and includes all structures which are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls, or any combinations of structural parts. 
    Buffer yard. An area of land which may contain sufficient area and width, landscape plantings, earth berms, fencing, walls, or other visual and/or sound barriers intended to eliminate or minimize land use conflicts between adjacent land uses. 
    Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, machinery, or materials. 
    Building height on a nonsloping lot. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the street yard face of the structure to the highest point of the coping (cap) of a flat roof; to the roof deck line of a flat mansard roof; or to the highest point (ridge) of a gable, hip, gambrel, or peaked (pitched) mansard roof. 
    Building height on a sloping lot. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade, immediately adjacent to all sides of a structure, to the highest point of the coping (cap) of a flat roof; to the roof deck line of a flat mansard roof; or to the highest point (ridge) of a gable, hip, gambrel, or peaked (pitched) mansard roof. 
    Building, principal. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. 
    Car wash. Any facility used for the washing of vehicles requiring the installation of special equipment, or machinery and plumbing affixed to or separate from the structure. Said facility shall be installed in such a manner as not to cause spray or runoff water to encroach upon any adjoining properties. 
    Channel. Those portions of the floodplain normally occupied by a stream, lakebed, or other body of water under average annual high-water flow conditions while confined within generally well-established banks. 
    Clothing repair shops. Shops where clothing is repaired, such as shoe, seamstress, tailor, and clothes pressing shops. 
    Collector street. See "Street, Collector." 
    Co-location. A telecommunication facility comprised of a single telecommunication tower or building supporting multiple antennas, dishes, or similar devices owned or used by more than one public or private telecommunications provider. 
    Commercial adult care center. An establishment providing services for part of a day in a group setting to adults who need an enriched health-supportive or social experience and who may need assistance with activities of daily living, supervision, or protection. 
    Commercial child care center. An establishment providing care and supervision for four or more persons under the age of seven for less than 24 hours a day and licensed by the State of Wisconsin pursuant to § 48.65, Wis. Stats. 
    Commercial wireless telecommunication services. Licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public. 
    Community-based residential facility (CBRF). A place where five or more adults who are not related to the operator or administrator of the facility in which care, treatment, or services above the level of room and board are provided, but not including more than three hours of nursing care per week per resident nor above intermediate level nursing care. A community-based residential facility is subject to state-level licensing and operational limitations as set forth in ch. 50, Wis. Stats. A CBRF does not include any of the following: a convent, facilities for victims of domestic abuse, a shelter, or other facilities excluded in § 50.01(1g), Wis. Stats. 
    Community living arrangement. The following facilities licensed and operated, or permitted under the authority of the Wisconsin Statutes: child welfare agencies under § 48.60, Wis. Stats.; group foster homes for children under § 48.02(7), Wis. Stats.; and community-based residential facilities under § 50.01, Wis. Stats.; but does not include adult family homes, day care centers, nursing homes, general hospitals, special hospitals, prisons, or jails. The establishment of community living arrangements is governed by §§ 46.03(22), 48.625, 59.69(15), and 62.23(7)(i), Wis. Stats. 
    Conditional uses. See "Use, Conditional." 
    Condominium. A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all owners on a proportional, undivided basis. It is a legal form of ownership of real estate and not a specific building type or style. 
    Construction services. Establishments engaged in the distribution, handling, and installation of construction materials. For the purpose of this Ordinance, construction services do not include retail sales of construction materials to the general public such as hardware or lumber stores. 
    Control measure. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion and attendant pollution. 
    Control plan. A written description of the number, locations, sizes, and other pertinent information of control measures designed to meet the requirements of the construction site erosion control provisions of this Ordinance submitted by the applicant for review and approval by the village. 
    Coping. The highest point or covering course of a wall often with a sloping top to carry off water and commonly cut with a drip. 
    Day care facility, adult. See "Commercial Adult Care Center." 
    Day care facility, child. See "Commercial Child Care Center." 
    Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of earthen materials. 
    District, basic. A part or parts of the village for which the regulations of this Ordinance governing the use and location of land and buildings are uniform (such as the residential, business, and manufacturing district classifications). 
    District, overlay. A zoning designation that modifies the underlying basic use zoning district requirements in a specific manner. 
    Drainage system. One or more artificial ditches, tile drains, or similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge. 
    Dryland access. A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land which is outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above the regional flood elevation and wide enough to accommodate wheeled vehicles. 
    Dwelling. A building designed or used exclusively as a residence or sleeping place, but does not include boarding or lodging houses, motels, hotels, tents, cabins, or motor homes. 
    Dwelling, bi-level. A two-level dwelling with one level above grade, and the other level partially below grade. The lower level may or may not have exterior access. For the purpose of measuring living areas, the zoning administrator will determine functional areas, as set forth in the definition of "living area," and the first floor area, which usually is the first level that is entirely above grade. 
    Dwelling, efficiency. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room with no separate sleeping rooms. 
    Dwelling, multifamily. A residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence not to exceed the number of dwelling units provided. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family and surrounded by open space or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. 
    Dwelling, tri-level. A three-level dwelling with two levels above grade, and a third level partially below grade. The lowest level may or may not have exterior access. For the purpose of measuring living areas, the zoning administrator will determine functional areas, as set forth in the definition of "living area," and the first floor area, which usually is the first level that is entirely above grade. 
    Dwelling, two-family. A detached building containing two separate dwelling (or living) units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families. A two-family dwelling may also be known as a "duplex." 
    Dwelling unit. One or more rooms designed, occupied, or intended to be occupied as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household. 
    Eave. The projecting lower edge of a roof overhanging the wall of the building. 
    Election campaign period. In the case of an election for office, the period beginning on the first day for circulation of nomination papers by candidates, or the first day on which candidates would circulate nomination papers if papers were required, and ending on the day of the election. In the case of a referendum, the period beginning on the day on which the question to be voted upon is submitted to the electorate and ending on the day on which the referendum is held. 
    Environmental control facility. Any facility, temporary or permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce, or aid in the prevention, measurement, control, or monitoring of noise, air, or water pollutants, solid waste or thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities. 
    Erosion. The detachment and movement of soil, sediment, or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
    Essential services. Services provided by public and private utilities and streets, necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These services include underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, stormwater drainage, and communication systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations, and hydrants, but not including buildings. 
    Fall zone. An area of land surrounding a tower structure, as certified by the manufacturer or an independent structural engineer, in which the structure would fall in the event of collapse or other structural failure. 
    Family. The body of persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, or not more than four unrelated persons who live together in one dwelling unit as a single housekeeping entity. 
    Family day care home. A dwelling licensed as a day care center by the State of Wisconsin pursuant to § 48.65, Wis. Stats., where care is provided for not more than eight children. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency which administers the National Flood Insurance Program. This agency was formerly known as the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) and was part of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
    Fence, open. A structure of rails, planks, stakes, strung wire, or similar material erected as an enclosure, barrier, or boundary. Open fences are those with more than 50 percent of their surface area open for free passage of light and air. Examples of such fences include rail, picket, and wrought iron fences. 
    Fence, security. A fence intended to guard property against unauthorized entry, and to protect stored goods and products from theft and other unauthorized handling. Security fences are often made of wrought iron or woven wire. 
    Fence, solid. A structure of rails, planks, stakes, strung wire, or similar material erected as an enclosure, barrier, or boundary. Solid fences are those with 50 percent or less of their surface area open for free passage of light and air and designed to conceal from view the activities conducted behind them. Examples of such fences are stockade, board-on-board, board-and-batten, basket weave, and louvered fences. 
    First floor area. See "Floor Area, First." 
    Flood. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by the overflow or rise of inland waters; the rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or the sudden increase caused by an unusually high-water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
    Flood frequency. The probability of a flood occurrence. A flood frequency is generally determined from statistical analysis. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year. 
    Flood insurance study. An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards, and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations; or an examination, evaluation, and determination of mudslide or mud flow, and/or flood-related erosion hazards. Such studies shall result in the publication of a flood insurance rate map showing the intensity of flood hazards. 
    Floodplain. The land which has been or may be hereafter covered by floodwater during the regional flood. The floodplain includes the floodway and the flood-fringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the floodplain is all lands contained in the "regional flood" or 100-year recurrence interval flood, and is divided into the Floodway Regulatory Area, the Floodplain-Conservancy Regulatory Area, and the Urban-Floodplain Regulatory Area. 
    Floodplain fringe. The portion of the floodplain, outside the floodway, that is subject to inundation by the 100-year recurrence interval flood. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the floodplain fringe is included in the Floodplain-Conservancy Regulatory Area or the Urban-Floodplain Regulatory Area. 
    Flood profile. A graph showing the relationship of the floodwater surface elevation of a flood event of a specified recurrence interval to the stream bed and other significant natural and manmade features along a stream. 
    Floodproofing. Any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities, and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage (see section 95-141). 
    Flood protection elevation. A point two feet above the water surface elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood. This safety factor, also called "freeboard," is intended to compensate for the many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights greater than those computed. These factors include, but are not limited to, ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology of the watershed, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggradation of a river or stream bed. 
    Flood stage. The elevation of the floodwater surface above the officially established datum plane, which is Mean Sea Level, 1929 Adjustment, on the Supplementary Floodland Zoning Map. 
    Flood storage. Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account in reducing the regional flood discharge. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or stream, and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel, required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
    Floor area. The sum of the gross horizontal area of all floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or, in the case of a common wall separating two dwellings or units, from the centerline of such a common wall. For the purpose of the Ordinance, floor area shall not include basements, porches, decks, garages, and unfinished attics. 
    Floor area, first. For the purpose of identifying the first floor level in a multistory dwelling, the zoning administrator shall determine the first floor area, which usually is the first level that is entirely above grade. 
    Floor area, gross. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors measured in square feet, not including the basement floor, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of common walls separating two units. The floor area of a building includes elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, floor space used for mechanical equipment (except equipment, open or closed, located on a roof or in a basement), penthouses, attic space having headroom of seven feet ten inches or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed permanently-heated porches, and floor area devoted to accessory uses. 
    Floor area, gross-Business, governmental, institutional, and manufacturing buildings. For the purpose of calculating off-street parking and loading space requirements, the sum of the gross horizontal area of a floor or floors of the building, or portion thereof, devoted to a use shall be used to determine required off-street parking or loading spaces. This floor area shall include accessory storage areas located within selling or working space, such as counters, racks, or closets and any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices. However, floor area, for the purposes of determining off-street parking spaces, shall not include floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes except as otherwise noted herein. 
    Floor area, primary. The floor area of a building devoted to customer service, sales area, or actual operational area and which specifically shall not include storage, warehouse, utility, hallways, or other accessory uses. 
    Footcandle. The illumination on a surface one square foot in area on which there is a uniformly distributed flux of one lumen. One footcandle equals one lumen per square foot. In this Ordinance, the standard for various light sources will be measured in footcandles. 
    Foster family home. The primary domicile of a foster parent, licensed by the State of Wisconsin pursuant to § 48.62, Wis. Stats., which is for four or fewer foster children or, if necessary to enable a sibling group to remain together, for no more than six children or, if the state promulgates rules permitting a different number of children, for the number of children permitted under those rules. 
    Frontage. The smallest dimension of a lot abutting a public street measured along the street line. 
    Front yard. See "Yard, Street." 
    Garage, private. A structure primarily intended for and used for the enclosed storage or shelter of the private motor vehicles of the owner(s) or families resident upon the premises. 
    Garage, public or commercial. Any building or portion thereof used for equipping, servicing, repairing, leasing, or public parking of motor vehicles. 
    Gift stores. Retail stores where items such as art, antiques, jewelry, books, and notions are sold. 
    Group foster home. Any facility operated by a person required to be licensed by the State of Wisconsin pursuant to § 48.625, Wis. Stats., for the care and maintenance of five to eight foster children. 
    Home occupation. An occupation conducted for financial gain within a private dwelling unit, where such occupation is clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal residential use of the premises. For the purpose of this Ordinance, bed and breakfast establishments are not considered home occupations. 
    Hotel. A facility, other than a bed and breakfast establishment, offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and may provide additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities. 
    Housing for the elderly. A dwelling unit or units designed and constructed to be occupied by elderly persons. An elderly person is a person who is 62 years of age or older on the date such person intends to occupy the premises, or a family, the head of which, or his spouse, is an elderly person as defined herein. 
    Increases in regional flood height. A calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, determined by comparing existing conditions and proposed conditions and which is directly attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients, and discharge. 
    Intermediate level nursing care. Basic care that is required by a person who has a long-term illness or disability that has reached a relatively stable plateau. 
    Junk or salvage yard. An area consisting of buildings, structures, or premises where junk waste and discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including automobile wrecking yards and house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment yards, but not including the purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment or used cars in operable condition. 
    Land developing activity. The construction of buildings, streets, parking lots, paved storage areas, and similar facilities. 
    Land disturbing activity. Any manmade change of the land surface including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling and grading, but not including agricultural activities such as planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops; growing and tending of gardens; harvesting of trees; and landscape modifications. 
    Landowner. Any person holding title to or having an interest in land. 
    Land user. Any person operating, leasing, renting, or having made other arrangements with the landowner by which the landowner authorizes use of his or her land. 
    Letter of map amendment (LOMA). A letter from the Federal Emergency Management Agency stating that an existing structure or parcel of land that has not been elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood. 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F). A letter from the Federal Emergency Management Agency stating than an existing structure or parcel that has been elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood. 
    Living area. The total area abounded by the exterior walls of a building at the floor level, but not including basement, unfinished attics, utility rooms, garages, porches, and breezeways. 
    Loading area. A completely off-street space or berth on the same lot for the loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress to and egress from a public street or alley. 
    Local street. See "Street, Minor." 
    Lot. A parcel of land having frontage on a public street, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, and other dimensional requirements of this Ordinance. No lands dedicated to the public or reserved for roadway purposes shall be included in the computation of lot size. 
    Lot, corner. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection provided that the corner of such intersection shall have an angle of 135 degrees or less, measured on the lot side (see Illustration No. 7). 

    Lot, double frontage. A parcel of land with frontage on more than one street or with frontage on a street and a navigable body of water (see Illustration No. 7). 
    Lot, flag. A lot generally not fronting on or abutting a public street and where access to the public street is by a narrow, private right-of-way (see Illustration No. 7). Flag lots are not generally considered to conform to sound development principles. 
    Lot, Interior. A lot with frontage on one street which is bounded by adjacent lots along each side and a lot behind fronting on a different street (see Illustration No. 7). 
    Lot, substandard. A parcel of land held in separate ownership having frontage on a public street, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or structure together with accessory buildings and uses, having insufficient size to meet the lot width, lot area, yard, off-street parking areas, or other dimensional requirements of this Ordinance. 
    Lot width. The width of a parcel of land measured at the front yard setback line. 
    Machine shops. Shops where lathes, presses, grinders, shapers, and other wood and metal working machines are used, such as blacksmith, tinsmith, welding, and sheet metal shops; plumbing, heating and electrical repair shops; and overhaul shops. 
    Manufacture. When used in describing an industrial operation, the making or processing of a product with machinery. 
    Minor street. See "Street, Minor." 
    Mobile home. A transportable structure built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to required utilities. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a recreational vehicle, a travel trailer, or a manufactured home (a living unit which is transported in two or more modules to construct a permanent residential home on a permanent chassis) are not considered mobile homes. 
    Mobile home park. A parcel of land which has been developed for the placement of mobile homes and is owned by an individual, a firm, trust, partnership, public or private association, or corporation. Individual lots within a mobile home park are rented to individual mobile home users. 
    Motel. A building containing lodging rooms having adjoining individual bathrooms, and where each lodging has a doorway opening directly to the outdoors, and more than 50 percent of the lodging rooms are for rent to transient tourists for a continuous period of less than 30 days. 
    Navigable water. Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within Wisconsin, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages, and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state. The Wisconsin Supreme Court has declared navigable bodies of water that have a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and with levels of flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis. [Muench v. Public Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952) and DeGayner and Co., Inc., v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975)]. For example, a stream which is navigable by a skiff or canoe during normal spring highwater is navigable, in fact, under the laws of this state though it may be dry during other seasons. Under § 281.31(2m), Wis. Stats., and § NR 115.03(5), Wis. Adm. Code, shoreland regulations do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if: 
1.  Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river; 
2.  Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching; and 
3.  Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, rivers and streams will be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either perennial or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps until such time that the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources has made a determination that the waterway is not, in fact, navigable. 
    Nonconforming lot. A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption or amendment to conform to the present requirements of this Ordinance. Vacant nonconforming lots may also be referred to as substandard lots. 
    Nonconforming structure. A building or structure lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance which houses a use that is permitted in the district, but does not comply with all the applicable area, width, height, yard, and/or parking requirements of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use. Any use of land, or land and buildings in combination, lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance which does not comply with the use regulations for the district in which it is located. 
    Nudity. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less than a full opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or showing of the covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state. 
    Nursing home. An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. 
    Obstruction to flood flow. Any development which physically blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development by itself or in connection with any future similar development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
    Open space. Land areas not occupied by buildings, structures, parking areas, streets, driveways, alleys, or other impervious surfaces, except paved paths, trails, and sidewalks. 
    Ordinary highwater mark. The point on the bank or shore of a body of water up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristics. 
    Overlay district. See "District, Overlay." 
    Parking lot. A structure or premises containing more than five parking spaces open to the public. Such spaces may be for rent, charge a fee, or be free-of-charge. 
    Parking space. A graded and surfaced area of not less than 180 square feet in area either enclosed or open for the parking of a motor vehicle, having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley. 
    Parties in interest. Includes all abutting property owners, all property owners within 200 feet, and all property owners of opposite frontages. 
    Party wall. A wall containing no opening which extends from the elevation of building footings to the elevation of the outer surface of the roof or above, and which separates contiguous buildings but is in joint use for each building. 
    Pennant/streamer. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, with or without any representation or writing thereon, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
    Principal use. See "Use, Principal." 
    Processing. When used in describing an industrial operation, the series of continuous actions that changes one or more raw materials into a finished product. The process may be chemical as in the processing of photographic materials; it may be special method such as processing butter or cheese; or it may be a mechanical process such as packaging a base product. 
    Professional offices. Offices or services of doctors of medicine, dentists, ministers, architects, landscape architects, professional engineers, lawyers, authors, artists, musicians, insurance agents, financial planners, or other similar recognized professions. 
    Professional home offices. Residences of doctors of medicine, dentists, clergymen, architects, landscape architects, professional engineers, registered land surveyors, lawyers, real estate agents, insurance brokers, artists, teachers, authors, musicians, or other recognized professions where the office use is clearly incidental to the residential use of the premises. 
    Public utility. Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas, electric, transportation, water, sewer, or land-line telephone service to the general public. For the purpose of this Ordinance, commercial wireless telecommunication service facilities shall not be considered public utility uses, and are defined separately. 
    Reach. A longitudinal segment of a stream generally including those floodplains wherein flood stages are primarily and commonly controlled by the same manmade or natural obstructions to flow. 
    Rear yard. See "Yard, Rear." 
    Regional flood. The regional flood is a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have generally occurred in Wisconsin and which may be expected to occur on a particular stream because of like physical characteristics. The flood frequency of the regional flood is once in every 100 years; this means that in any given year, there is a one percent chance that the regional flood may occur or be exceeded. During a typical 30-year mortgage period, the regional flood has a 26 percent chance of occurrence. 
    Roadside stand. A temporary building or structure used or intended to be used solely for the sale of seasonal goods or services, such as fresh produce or Christmas trees. 
    Runoff. The rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface. 
    Satellite dish antenna. See "Antenna, Satellite Dish." 
    Set of one-year design storms. The rain intensities and rain volumes or corresponding values specific to the community for the storm durations of 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 6, 12, and 24 hours that occur approximately once each year. The following are typical characteristics of these one-year storms in most of Wisconsin: 
Storm 
Duration 
(hours) Average Rain 
Intensity 
(inches/hour) Total Rain 
(inches) 0.5 1.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.1 2.0 0.7 1.3 3.0 0.5 1.5 6.0 0.3 1.7 12.0 0.2 2.0 24.0 0.1 2.3  
    Setback. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the minimum setback for a building or structure from a street right-of-way line, side lot line, or rear lot line is the same as the minimum yard requirement. 
    Sexual conduct. Acts or simulated acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person is a female, breasts. 
    Shorelands. Those lands lying within the following distances from the ordinary high-water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond, or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Shorelands shall not include lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches where (a) such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river; (b) those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching; and (c) such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use. 
    Side yard. See "Yard, Side." 
    Sign. Any medium, including its structure, words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks, by which anything is made known and which are used to advertise or promote an individual, firm, association, corporation, profession, business, commodity, or product and which is visible from any public street or highway. 
    Sign, abandoned. A sign, or part thereof, which no longer correctly advertises a bona fide business, service, or product available on the premises for a period of 60 days or more. Also, a structurally unsound sign, or part thereof, which has been left unrepaired for a period of 60 days or more after notification by the Building Inspector that such sign is in need of repair. 
    Sign, area. The area of the largest single face of the sign within a perimeter which forms the outside shape including any frame that forms an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the signs may be placed. If the sign is an irregular shape or consists of more than one section or module, their area shall be totaled. Any irregular shaped sign area shall be computed by using the actual sign face surface. In the case of individual letters, the area of copy will be squared off and used. 
    Sign, awning, canopy or marquee. A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to an awning, canopy, or marquee (see Illustration No. 8). Such signs may be internally illuminated by florescent or other light sources in fixtures approved under national and local electrical codes. 

    Sign, electronic message. A changeable message sign whose message is electrically activated such as the light bulbs or mechanical flip discs. 
    Sign, flashing. Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source or which includes the illusion of an intermittent light source, not including electronic message signs or time and temperature signs. 
    Sign, freestanding. Any sign which is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent from any building. 
    Sign, ground. Any sign in contact with or in close proximity to the ground and placed upon or supported by the ground independent of any other structure. Also see "Sign, Monument" and Illustration No. 8. 
    Sign, height. The vertical distance measured from the normal ground level adjacent to the sign or the mean centerline street grade adjacent to where the sign is located, whichever is higher, to the highest point of such sign or sign structure. 
    Sign, illuminated. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes. 
    Sign, monument. A low sign independent from any building that is in contact with or in close proximity to the ground and is usually supported by ornate posts or pillars on the sides and/or a structural base of not less than 75 percent of the width of the sign face (example: a sign with a face eight feet wide would require a structural base of six feet or more in width). Also see "Sign, Ground" and Illustration No. 8. 
    Sign, off-premises. A sign which is not appurtenant to the use of the property where the sign is located, or to a product sold, or a service offered upon the property where the sign is located, and which does not identify the place of business where the sign is located as purveyor of the merchandise or services advertised upon the sign. 
    Sign, permanent. Any sign which is intended to be, and is so constructed as to be, of lasting and enduring condition, remaining unchanged in character, condition (beyond normal wear), and position, and in a permanent manner affixed to the ground, wall, or building. 
    Sign, pole. A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is ten feet or more above ground (see Illustration No. 8). 
    Sign, portable. A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building, structure, or to the ground. Such sign includes "sandwich board signs" or is sometimes mounted on wheels to make it transportable (see Illustration No. 8). 
    Sign, projecting. A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and which projects more than 12 inches from such building (see Illustration No. 8). 
    Sign, real estate. Any temporary sign placed on a property which is for sale, rent, or lease. 
    Sign, roof. A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building and which projects above the point of a building with a flat roof, including a mansard roof, and the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable, or hip roof (see Illustration No. 8). 
    Sign, temporary. Any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, wood, light fabric, cardboard, wall board, plastic, or other similar materials, with or without frames, and not permanently attached to the ground, wall, or building, intended to be displayed for a short period of time. 
    Sign, time and temperature. An electrically controlled sign alternately displaying time and temperature for public service information. This sign information may be incorporated into a business identification sign. 
    Sign, wall. A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and which does not project more than 12 inches from such building or structure (see Illustration No. 8). This definition includes signs composed of individual letters or symbols. 
    Sign, window. A sign that is applied or attached to the exterior or interior of a window, which is usually intended to be seen from the exterior of the building (see Illustration No. 8). Signs displayed on glass panels which are integral to doors visible from the exterior of the building shall be considered to be window signs for the purposes of this Ordinance. 
    Sign copy. The message, announcement, words, letters, numbers, pictures, art, advertisement, and any other information or decoration on the face of a sign. 
    Sign face. The area or display surface used for the message. 
    Sign maintenance. The replacing or repairing of a part or portion of a sign made unusable by ordinary wear, tear, or damage beyond the control of the owner or the reprinting of existing copy without changing the wording, composition, or color of said copy. 
    Street. A public right-of-way not less than 50 feet wide providing primary access to abutting properties. 
    Street, arterial. A public street or highway used or intended to be used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic, whose function is to convey traffic between activity centers and municipalities. For the purpose of regulating signs, arterial streets include designated county and state trunk highways as of the adoption date of this Ordinance. 
    Street, collector. A public street that collects and conveys traffic between minor and arterial streets. 
    Street, minor. A public street used, or intended to be used, primarily for access to abutting properties. Minor streets are sometimes referred to as local streets or land-access streets. 
    Street yard. See "Yard, Street." 
    Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders. 
    Structure. Any erection or construction, such as buildings, prefabricated or prebuilt buildings, tanks, towers, masts, poles, booms, signs, and fences. Also, any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to or placed upon the ground, riverbed, streambed, or lakebed such as campers and trailers that are not constructed on site. 
    Structure, principal. See "Building, Principal." 
    Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not, however, include either: (a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (b) any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the Wisconsin State Historical Society or listed on the National Register of Historic Places provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historical structure. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications, or additions; such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, and the replacement of doors, windows, and other nonstructural components. "Substantial improvement" begins when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
    Tavern. An establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor by the drink to the general public and where food or packaged liquors may be served or sold, but only as an accessory use. A tavern may also be called a "bar." 
    Terrestrial antenna. See "Antenna, Terrestrial." 
    Tower. Any ground or roof-mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade. 
    Tower, monopole. A communication tower consisting of a single pole and constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Transshipment depot. An establishment primarily engaged in undertaking the transportation of goods from shippers to receivers for a charge covering the entire transportation route and, in turn, making use of services of other transportation establishments as instruments in effective delivery. 
    Unnecessary hardship. The circumstance where special conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with restrictions governing dimensional standards (such as lot area, lot width, setbacks, yard requirements, or building height) unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this Ordinance. 
    Use. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
    Use, accessory. A subordinate use on the same lot which is incidental and customary in connection with the principal use. 
    Use, conditional. Uses of a special nature as to make impractical their predetermination as a principal use in a district. 
    Use, principal. The main use of land or building as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. 
    Utilities. Public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, power and communication transmission lines, electrical power substations, static transformer stations, telephone and telegraph exchanges, microwave radio relays, and gas regulation stations, but not including sewage disposal plants, municipal incinerators, warehouses, shops, and storage yards. 
    Variance. An authorization granted by the board of zoning appeals to construct, alter, or use a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional standards of this Ordinance. A variance may not permit the use of a property that is otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance. 
    Vision clearance triangle. A triangular shaped portion of land established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to severely limit or substantially obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. 
    Wetland. An area where water is at, near, or above the land surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet conditions. 
    Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook. A book published by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, Bureau of Water Resources Management, Nonpoint Source and Land Management Section, originally published in April 1989 and periodically updated. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the latest edition shall apply. 
    Yard. An open space on the same lot with a principal structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except for vegetation and accessory structures. The street and rear yards extend the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, front. See "Yard, Street." 
    Yard, rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest enclosed portion of the principal structure, including covered porches but not covered steps or stoops (see Illustration No. 9). This yard shall be opposite the face of the dwelling containing the "front door" or main entryway. 
    Yard, side. A yard extending from the street yard to the rear yard of the lot, the width of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest enclosed portion of the principal structure, including covered porches but not covered steps or stoops (see Illustration No. 9). Lots generally have two side yards, however, a corner lot has only one side yard. The side yard setback area does not extend beyond the front building face into the street yard, or beyond the rear building face into the rear yard. 
    Yard, street. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing or proposed street or highway line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest enclosed portion of principal structure, including covered porches but not covered step or stoops (See Illustration No. 9). Where the street line is an arc, the street yard shall be measured from the arc (see Illustration No. 5). Corner lots have two such yards and one side yard and one rear yard. Corner double-frontage lots have three such yards, one on each side of the structure facing a street, while the remaining yard is a side yard. Interior double-frontage lots have two such yards and two side yards. 

(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1502, 5-25-04) 
Secs. 95-223-95-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - ADOPTION AND EFFECTIVE DATE 

Sec. 95-231. - Plan commission recommendation. 
    The plan commission of the Village of Kewaskum recommended the adoption of this Ordinance at a meeting held on the 25th day of May, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1601, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-232. - Public hearing. 
    Pursuant to and in accordance with the Laws of the State of Wisconsin, the village board of trustees held a public hearing on this amended Ordinance on the 25th day of May, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1602, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-233. - Village board approval. 
    The village board of trustees concurred with the recommendations of the village plan commission and adopted the Zoning Ordinance at a meeting held on the 25th day of May, 2004, by Ordinance No. 2004-04. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1603, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 95-234. - Effective date. 
    This Ordinance became effective on the 3rd day of June, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 95.1604, 5-25-04) 
APPENDIX A 
SUMMARY OF AREA, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

(Ord. No. 2004-04, 5-25-04) 
APPENDIX B 
SECTION RENUMBERING TABLE 
The original section designations of Ord. No. 2004-04 were changed to reflect the style of the other chapters of this Code of Ordinances. This table provides a cross reference for those changes. 
Ord. No. 
2004-04 
Section Ch. 95 
Section 95.0100 Art. I 95.0101 95-1 95.0102 95-2 95.0103 95-3 95.0104 95-4 95.0105 95-5 95.0106 95-6 95.0107 95-7 95.0108 95-8 95.0109 95-9 95.0200 Art. II 95.0201 95-21 95.0202 95-22 95.0203 95-23 95.0204 95-24 95.0205 95-25 95.0206 95-26 95.0207 95-27 95.0300 Art. III 95.0301 95-31 95.0302 95-32 95.0303 95-33 95.0304 95-34 95.0305 95-35 95.0306 95-36 95.0307 95-37 95.0308 95-38 95.0309 95-39 95.0310 95-40 95.0311 95-41 95.0312 95-42 95.0313 95-43 95.0314 95-44 95.0315 95-45 95.0316 95-46 95.0317 95-47 95.0318 95-48 95.0319 95-49 95.0320 95-50 95.0321 95-51 95.0322 95-52 95.0323 95-53 95.0400 Art. IV 95.0401 95-61 95.0402 95-62 95.0403 95-63 95.0404 95-64 95.0405 95-65 95.0406 95-66 95.0407 95-67 95.0500 Art. V 95.0501 95-71 95.0502 95-72 95.0503 95-73 95.0504 95-74 95.0505 95-75 95.0506 95-76 95.0507 95-77 95.0508 95-78 95.0509 95-79 95.0510 95-80 95.0511 95-81 95.0512 95-82 95.0513 95-83 95.0514 95-84 95.0600 Art. VI 95.0601 95-91 95.0602 95-92 95.0603 95-93 95.0604 95-94 95.0605 95-95 95.0606 95-96 95.0607 95-97 95.0608 95-98 95.0609 95-99 95.0610 95-100 95.0611 95-101 95.0612 95-102 95.0613 95-103 95.0614 95-104 95.0615 95-105 95.0700 Art. VII 95.0701 95-111 95.0702 95-112 95.0703 95-113 95.0704 95-114 95.0705 95-115 95.0706 95-116 95.0707 95-117 95.0800 Art. VIII 95.0801 95-121 95.0802 95-122 95.0803 95-123 95.0804 95-124 95.0805 95-125 95.0806 95-126 95.0900 Art. IX 95.0901 95-131 95.0902 95-132 95.0903 95-133 95.0904 95-134 95.0905 95-135 95.0906 95-136 95.0907 95-137 95.0908 95-138 95.0909 95-139 95.0910 95-140 95.0911 95-141 95.1000 Art. X 95.1001 95-151 95.1002 95-152 95.1003 95-153 95.1004 95-154 95.1005 95-155 95.1006 95-156 95.1007 95-157 95.1100 Art. XI 95.1101 95-161 95.1102 95-162 95.1103 95-163 95.1104 95-164 95.1105 95-165 95.1106 95-166 95.1107 95-167 95.1108 95-168 95.1109 95-169 95.1110 95-170 95.1111 95-171 95.1200 Art. XII 95.1201 95-181 95.1202 95-182 95.1203 95-183 95.1204 95-184 95.1205 95-185 95.1206 95-186 95.1207 95-187 95.1208 95-188 95.1209 95-189 95.1300 Art. XIII 95.1301 95-195 95.1400 Art. XIV 95.1401 95-201 95.1402 95-202 95.1403 95-203 95.1404 95-204 95.1405 95-205 95.1406 95-206 95.1407 95-207 95.1408 95-208 95.1409 95-209 95.1410 95-210 95.1411 95-211 95.1412 95-212 95.1500 Art. XV 95.1501 95-221 95.1502 95-222 95.1600 Art. XVI 95.1601 95-231 95.1602 95-232 95.1603 95-233 95.1604 95-234  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1983 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1983 Code, as updated through February 6, 1995, which are included herein. Sections of the 1983 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1983 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1.01-1.07 2-31-2-37 1.08 30-1 1.10(1)-1.10(6) 2-411-2-416 1.10(8) 2-417 1.11 26-1 1.16(2), 1.16(3) 2-152, 2-153 1.17(2) 2-177 1.18(2) 2-201 1.30 2-261 1.31(1)-1.31(5) 2-281-2-285 1.32 50-1 1.33 42-61 1.34 2-306 1.35 2-331 1.36 2-236 2.01 2-31 2.02-2.09 2-61-2-68 2.10 2-91 2.11 2-1 2.12, 2.13 2-69, 2-70 3.01 2-452 3.02 2-451 3.03-3.06 2-453-2-456 3.06(4) 2-151 3.06(5) 2-126 3.07 2-418 3.08 2-457 3.09 2-176 4.01 46-61 4.02 2-281, 2-282 4.03, 4.04 46-63, 46-64 4.05 46-62 4.06 46-65 5.01-5.07 38-36-38-42 5.08(2), (3) 38-43 5.08(5) 38-43 5.09-5.11 38-44-38-46 6.01-6.06 34-1-34-6 6.10 34-7 7.01, 7.02 90-1, 90-2 7.03 90-131 7.04, 7.05 90-96, 90-97 7.06 90-133 7.07 90-132 7.08 90-38 7.09 90-98 7.10, 7.11 90-201, 90-202 7.12 90-37 7.15 90-3 7.16(1) 90-36 7.16(3) 90-64 7.16(4) 90-61 7.16(5) 90-62, 90-63 8.01(1) 82-41 8.01(2)-8.01(4) 82-43-82-45 8.01(5) 82-42 8.02 82-2 8.03 82-5 8.04(1)(a), 8.04(1)(b) 82-76 8.04(1)(c) 82-83 8.04(1)(e), (f) 82-81, 82-82 8.04(1)(h)-8.04(1)(j) 82-77-82-79 8.04(2) 82-80 8.05 82-112 8.05(1) 82-111 8.06 82-113 8.07 82-4 8.08 82-3 8.08(1)(d) 82-76 8.08(1)(g) 82-76 8.09, 8.10 82-6, 82-7 8.11, 8.12 82-146, 82-147 8.13 82-181 8.14 82-1 9.02-9.04 62-2-62-4 9.05, 9.06 62-41, 62-42 9.07 10-1 9.08, 9.09 78-1, 78-2 9.10 66-1 9.11 38-1 9.12, 9.13 58-1, 58-2 9.14 62-76 9.15 58-41 9.16 6-4 9.17 62-111 9.18(1)-9.18(5) 70-31-70-35 9.19 42-121 9.20, 9.21 62-5, 62-6 9.29.9-9.951.16 62-1 9.30 62-7 10.01, 10.02 58-3, 58-4 10.03 58-76 58-78 10.04 58-5 10.05 58-79 10.05(10) 10-2 10.06(1) 58-112 10.06(2) 58-111 10.06(3)-10.06(7) 58-113-58-117 10.06(8) 58-114 10.06(9) 58-118 10.07, 10.08 58-6, 58-7 10.12 58-8 11.01 6-72 11.02(8) 6-61 11.03 6-1 11.04(1) 6-61 11.04(2) 6-63 11.05-11.10 6-66-6-71 11.15(1), 11.15(2) 6-64, 6-65 11.15(3) 6-116 11.15(4)-(7) 6-64 11.15(8), (9) 6-65 11.16 6-116 11.17 6-120 11.25 6-7 11.26, 11.27 6-117, 6-118 11.27(3) 6-119 11.29 6-2 6-5 11.35 6-6 11.36-11.38 6-8-6-10 11.40 6-3 12.01(1) 10-41 12.01(5), (6) 10-41 12.01(7) 10-3 12.01(12) 66-2 12.02 18-56 12.04(1), 12.04(2) 10-41, 10-42 12.04(2)(b) 10-121 12.04(3) 10-122 12.04(4) 10-43 12.04(5)(a) 10-92 12.04(5)(b) 10-90 12.04(6) 10-93 12.04(7) 10-91 12.04(8)(a) 10-4 12.04(8)(b) 10-95 12.04(8)(c) 10-94 12.04(8)(d) 10-96 12.04(8)(e) 10-123 12.04(8)(f) 10-97 12.04(9) 10-121 12.04(10) 10-3 12.05(1)-12.05(7) 18-241-18-247 12.06 90-166 12.07 54-1 12.08(1) 18-180 12.08(2), 12.08(3) 18-156, 18-157 12.08(4)-12.08(6) 18-181-18-183 12.08(8) 18-158 12.08(9) 18-184 12.09 18-121 12.13 18-31 13.01 94-1 13.02 94-38 13.02(5) 94-42 13.02(6) 94-36 13.03, 13.04 94-66, 94-67 13.045(1)-(6) 94-68 13.05, 13.06 94-69, 94-70 13.07 94-44 13.08, 13.09 94-71, 94-72 13.10 94-37 13.11 94-44 13.12 94-73 13.13 94-39 13.14-13.16 94-74-94-76 13.17, 13.18 94-40, 94-41 13.19, 13.20 94-101, 94-102 13.21, 13.22 94-105, 94-106 13.23 94-43 13.24 94-107 13.25, 13.26 94-103, 94-104 13.27 94-45 13.29 94-141 13.30, 13.31 94-176 13.32-13.35 94-177-94-180 13.36 94-182 13.37(1) 94-177 13.37(2), (3) 94-184 13.37(4) 94-188 13.37(5), (6)(a) 94-184 13.37(6)(b) 94-187 13.37(6)(c)-(f) 94-184 13.37(7)-13.37(9) 94-185-94-187 13.38 94-219 13.38(3)-13.38(6) 94-220-94-223 13.39(1)-(7) 94-189 13.39(8)-13.39(11) 94-224-94-227 13.40(1)-13.40(4) 94-251-94-254 13.40(5) 94-181 13.41 94-255 13.42, 13.43 94-281, 94-282 13.44 94-192 13.45 94-195 13.46(1)-13.46(7) 94-306-94-312 13.47 94-196 13.48 94-331 13.49 94-228 13.50 94-332 13.51, 13.52 94-190, 94-191 13.53, 13.54 94-193, 94-194 13.60 94-183 14.01(2), (3) 42-62 14.02 42-86 14.03 42-36 14.04-14.06 42-2-42-4 14.09 14-6 14.15 42-1 15.01 14-326 15.03-15.07 14-327-14-331 15.10 14-332 16.01-16.03 74-1-74-3 16.04(1)-16.04(4) 74-81-74-84 16.05 74-5 16.06 74-42 16.07-16.10 74-43-74-46 16.11 74-4 16.12 74-41 17.01 78-35 17.02, 17.03 78-37, 78-38 17.04 78-91 17.05(1), (2) 78-92 17.05(3) 78-43 17.06, 17.07 78-93, 78-94 17.08 78-42 17.09 78-45 17.10 78-44 17.11, 17.12 78-95, 78-96 17.13 78-41 17.14 78-70 17.15-17.17 78-66-78-68 17.18 78-97 17.19, 17.20 58-77, 58-78 17.21 78-69 17.22 78-122 17.23 78-127 17.23(4) 78-36 17.24 78-123 17.24(1) 78-124 17.24(2), (3) 78-125 17.25 78-121 17.26 78-126 17.27 78-122 17.28 78-40 17.29 78-39 18.01 86-1 18.02-18.05 86-4-86-7 18.06, 18.07 86-2 18.08(1)(a) 86-48 18.08(1)(b) 86-46 18.08(1)(c) 86-51 18.08(1)(d) 86-48 18.08(1)(e), 18.08(1)(f) 86-52, 86-53 18.08(2), 18.08(3) 86-54, 86-55 18.08(4) 86-49 18.08(5) 86-56 18.09 86-11 18.15-18.21 86-91-86-97 18.25 86-131 18.26(1)-(11) 86-132 18.26(12) 86-131 18.26(13)-(15) 86-132 18.30-18.32 86-47-86-49 18.35 86-50 18.36 86-98 18.38 86-57 18.40, 18.41 86-12, 86-13 18.45-18.47 86-8-86-10 18.48 86-3 24.01 2-366 24.02, 24.03 2-369, 2-370 24.04, 24.05 2-367, 2-368 24.06-24.09 2-371-2-374 24.10(1)-(3) 2-375 24.10(4) 2-376 24.11-24.13 2-377-2-379 25.01 1-2 25.02 1-14 25.03 2-154 25.05, 25.06 1-8, 1-9 25.07 1-1 25.08 1-13 30.00, 30.01 14-1 30.025 14-4 30.03 14-5 30.04 14-56, 14-57 30.05(1)-(5) 14-58 30.05(6), (7) 14-59 30.05(8) 14-58 30.06 14-61 30.07(1)-30.07(8) 14-121-14-128 30.08 14-161 30.09 14-62 30.09(4) 14-65 30.10, 30.11 14-63, 14-64 30.14 14-2 30.15(1)-30.15(3) 14-186-14-188 30.15(4)(a)-(e) 14-189 30.15(4)(f) 14-190 30.15(5)-30.15(9) 14-191-14-195 30.16, 30.17 14-236, 14-237 30.18, 30.19 14-261, 14-262 30.43(1)-30.43(8) 14-286-14-293 30.48(1) 14-366 30.48(2)(a)-(k) 14-367 30.48(2)(l)-(n) 14-368 30.48(3) 14-368 30.51 14-3 30.52 14-60  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1983 Code, as updated through February 6, 1995, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1983 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede February 6, 1995, but which were never included in the 1983 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since February 6, 1995, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 95-2  6-19-95 1-4 18-281-18-284 12.11(1) 18-285 12.11(2) 18-287 12.11(3) 18-286 12.11(4), 12.11(5) 18-288, 18-289 95-7  7-17-95 26-1 95-8  8-21-95 13.21(1), (4) 94-105 13.39(8) 94-224 13.39(11) 94-227 95-10  8-21-95 8-13 82-181 95-12 12-11-95 1, 2 10-62 4-9 10-62 12.01(6)(a) 10-63 12.10(3) 10-61 96-3  3- 4-96 7.04(1)(a) 90-96 96-4  4- 1-96 22.01 22-1 22.02 22-3 22.03 22-2 22.04 22-28 22.05 22-27 22.06 22-26 22.07 22-9 22.08 22-17 22.09 22-16 22.10 22-18 22.11 22-14 22.12 22-10 22.13 22-13 22.14 22-20 22.15, 22.16 22-22, 22-23 22.17 22-11 22.18 22-7 22.19 22-12 22.21 22-4 22.22 22-8 22.23 22-19 22.24 22-24 22.25 22-21 22.26 22-5 22.27 22-25 22.28 22-6 22.29 22-15 96-5  6-17-96 94-141 96-6  7-15-96 2-285 96-8  8-19-96 62-1 96-12 11-25-96 1-11 97-1  2-17-97 10.05(13)       Added 58-79(12) 97-2  3-17-97 1.36 2-236 97-4 11-17-97 8.13 82-181 97-5 12- 8-97 1-7       Added Adopt. Ord., p. xi 98-2  2- 2-98 94-68 98-3  3-16-98       Added 18-57(11), 
18-301-18-303 98-4  5-18-98 78-1 98-5  8-17-98       Added 90-221-90-223 99-1  3- 1-99       Added 2-511-2-522 99-2  4- 5-99 Adopts amend. 
to Gen. Ords., 
pg. xii.i 99-3  3-15-99       Added 10-5 2000-01  4-17-00 1       Added 2-262 2000-02  5- 1-00 90-97 2000-04  5-15-00 50-1(d) 2001-03  4- 2-01 Adopts amend. 
to Gen. Ords., 
pg. xii.iii 2001-05  9-17-01 90-96(a), (b) 2002-01  1-21-02       Added Ch. 75 2002-02  2- 4-02 62-1 2002-03  2-18-02 90-97(a)(1) 2002-04  4- 1-02 87.01- 87.16       Added 87-1-87-16 2002-10  9- 3-02 86-93(b) 2003-01  1- 6-03       Added 90-4 2003-02  1-20-03 62-41 2003-03  1-20-03 6-72 2003-05  4- 7-03 1.36 2-236 2003-06  4-21-03 2-32 2003-11  5-19-03 Ch. 10 2003-13  8- 4-03       Added 86-45 2003-14  8-18-03       Added 86-130 86-132(a), (b)(2), (e)       Added 86-150, 86-151 2003-15 11- 3-03 62-1 2004-04  5-25-04       Added Ch. 95 2004-05  5-17-04 2-261 2004-07  8- 2-04 2       Dltd 2-64(10)       Rnbd 2-64(11)       as 2-64(10) 2004-08  8-16-04       Added 62-77 2005-01  1-24-05 95.0605 95-95(c) 2005-04  3-14-05 Adopts amend. 
to Gen. Ords., 
pg. xii.v 2005-05  6-20-05 6-62(7)       Added 6-62(8)       Rnbd 6-62(8)-(11)       as 6-62(9)-(12) 6-72(6)       Added 6-72(7)       Rnbd 6-72(7)       as 6-72(8) 2005-06  6-20-05       Added 6-73 2005-11 12-12-05 95.1103 95-163(c) 2006-04  4-17-06 1       Added 86-14 2       Rpld 86-98(d), 94-184(b) 2007-01  5-21-07 1       Added 6-74 2007-02  6-11-07 2-91 07-03 11- 5-07 1 6-66(a) 2       Added 6-66(e) 08-01  3-17-08 1       Rpld 58-41 08-02  9- 8-08 1-3 50-1(a)-(c) 4       Added 50-1(g) 08-04 10-20-08 1 14-331 08-05 10- 6-08 1       Added 26-2 09-01  1-19-09 1 86-4 2 86-5 09-02  2-16-09 1       Added 1-17 09-03  6- 1-09 1 2-32 09-04  7-20-09 1       Added 14-392-14-397 09-05 10- 5-09       Added Ch. 40 09-07 10- 5-09 1       Added 14-331(8) 2       Rnbd 14-331(8)       as 14-331(9) 09-09 11-16-09 1 62-2 10-01  2- 1-10 1       Added 26-3 10-02  2-15-10 1       Added 90-203 10-05  6-21-10 1 42-121 10-06  6-21-10 1       Rpld 58-79(7) 2, 3 62-4 10-07  7-12-10 1 2-64 10-08  8- 2-10 1 58-77, 58-78(a), (b) 10-09  8- 2-10 1 38-1 10-10 10- 4-10 1 94-67 10-11 10- 4-10 1 62-1 10-12 11- 1-10 1 82-112 10-13 11-15-10 1 90-96(b) 2       Added 90-96(f) 11-01  4- 4-11 1 86-49(d) 11-03  9-12-11 1 2-370(9) 12-01  1- 9-12 1 82-6(a), (c) 12-02  1-23-12 1 94-221 12-03  2-20-12 1 6-120 12-04  2-20-12 1 94-68(a) 12-05  5-21-12 1 10-2 12-06  5-21-12 1       Added 30-2 13-01  3-18-13 1 90-203(e) 13-03  6-17-13 1       Added 90-204 13-05 10- 7-13       Rpld 40-26-40-30, 40-41-40-44, 40-55-40-58, 40-69-40-71, 40-81-40-83, 40-94-40-97, 40-107-40-113, 40-124, 40-125, 40-136, 40-147       Added 40-26-40-30, 40-40-40-44, 40-55-40-58, 40-69-40-71, 40-81-40-83, 40-94-40-97, 40-107-40-113, 40-123-40-125, 40-136, 40-147 14-01  1- 6-14 1 2-32 14-02  1-20-14 1 2-66 14-04  7-21-14 1 6-73 14-05  7-21-14 1 58-78 14-06  8- 4-14 1 62-2 2       Rpld 62-3 14-07  8- 4-14 1 90-132 14-09 12- 1-14 1 78-1 15-01  2- 2-15 1 2-32 15-05  7-20-15 1       Added 14-7 15-06 11- 2-15 40-30(2) 40-42 40-71(7) 40-94(2), (3) 40-108(1) 40-147 15-07 10-12-15 1 66-1 15-08 10-12-15 1 78-1 16-03  4- 4-16 1       Added 62-150-62-153 16-05  7-18-16 1 94-105 16-07  8- 1-16 1 95-26 95-31(h) 95-47(intro. ¶) 2       Rpld 95-8       Rpld 95-31(d)       Rpld 95-49-95-51       Rpld 95-117       Rpld 95-141       Rpld 95-168(c)       Rpld 95-187 3       Rpld 95-151-95-157 4       Rpld 74-1-74-5, 74-41-74-46, 74-81-74-84 16-08  8- 1-16 1 94-105 16-10  9-19-16 1 94-224 16-11 12-12-16 1       Added 82-200-82-208  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter Ordinances and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Wisconsin Statutes. 
Section 
Wis. Stats. Section  
this Code 6.88 30-2 7.30(2)(a) 30-2 12.04 95-93 13.48(13) 40-30 95-23 16.61(3)(e) 2-418 16.61(7)(a), (b) 2-417 16.971(4)(c) 2-416 17.03 2-35 17.035 2-35 17.13(1), (3) 2-34 17.13(2), (3) 2-34 17.16 2-34 17.24 2-35 19.01 95-162 19.31-19.39 2-414 19.34 2-414 19.35 2-416 19.35(1) 2-414 2-416 2-262 19.35(1)(a), (am) 2-415 2-416 19.36 2-416 19.37 2-415 2-418 19.37(1) 2-415 19.39 2-414 19.59(5) 2-520 19.81-19.89 2-61 19.84 2-61 chs. 23-968 62-1 23.33 90-36 90-203 27.09 82-7 29.038(3)(b)1.a. 62-2 ch. 30 40-43 40-56 40-57 95-207 30.11 40-147 30.12(4)(a) 95-23 30.2022 40-30 ch. 31 40-43 40-56 43.30 2-416 43.54(2) 50-1(d) 43.58 50-1 45.28 90-62 46.03(22) 95-222 46.215 6-118 46.22 6-118 48.02(7) 62-151 95-222 48.02(15d), (17) 62-151 48.60 95-222 48.62 95-222 48.625 95-222 48.65 62-151 48.651 62-151 49.16 90-133 50.01 95-222 59.07(38) Ch. 18, Art. III 59.11 Ch. 78, Art. II, Div. 4 59.69 40-26 40-30 40-107 40-125 59.69(10) 40-94 59.69(15) 95-222 59.692 40-26 40-30 40-107 59.694 40-26 40-30 40-110 87-14 59.81 78-2 60.627 87-3 61.19 Char., § I Ch. 30 61.195 Char., § I 61.197 Char., § I 61.21 2-33 61.23 Char., § I 61.25(2) Char., § I 61.32 Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2 61.34 Ch. 82 61.34(1) Ch. 18, Art. II, Div. 2 61.345 Ch. 78, Art. II 61.35 40-26 40-30 95-1 61.351 95-1 95-188 61.351(5) 95-116 61.353 95-26 61.354 87-1 87-4 95-1 61.36 Ch. 66 61.54-61.56 2-457 61.65 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 3 2-284 61.65(2)(a) Ch. 38, Art. II 62.13 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 3 62.15 2-457 62.17 Ch. 14 Ch. 14, Art. IV 62.17(2) 14-59 62.23 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 4 40-26 40-30 40-125 62.23(6) 82-41 62.23(6)(b) 82-42 62.23(6)(d), (g) 82-45 62.23(7) 40-107 95-1 62.23(7)(e) Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 5 40-110 62.23(7)(h) 40-94 95-116 62.23(7)(i) 95-34 95-35 95-36 95-37 95-45 95-222 62.25 2-370 66.01 Char., § I Char., § V 66.0105 86-4 66.0119 95-155 95-202 66.025 Adopt. Ord. 66.035 1-1 66.036 14-59 66.04 Ch. 2, Art. VII 66.0413 95-103 66.042 Ch. 2, Art. VII 66.044 2-456 66.044(4) 2-151 66.05 14-161 14-237 58-79 66.05(2) 14-237 66.0509 2-370 66.052 42-4 66.058 54-1 66.058(3)(c), (e) 54-1 66.06 Ch. 94 66.0617 86-14 66.0627 14-331 66.067 94-176 66.069 Ch. 94 66.069(1) 94-227 66.0701-66.0733 86-130 66.076 94-176 66.082 Ch. 22 66.082(3)(c) 22-11 66.082(5) 22-26 66.083 Ch. 18, Art. IV 66.114 1-11 66.115 1-11 66.117 1-11 66.119 1-11 66.119(3) 1-11 66.12 90-36 66.12(1) 1-11 66.122 Ch. 14 14-327 94-184 66.122-66.125 94-190 66.123 14-327 66.196 2-36 66.197 2-32 66.302 Ch. 14 66.325 Ch. 34 66.325(2) 34-7 66.34 Ch. 2, Art. II 66.52 2-236 66.60(16)(a) 94-227 66.615 et seq. Ch. 82 68.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 68.05 2-367 2-368 68.06 2-367 2-368 68.07 2-371 68.07-68.16 18-183 68.08 2-372 68.09 2-373 68.10 2-374 68.11 2-375 68.12 2-377 68.13 2-378 68.14 2-379 68.16 18-183 70.27 86-3 86-57 70.46 2-261 70.47(6m)(c) 2-261 70.47(7)(af) 2-262 70.65(2) 2-452 70.67(1), (2) 2-176 73.10 Ch. 2, Art. VII 2-456 84.31 Ch. 18, Art. III 84.31(9) Ch. 18, Art. III 87.30 40-26 40-30 40-136 95-1 87.30(2) 95-1 ch. 92 87-16 95.21 10-92 10-97 95.21(4)(b) 10-62 97.12(2) 18-288 101.123 42-121 101.123(8) 42-121 101.60 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. V 102.04(3) 14-2 118.15 62-77 118.64(4) 62-77 118.115 62-77 118.163 62-77 ch. 125 6-66 125.04(1) 6-61 125.04(3) 6-66 125.04(3)(f)3 6-66 125.04(3)(g)6 6-66 125.04(4) 6-67 125.04(5), (6) 6-64 125.04(6) 6-64 125.04(10) 6-69 125.04(12) 6-68 125.06 6-61 125.07(2)(a) 6-6 125.09(1) 6-9 125.09(2)(b), (c) 6-5 125.09(3) 6-10 125.12 6-70 125.17 6-72 125.17(6)(a) 6-72 125.26(6) 6-117 125.32(2) 6-72 6-118 125.04(3)(g)6 6-66 125.51(4) 6-64 6-72 125.51(4)(br) 6-62 125.51(5)(b)1.d 6-117 125.51(10) 6-72 125.68(2) 6-72 6-118 125.226(6) 6-72 134.71 Ch. 18, Art. VII 134.90(1)(c) 2-416 144.06 94-1 ch. 145 14-326 145.04(3) 14-327 159.01(3) 78-38 159.11 Ch. 78, Art. II, Div. 4 159.81 78-2 159.95 78-39 159.97 78-39 165.87 1-11 90-3 90-63 166.23 90-96 167.10(1) 62-4 167.10(3)(b)(1) 62-4 170.01 et seq. Ch. 10 172.01 et seq. Ch. 10 174.001 10-94 174.001 et seq. Ch. 10 174.042 Ch. 10, Art. IV 174.05-174.09 10-41 174.05-174.10 10-5 174.05 10-41 10-44 174.07 10-44 196.01 et seq. Ch. 94 196.58(1) 94-179 227.01(1) 87-5 ch. 236 40-108 86-4 86-5 86-14 236.02(12) 40-147 236.12 86-48 86-49 86-52 86-56 236.13(5) 86-151 236.15 86-131 236.20 86-49 236.30-236.32 86-3 236.34 86-11 ch. 252 42-3 252.03 Ch. 42, Art. II, Div. 3 254.59 42-2 254.61(5) 42-131 254.74 95-34 95-35 95-36 95-37 95-38 95-40 95-48 281.31(2m) 95-222 281.33 95-1 301.45 62-151 301.46(2), (2m) 62-151 302.46(1) 1-11 90-3 90-63 chs. 340-348 90-1 340.01(2g) 90-203 340.01(22) 86-14 340.01(24m) 90-221 340.01(43m) 90-221 ch. 341 90-204 343.30(6)(b)1-3 6-118 345.11 90-61 345.11-345.61 90-36 345.26(3)(b) 90-63 345.27(1), (2) 90-64 345.28 90-62 345.37 90-63 346.04 90-201 346.06 90-201 346.11 90-201 346.14(1) 90-201 346.16(3) 90-132 346.18-346.21 90-201 346.26 90-201 346.27 90-201 346.33 90-201 346.35 90-201 346.37 90-201 346.39 90-201 346.40 90-201 346.41 90-37 346.44 90-201 346.48(2)(b)2 90-96 346.46-346.48 90-201 346.50-346.55 90-3 346.50 95-63 346.50(1)(b) 90-201 346.503 95-63 346.505 95-63 346.51-346.55 90-3 90-201 346.51 90-96 346.52 90-96 346.70 90-38 346.70(4)(f) 90-38 346.73 90-38 346.78 90-223 346.87-346.91 90-201 346.92(1) 90-201 346.94(1), (9) 90-201 346.94(17) 90-223 347.25(2) 90-96 348.15 90-132 348.16 90-133 348.16(3) 90-132 349.06 Ch. 90 349.07 90-131 349.13 90-3 90-96 349.13(1)(c) 90-96 349.14 90-3 349.16 90-133 349.26 90-204 349.29(1) 90-96 ch. 350 90-1 90-201 350.17 90-36 423.203 18-158 423.203(1)(a)-(c), (2), (3) 18-158 440.41 18-157 ch. 442 2-418 561.35 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 4 571.500 90-204 703.27(1) 86-4 86-5 755.03(1) 26-1 778.10 1-16 ch. 800 90-36 800.12 26-1 ch. 814 90-3 90-63 814.70 26-2 26-3 814.705 26-2 26-3 814.71 26-2 26-3 823.01 et seq. Ch. 58 885.01(3) 2-520 887.01 6-66 891.10 2-1 895.035 62-7 905.03 2-416 938.343 1-11 6-3 938.343(2) 6-3 938.344 1-11 6-118 938.344(3) 6-118 938.355(6)(d) 1-11 938.547(4) 6-118 941.37 38-43 943.01(1) 62-7 946.13 2-516 961.01(22) 62-151 971.17(1j) 62-151 973.055(1) 1-11 975.06 62-151 980.01(6) 62-151 ch. 985 40-147 95-195 990.01(24) 1-2 990.001 1-2 990.001(2) 1-2 990.001(8) 1-2  
