Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 1198[
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., the ordinances of the City of Lake Mills
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the City Council of the City of
Lake Mills, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections
by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 660, are hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the City of Lake
Mills," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall
remain there for use and examination by the public for at least two weeks,
in accordance with § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., and until final action is taken on
this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the City Clerk, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of said City Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Lake Mills" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be inserted
in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Lake Mills, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required by law, a notice of the adoption of this
ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office
of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office
hours. The publication of notice of the enactment of this ordinance, coupled
with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the Code required
to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are included as supplements to said Code.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the City Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Lake
Mills to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any part
of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a penalty as provided
in § 1-19 of the Code.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 1-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this
ordinance are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such repeal
shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid
legislation of the City of Lake Mills which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and
effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The City Council of the City of Lake Mills
has determined that the following ordinances are no longer in effect
and hereby specifically repeals the following elements of the 2009
Code:
(1) Title 2, Chapter 12, Fire Department Advisory Committee.
(2) Title 4, Chapter 5, Dutch Elm Disease.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to May 15, 2018.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances; new ordinances.
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending the Zoning Map or otherwise
rezoning property.
O. Any charter ordinances.
P. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
fee or fees.
Q. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
deposit or bond schedule.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing sewer or water
rates or charges.
S. Ord. No. 1186, Cross Connections and Water Supply Regulations.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the City of Lake Mills, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsection C
hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. The following changes are made throughout the Code:
§ 1-13 LAKE MILLS CODE § 1-14
1:6
§ 1-15. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
(1) "U.S. Soil Conservation Service" is changed to "USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service."
(2) "Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations" is changed
to "Department of Safety and Professional Services."
(3) "Department of Commerce" is changed to "Department of Safety
and Professional Services."
(4) "Department of Health and Family Services" is changed to
"Department of Health Services."
(5) "Parks Director," "Park and Forestry Director" and "Director of
Parks & Forestry" are changed to "Parks and Forestry Director."
(6) "Park Board" is changed to "Parks Board."
(7) "Common Council" is changed to "City Council."
(8) References to the City's "Master Plan" are changed to
"Comprehensive Plan."
(9) "Board of Appeals" is changed to "Zoning Board of Appeals."
(10) "Police and Fire Commission" (the "Commission") is changed to
"Board of Police and Fire Commissioners" (the "Board").
(11) "Public Works Board" is changed to "Board of Public Works."
(12) "Street(s) Superintendent" is changed to "Director of Public
Works."
C. The amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A1 attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code.)
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14C, the chapters, articles and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 11-20-2018 by Ord. No.
1198." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
City offices.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7

ARTICLE II
Word Usage
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 1, Ch. 3, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 1-16. Construction of words.
§ 1-17. General definitions.
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall
have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT — A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY — The City of Lake Mills, County of Jefferson, State of Wisconsin.
CODE — The Municipal Code of the City of Lake Mills.
EMPLOYEES — Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City
employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the
words "of the City of Lake Mills."
FEE — A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a
business, profession or occupation.
LICENSE — The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
NUISANCE — Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of
the inhabitants of the City; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person
or to the community.
A. Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be
included, although distributive words may not have been used. When
any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this City Code by
words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender,
several matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and
bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these
rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this City
Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction
or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
B. The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been
changed in the content of this City Code to "chapter," "article,"
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational
and clarification purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is
not meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original
ordinances.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:9
OCCUPANT — As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE — Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission
of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS — Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
City of Lake Mills."
OPERATOR — The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
OWNER — As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a
part of such building or land.
PERSON — Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit,
as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments
by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished
and every right or interest therein.
RETAILER — Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood
to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or
other property.
STREET — Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT — As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or
with others.
WHOLESALER — The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesaler dealer," as used
in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to
persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN; IN WRITING — May include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any
person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required
by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is
unable to write, by his proper mark.
§ 1-17 LAKE MILLS CODE § 1-18
1:10
§ 1-18. Catchlines.
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify
or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section thereof, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended
or reenacted.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:11

ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Adopted 6-3-1997 by Ord. No. 769B (Title 1, Ch. 4, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 1-19. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code shall, upon
conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty which, unless otherwise
specifically provided for therein, shall be as follows:
§ 1-20. Application of provisions.
A. First offense penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Code subject to a penalty shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less
than $1 nor more than $500, together with costs of prosecution.
B. Second offense penalty. Any person who shall be convicted of violating
the same provision of this Code two or more times within one year shall,
upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000, together with costs of prosecution.
A. The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
chapter of this City Code the same as though it were a part of each and
every separate chapter unless otherwise indicated. Any person
convicted of a violation of any chapter of this City Code where a duty is
prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action that is of a
continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be
deemed guilty of a civil offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed
or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this City
Code.
B. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different sections or chapters of this City Code, the prosecuting officer
may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall
be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or
penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes
a breach of any chapter or provision of this City Code and there shall be
no forfeiture or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply.
D. Whenever in this Code any state statute or administrative regulation
has been referred to or adopted by reference, such reference or
adoption shall include all amendments and revisions to the statute or
Code subsequently adopted, approved and enacted.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:13
§ 1-21. Liability of officers.
No provision of this City Code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable
for any forfeiture or penalty for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intent of the City Council to impose such forfeiture or penalty on such
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty.
§ 1-21 LAKE MILLS CODE § 1-21
1:14
Chapter 10
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 16.
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 27.
City Council — See Ch. 38.
City Manager — See Ch. 44.
Ethics — See Ch. 71.
§ 10-1. Form of government.
The City of Lake Mills, Jefferson County, Wisconsin, is organized and
operated under the City Manager system of government, Chapter 64,
Wisconsin Statutes. (Charter Ord. 11-10-1953)
§ 10-2. Elected officials.
The elected officials of the City shall be two Council members elected from
each of the City's Council Districts, one Council member elected at large,
and a Municipal Judge. (Charter Ord. 1132, 9-2-2014)
§ 10-3. Appointed officials.
A. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council in accordance
with § 64.09, Wis. Stats.
B. The following officials shall be appointed by the City Manager subject to
confirmation of the Council. These officials shall be appointed to
indefinite terms and are removable for cause by a 3/4 vote of the
Council after a hearing: [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
City Treasurer
City Clerk
Deputy Clerk
City Assessor
City Attorney
Director of Public Works
Utility Superintendent
Zoning Administrator
Building Inspector
Plumbing Supervisor
Electrical Inspector
Cemetery Superintendent
§ 1-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-3
1:15
§ 10-4. Ethics Code. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 1064A]
Requirements under the Code of Ethics and Statements of Interests are
set forth in Chapter 71, Ethics, of this Code. In addition, all City officials,
whether appointed or elected, are subject to other laws and their oaths
of office. Explanations of duties and requirements of public office may be
found by consulting the Wisconsin State Statutes, including but not limited
to Ch. 19, General Duties of Public Officials, and §§ 946.10 through 946.18,
Crimes Against Government and Its Administration; the City Council
Orientation Manual, the Board and Committee Handbook, and the
Handbook for Wisconsin Municipal Officials, which is published by the
League of Wisconsin Municipalities. Appointment or election to public office
carries duties and responsibilities about which each official needs to be
aware, in addition to the power and authority conferred by the office
City Forester
Parks and Forestry Director
C. The City Manager may create minor administrative offices and
positions, and the City Manager may appoint persons to carry out the
duties of such minor offices and the City Manager may remove these
officials at pleasure whenever their performance is unsatisfactory to
the City Manager.
D. The City Manager shall appoint all heads of all departments, all
subordinate City officials (unless Subsection E applies), and all City
employees. Such appointments shall only be subject to confirmation by
the Council, if such positions are enumerated in Subsection B of this
section. Unless confirmed by the Council, these persons are subject to
removal, suspension, or dismissal by the City Manager.
E. Appointments of members of boards and commissions, unless otherwise
prohibited by law, shall be by the Council President, subject to
confirmation of the Council. Appointments of members of the Board of
Police and Fire Commissioners and the Housing Authority shall be
made by the City Manager. Removal or suspension of officials appointed
in this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of § 17.12, Wis.
Stats.
F. The Library Director shall be appointed by the Library Board, subject to
confirmation of the Council.
G. The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall appoint the Chiefs of
the Police and Fire Departments. Appointments of police officers and
firefighters shall be by the Chiefs of the Departments, subject to
approval by the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners. Removal and
suspension of Police and Fire Department personnel shall be by the
Board of Police and Fire Commissioners in accordance with § 62.13,
Wis. Stats.
§ 10-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 10-4
1:16
to which the official is appointed or elected. The City Attorney may be
consulted for information and training upon request.
Chapter 16
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 10. City Council — See Ch. 38.
§ 16-1. Administrative review procedures.
Chapter 27
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 10. Officers and employees — See Ch. 153.
A. Legislative purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to afford a
constitutionally sufficient, fair and orderly administrative procedure
and review in connection with determinations by City officials which
involve constitutionally protected rights of specific persons which are
entitled to due process protection under the 14th Amendment to the
United States Constitution.
B. Wis. Stats. Chapter 68 is incorporated herein in its entirety, unless the
City Council adopts amendments to this chapter which specify certain
portions of the statutory municipal review procedure in Chapter 68 that
are not applicable because the City of Lake Mills has elected not to be
governed thereby.
§ 10-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1
1:17

ARTICLE I
Board of Review
[Adopted 2-17-1998 by Ord. No. 798B (Title 2, Ch. 1, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 27-1. Membership. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
The Board of Review shall consist of seven members, none of whom shall
occupy elected public office of the City nor be the City Manager, City
Assessor, or City Attorney. Members of the Board shall be appointed by
the Council President, subject to confirmation by the Council, for staggered
terms of five years, commencing on April 1. The City Clerk, or the City
Treasurer, as the Clerk's designee, shall serve as a voting member of the
Board of Review and shall also serve as the Clerk of the Board. Members of
the Board, except members who are full-time employees or officers of the
City, shall receive such compensation as shall by resolution be determined
by the Council from time to time. Each member shall take and file the oath
of office required by § 19.01, Wis. Stats., before entering into the duties of
office.
§ 27-2. Time and place of meeting. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1103]
The Board shall meet annually at any time during the thirty-day period
beginning on the second Monday of May. Meetings shall be held in the
Council Chamber or in a public place designated by the Council. Meetings
shall be noticed and posted by the City Clerk or the City Treasurer, as the
Clerk's designee, at least 15 days before the first session of the Board. The
City Clerk or the City Treasurer, as the Clerk's designee, shall publish a
Class I notice of the meeting and shall post the notice in three public places
and shall also post the notice on the door of the City municipal building.
The notice shall include the requirements under §§ 70.47(7)(aa) and (ac)
to (af), Wis. Stats. The Board shall conduct its proceedings according to
§ 70.47, Wis. Stats., and may adjourn from time to time until its business
is completed. The City Clerk or the City Treasurer, as the Clerk's designee,
shall keep a record of all proceedings of the Board.
§ 27-3. Duties.
The Board shall have the powers and duties as set forth in § 70.47, Wis.
Stats., and any amendments thereto, which are incorporated herein by
reference.
A. The Board shall carefully examine the roll or rolls and correct all
apparent errors in description or computation, and shall add all omitted
property as provided in § 70.47(10), Wis. Stats.
B. The Board shall not raise or lower the assessment of any property
except after a hearing as provided in §§ 70.47(8) and (10), Wis. Stats.
§ 27-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-3
1:19
§ 27-4. Confidentiality of certain information. [Amended 7-2-2013
by Ord. No. 1112]
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), or as that section is amended in the
future, whenever the Assessor, in the performance of the Assessor's duties,
requests or obtains income and expense information, then such income
and expense information provided to the Assessor shall be held by the
Assessor on a confidential basis, except, however, that the information may
be revealed to and used by persons in discharging duties as imposed by
law, whether those duties are imposed by office, including, but not limited
to, use by the Assessor in performance of official duties of the Assessor's
office, or when used by the Board of Review in performance of its official
duties, or whether those duties are imposed by an order of a court. Income
and expense information provided to the Assessor under § 70.47(7)(af),
unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is not subject to the right of
inspection and copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1).
C. Objections to valuations shall be handled in accordance with § 70.47(7),
Wis. Stats., and corrections of assessment shall be in accordance with
§ 70.47(9), Wis. Stats.
D. All notices of decision shall be given in accordance with § 70.47(12),
Wis. Stats., prior to the Board's final adjournment.
§ 27-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 27-4
1:20
ARTICLE II
Library Board
[Adopted 2-17-1998 by Ord. No. 798 (Title 2, Ch. 2, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 27-5. Membership.
The Library Board shall consist of seven members, including one Council
member, a school district administrator, and five citizen members, such that
not more than two members may be residents of towns lying adjacent to
the City. Appointments shall be made by the Council President, subject to
confirmation by the Council, except that the Council member serving on
the Board shall be elected by the Council. Members shall be appointed
to staggered terms of three years, commencing on July 1, except that the
Council member serving on the Board shall serve for a one-year term.
§ 27-6. Organization.
Each member shall take and file the oath of office required by § 19.01, Wis.
Stats., prior to entering into the duties of office. The Board shall annually, by
no later than August 1, elect from its members a President and such other
officers as the Board deems necessary. No member shall be compensated
for his/her service on the Board. A majority of the membership of the Board
shall constitute a quorum.
§ 27-7. Powers and duties.
A. The Board shall have such powers and duties as are set forth in § 43.58,
Wis. Stats., and any amendments thereto, which are incorporated
herein by reference.
B. The Board shall review and make recommendations to the Library
Director on the annual budget prior to September 1 of each year.
§ 27-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-7
1:21

ARTICLE III
Plan Commission
[Adopted 2-17-1998 by Ord. No. 798B (Title 2, Ch. 3, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]2
§ 27-8. Organization; membership.
§ 27-9. Powers and duties.
§ 27-10. Comprehensive Plan.
A. Membership. The City Plan Commission shall consist of seven members
as follows: a member of the City Council and six other members.
(1) The Council member of the Plan Commission shall be elected by the
Council by a 2/3 vote during April of each year.
(2) The citizen members shall be appointed by the Council President
during April for terms of three years, which commence on May 1
during the year of appointment, and such appointments are subject
to confirmation by the Council. All members shall be residents of
the City of Lake Mills.
B. Officers. The Chairperson of the Plan Commission shall be appointed
annually by the Council President, subject to confirmation by the
Council. In addition, the City Plan Commission may elect a Vice
Chairperson, Secretary and such other officers as the Commission may,
in its judgment, deem necessary to carry out the duties of the Plan
Commission.
A. General provisions. The City Plan Commission shall have the powers
and duties prescribed in § 62.23, Wis. Stats., and such other powers and
duties as shall be vested in it from time to time by the Council.
B. Records maintained. The Plan Commission shall keep a written record
of its proceedings, a copy of which shall be filed with the Clerk. Four
members shall constitute a quorum, but all actions shall require the
affirmative approval of a majority of all members of the Plan
Commission. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
C. Staff employed. The Plan Commission shall have the power to employ
experts and such staff as may be necessary, and to pay for their services
and such other expenses as may be necessary and proper within the
limits of the budget established by the Council or placed at its disposal
through gift, and subject to any ordinance enacted by the Council.
D. Utilization of City officials. As far as possible, the City Plan Commission
shall utilize the services of existing City officials and employees.
2. Editor's Note: See also § 660-177 of this Code for provisions regarding Plan Commission.
§ 27-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-10
1:23
A. The Plan Commission shall develop and update the Comprehensive Plan
for the City of Lake Mills in accordance with the provisions of § 62.23,
Wis. Stats.
B. The Comprehensive Plan shall, among other things, designate areas to
be developed in accordance with particular land usages, areas to be
serviced with sanitary sewers, and a projection of the timing of
availability of urban services.
C. The Comprehensive Plan shall be used as guidance by the Plan
Commission for granting or denying approvals of proposed
development in the designated areas of the Plan.
D. The Plan Commission shall adopt the Comprehensive Plan, increments
of the Comprehensive Plan, or any subsequent changes or modifications
to the Comprehensive Plan by a majority vote of all members of the Plan
Commission. The adoption of any plan, increment, or change shall be by
resolution. The resolution will be signed by the Chairperson of the Plan
Commission and attested by the City Clerk. All documents, to include
any maps, charts, drawings, tables, graphs, and explanations shall be
similarly signed by the Chairperson of the Plan Commission and the
City Clerk.
E. Upon adoption by the Plan Commission, the resolution shall be certified
to the City Council within 60 days. The Council shall accept or reject the
certification of the Plan Commission by majority vote of all Council
members within 60 days after receipt.
F. A resolution to authorize and endorse the use of the Comprehensive
Plan, or any increments thereof, shall be adopted by the City Council
upon the acceptance of any certification of the Plan Commission under
§ 27-10E.
G. Plans, increments, or changes to the Comprehensive Plan that are
accepted by the City Council, along with the resolutions adopted by the
Plan Commission and City Council, shall be forwarded to the County
Land Information Office and the County Zoning Office within 30 days by
the City Manager.
§ 27-10 LAKE MILLS CODE § 27-10
1:24
ARTICLE IV
Zoning Board of Appeals
[Adopted 2-17-1998 by Ord. No. 798B (Title 2, Ch. 4, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]3
§ 27-11. Establishment; membership.
A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established. The Board shall consist
of five members and two alternate members appointed by the Council
President, subject to confirmation by the Council, for staggered terms of
three years commencing on June 1.
§ 27-12. Organization and meetings.
A. The Council President may appoint two alternate members for
staggered terms of three years and such appointments are subject to
confirmation of the Council. Annually, the Council President shall
designate one of the alternate members as first alternate and the other
as second alternate. The first alternate shall act, with full power, only
when a member of the Board refuses to vote because of interest or is
absent. The second alternate shall so act only when the first alternate
so refuses or is absent or when more than one member of the Board so
refuses or is absent.
B. The members shall serve without compensation, except the Secretary
shall be compensated the amount approved by the Council. All
members shall take and file the oath required by § 19.01, Wis. Stats.,
before entering into the duties of office.
C. The Council President shall annually by July 1 designate one of the
members Chairperson, subject to confirmation of the Council.
A. The Board shall by August 1 elect from its members a Vice Chairperson
and a Secretary to serve in those capacities for one year. The Board
shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure. Meetings of the
Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other
times as the Board may determine. The Chairperson, or in his/her
absence, the Vice Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public,
except that the Board may deliberate a case after a hearing in closed
session, provided any vote shall be taken in a properly noticed open
session.
B. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon each question of, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office
of the City Clerk and such records shall be deemed public records.
3. Editor's Note: See also § 660-176 of this Code for provisions regarding Zoning Board of
Appeals.
§ 27-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-13
1:25
§ 27-13. Powers.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
§ 27-14. Appeals provisions.
Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision
of the administrative officer charged with the enforcement of Chapter 660,
Zoning, of this Code, or any other provision of the Municipal Code adopted
pursuant to Chapter 660, Zoning.
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision and determination made by the Building
Inspector, or by any administrative official of the City in the
enforcement of Chapter 660, Zoning, of this Code, or in the
enforcement of any other provision of the Municipal Code adopted
pursuant to Chapter 660, Zoning.
B. Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the Zoning Code
upon which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to pass.
C. Authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms
of the Zoning Code as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship so that the intent of the Zoning Code
will be observed, public safety and welfare is secured, and substantial
justice is done.
D. Permit the erection and use of a building or premises in any location,
subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards in harmony with the
general purposes of the Zoning Code, for such public utility purposes
which are reasonably necessary for public convenience and welfare.
E. Reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify any order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from, and make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be
made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issue
of a permit.
F. If a quorum is present, the Zoning Board of Appeals may take action by
a majority vote of the members present to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from, to make such
order, requirement, decision or determination in favor of the applicant
or appellant on any matter on which it is required to pass, or to effect
any variation in the requirements of the Zoning Code, under the
standards as listed in § 660-176C. The grounds of every such
determination shall be stated in writing. [Amended 6-6-2006 by Ord.
No. 991]
§ 27-13 LAKE MILLS CODE § 27-14
1:26
A. Such appeals shall be taken within 30 days of entry of any order,
requirement, determination or decision, by filing with the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and with the Board, a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof, and by paying to the Clerk any
applicable fees.
B. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
C. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal shall have been filed
with the officer, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in the opinion of the officer, cause immediate peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by a court
of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal
is taken, and on good cause shown.
D. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals and
give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest,
and shall decide the same within a reasonable period of time.
E. Any party to the appeal may appear in person or by agent or by attorney
at the hearing.
F. In any action involving a listed property, as defined in § 44.31(4), Wis.
Stats., which is a property listed on the national register of historic
places, or the state register, or both, the Board shall consider any
suggested alternatives or recommended decision submitted by the Plan
Commission.
G. Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of
the Board, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, or board or
commission of the City may, within 30 days after the filing of the
decision in the office of the City Clerk, commence an action seeking the
remedy available by certiorari.
§ 27-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-14
1:27

ARTICLE V
Parks Board
[Adopted 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 980 (Title 2, Ch. 5, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 27-15. Establishment, membership and organization.
§ 27-16. Meetings.
A. Establishment. A Parks Board is hereby reestablished.
B. Membership.
(1) The Parks Board shall consist of five members who shall be
residents of the City of Lake Mills.
(2) Four of five members shall be appointed by the Council President to
staggered, three-year terms, commencing on May 1 in the year of
appointment, and such appointments shall be subject to
confirmation by the City Council. Of those members first appointed
to the reestablished Parks Board on May 1, 2006, the first member
appointed shall serve a one-year term; the second and third
members appointed shall serve two-year terms; and the fourth
member appointed shall serve a three-year term.
(3) One member shall be a Council member who shall be elected to a
one-year term by the Council, commencing on May 1.
(4) The non-Council members shall not receive compensation for their
services to the Board. The Council member of the Board shall only
receive the compensation provided to members of the City Council.
(5) Each member shall take and file the official oath of office, as
required in Wis. Stats. § 19.01, prior to entering into the duties of
office. The written oaths shall be filed with the City Clerk.
[Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
C. Organization.
(1) The Council President shall by May 1 of each year select the
Chairperson from among the members of the Board, subject to
confirmation by the Council. The term of Chairperson shall be for
one year.
(2) The Board shall elect a Vice Chairperson and a Secretary to oneyear
terms at its May organizational meeting each year.
A. Time and place. Regular meetings of the Board shall be held on the
third Wednesday at 5:30 p.m. at the Lake Mills Municipal Building,
unless there is no business to be conducted.
§ 27-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-16
1:29
§ 27-17. Powers and duties.
Generally, the Parks Board shall be an advisory body to the City Council and
shall have the following powers and duties:
B. Special meetings at a time other than the regular meetings may be
called by the Chairperson or by any two other members of the Board.
Special meetings shall be held in the Lake Mills Municipal Building.
C. Notice and agenda. The Chairperson shall determine the agenda at
each regular meeting, and the members calling any special meetings
shall communicate the items to be placed on the agenda to the
Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be responsible for providing legal
notice of any special or regular meeting of the Board. All agenda items
shall pertain to business over which the Board has jurisdiction, as
defined under § 27-17, and all business shall be listed on the agendas
and provided in the legal notices of the meetings.
D. All meetings of the Board are subject to the Open Meetings Law in Wis.
Stats., Subchapter V of Chapter 19, and all records of the Board are
subject to the Open Records Law under Wis. Stats., Subchapter II of
Chapter 19.
E. Proceedings and records. Rules for the governance of meetings may be
adopted by the Board as it deems necessary, provided such rules do not
contravene any provision of this article.
F. The Secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting and shall file the duly
adopted minutes with the City Clerk. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1103]
G. The Vice Chairperson shall preside at any meeting of the Board at
which the Chairperson is absent, and shall preside over any item over
which the Chairperson has a conflict of interest.
A. Make recommendations to the City Council with respect to the
management, control, improvement and care of all public parks located
within the corporate limits of the City so as to secure the quiet, orderly
and suitable use and enjoyment of the parks. For purposes of this
section, City of Lake Mills parks are those public facilities and public
lands, bike trails and public lake access areas that have been set aside
for recreational purposes, such as but not limited to hiking, picnicking,
biking, swimming, fishing, boat launching, team or individual sports,
the use of playground areas or skateboarding equipment, and other
passive or active recreational activities enjoyed in an outdoor setting
within the parks;
B. Recommend to the City Council such rules, policies and ordinances that
are necessary to promote the efficient management, control,
improvement and care of all public parks located within the City;
§ 27-16 LAKE MILLS CODE § 27-17
1:30
C. Prepare and recommend adoption of a five-year Park Plan and Park
Master Plan using the support and expertise of both the Parks and
Forestry Director and the City's Planning Consultant;
D. Recommend to the City Council all matters relating to the efficient
operation of the park system, and such other matters as may be
referred to the Board for its review and recommendation. Such
referrals may from time to time be made with either the Parks and
Forestry Director or the City Council; and
E. Provide an annual report, either written or oral, to the City Council.
§ 27-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-17
1:31

ARTICLE VI
Board of Police and Fire Commissioners
[Adopted 2-17-1998 by Ord. No. 798B (Title 2, Ch. 7, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 27-18. Police and Fire Commissioners.
There is hereby created a Board of Police and Fire Commissioners
consisting of five citizens, three of whom shall constitute a quorum. The
City Manager shall appoint, in writing, five Commissioners for staggered
five-year terms, with the term of the first Commissioner expiring on April
30, 1991, and the term of the remaining Commissioners terminating on the
same date in successive years so that not more than one Commissioner's
term will terminate in any given year. Thereafter, the City Manager shall
annually, between the last Monday of April and the first Monday of May,
appoint in writing, to be filed with the secretary of the Board, one member
for a term of five years. No appointment shall be made that will result in
more than three members of the Board belonging to the same political party.
§ 27-19. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Board shall be as set forth in § 62.13(3),
(4), (5m) and (7), Wis. Stats., and any amendments thereto, which are
incorporated herein by reference.
A. All members of the Board shall take and file the oath required under
§ 19.01, Wis. Stats., prior to entering into the duties of office.
B. The Board shall select from its members a secretary who shall keep a
record of its proceedings.
C. The City Manager shall annually appoint the Chairperson of the Board.
D. Members shall serve without compensation, except that the Secretary
shall be compensated by an amount approved by the Council.
§ 27-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-19
1:33

ARTICLE VII
Board of Public Works
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 2, Ch. 8, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 27-20. Establishment, membership and organization.
A. Establishment. A Board of Public Works is hereby established under the
authority of § 62.14(1), Wis. Stats.
B. Membership.
(1) The Board of Public Works (Board) shall consist of six voting
members, as well as ex officio members as designated herein.
(2) Four of the voting members shall be residents of the City of Lake
Mills and shall be appointed to staggered, three-year terms by the
City Council President, subject to confirmation by the Council.
(3) One of the voting members shall be a Council member, who shall be
elected to a one-year term by the Council.
(4) One of the voting members shall be a resident whose primary
residence is served by both City-owned electric and sanitary sewer
utilities. Such member shall be appointed to a three-year term by
the Town of Lake Mills Board of Supervisors. Such member is
authorized to vote only on matters relating to the sanitary sewer
utility, electric utility, or the governance or operation of the Board.
(5) The ex officio nonvoting members of the Board shall be the City
Manager, City Attorney, City Clerk, City Treasurer, Electric Utility
Superintendent, Public Works Director, and Wastewater Utility
Supervisor. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(6) The voting members shall not receive compensation for their
service on the Board. Each voting member shall take the oath
required under Wis. Stats. § 19.01, and such oath shall be filed with
the City Clerk. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
C. Organization.
(1) The members of the Board shall, by their first meeting in May, elect
a President from among their members to serve in that capacity for
one year. However, the ex officio members, the member from the
Town of Lake Mills, and the member also serving as a Council
member, may not serve as President of the Board.
(2) The Board may elect a Vice President and such other officers as the
Board may deem necessary to carry out the duties of the Board.
The Clerk shall serve as the Secretary of the Board. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
§ 27-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-20
1:35
§ 27-21. Meetings.
§ 27-22. Powers and duties.
(3) The Board may adopt such rules as the Board may deem necessary
to carry out the duties of the Board, provided those rules do not
contravene any provision of this ordinance or any other ordinance
enacted by the City of Lake Mills.
A. Time and place. Meetings of the Board shall be held regularly at a time
and place decided by the Board. At least one meeting shall be held in
each calendar month, unless the Board has no business to conduct.
Additional meetings may be called by the President or by two of the six
voting members. Notice of each meeting shall be provided as required
under Wis. Stats. § 19.84. [Amended 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 1150]
B. Proceedings and records. Rules for the governance of meetings shall be
adopted by the Board as it deems necessary. The Board shall keep
minutes of all proceedings, indicating, at a minimum, the vote of each
member on each question. The minutes of each meeting shall be filed
with the City Clerk.
A. Generally.
(1) The Board shall have the powers and duties prescribed in
§ 62.14(6), Wis. Stats., and such other powers and duties vested in
it by the Council.
(2) The Board shall make recommendations to the Council on proposed
rates or charges to the general public or property owners for any
utility service, garbage and refuse collection service, or
assessments for public improvements.
B. City utilities. The Board shall have authority under § 66.0805(6), Wis.
Stats., to provide operational control of all public utilities owned or
operated by the City of Lake Mills. Additionally, the Board shall
perform, and is given the authority to perform, the following:
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(1) Recommend approval or rejection of yearly utility operating
budgets to the Council.
(2) Annually audit or inspect some or all financial records of the utility
maintained by the Utility Supervisor or any employee of the utility.
Additional audits or inspections may be conducted as the Board
deems appropriate.
(3) Recommend approval or rejection to the Council of any capital
expenditures submitted by the Utility Superintendent.
§ 27-20 LAKE MILLS CODE § 27-22
1:36
(4) Recommend to the Council approval or rejection of construction,
improvement, or extension of utility service, except that this
authority does not apply to the hook-up of an individual customer to
an existing utility main line.
(5) Review all proposed plats and, when appropriate, certified survey
maps and make recommendations to the Council concerning the
feasibility and appropriateness of each plat's or map's plan for
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, and water service, and any
utility easements for the proposed or future construction in the
platted or mapped area.
C. Streets, sidewalks, curbs, and gutters.
(1) The Board shall review all proposed plats submitted to the City of
Lake Mills and make recommendations to the Council concerning
the feasibility and appropriateness of each plat's plan for street
placement and construction; sidewalk, curb and gutter
construction; and any easements for the proposed or future
construction in the platted area.
(2) The Board shall prepare a report for the Council, by June 1 of each
year, on the condition of sidewalks, streets, curbs and gutters in the
City of Lake Mills. This report shall include, at a minimum:
(a) A prioritized list of construction projects for the laying of new
sidewalks.
(b) A prioritized list of sidewalk replacement projects.
(c) A list of sidewalk projects the Board recommends that the
Council authorize and fund in the following calendar year.
(d) A prioritized list of street, curb, and gutter repair or
replacement projects.
(e) A list of street, curb, and gutter projects the Board
recommends that the Council authorize and fund in the
following calendar year.
(3) The Board may order the replacement of defective, unsafe or
insufficient sidewalks in accordance with policies created by the
Council and in accordance with § 66.0907, Wis. Stats.
D. Garbage, refuse, and recyclables. The Board shall supervise the
development, implementation, modification and renewal of all contracts
for the pickup and disposal of garbage, refuse, and recyclable materials
from all types of property within the City of Lake Mills. The Board shall
provide recommendations to the Council concerning these contract
matters.
E. All parks, park land, recreational sites and library facilities are
excluded from the authority of the Board of Public Works.
§ 27-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-22
1:37

ARTICLE VIII
Economic Development Commission
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 2, Ch. 9, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 27-23. Organization.
The Economic Development Commission is hereby established and shall
consist of seven members.
§ 27-24. Membership.
§ 27-25. Officers.
The Chairperson shall annually be elected by the members of the
Commission, and the members may elect a Vice Chairperson, Secretary, and
such other officers as the Commission, in its judgment, deems necessary to
carry out its duties.
§ 27-26. Meetings.
Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson or any two members,
and all meetings shall be noticed and open to the public, except as provided
in § 19.85, Wis. Stats. The Commission may adopt rules for its governance
and procedure.
§ 27-27. Powers and duties.
The Economic Development Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:
A. Four citizen members of the Economic Development Commission shall
be appointed by the Council President, subject to confirmation of the
City Council.
B. Annually, one Council member shall be elected by the City Council to a
one-year term.
C. All terms of office shall commence on May 1 in the year of appointment.
Citizen members shall be appointed to three-year terms.
D. No compensation shall be paid for service on the Commission.
E. Members shall take the official oath required by Wis. Stats. § 19.01 and
such oath shall be filed with the City Clerk. [Amended 12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 1103]
A. Promote all City-owned business, commercial, and industrial sites to
prospective developers.
§ 27-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-27
1:39
B. Review industrial, commercial, and business development proposals
and make recommendations to the City Plan Commission as
appropriate.
C. Recommend to the City Council policies designed to facilitate
industrial, commercial, and business development and growth in an
orderly fashion.
D. Review applications for requests under the community development
block grant-economic program.
E. Community development block grant-economic development program
requests for financial assistance. All requests from businesses and/or
industries located in the City of Lake Mills for financial assistance
under the Wisconsin Community Development Block Grant-Economic
Program shall be processed in accordance with the procedures given
below. These requests are for initial applications for block grants only.
Requests for assistance under the City of Lake Mills revolving loan
account shall be processed in accordance with § 27-27F, and the
Revolving Loan Program Policies and Procedures Manual.
(1) Initial requests shall be prepared by the local business or industry
in letter format and contain the following information:
(a) Name of business.
(b) Local address of business.
(c) Name of parent organization and address, if applicable.
(d) Amount of City-provided matching funds requested.
(e) Specific utilization of City-provided matching funds.
(f) Source of private matching funds. Note: One-dollar private
matching funds are required for each City-provided dollar
requested. Include documentation from private lender if
appropriate.
(g) Number of full-time equivalent (FTE) jobs/positions to be
created by the proposed expansion. Note: Applicants must
create one FTE position for each $20,000 of City-provided
matching funds requested.
(2) Requests for financial assistance shall be forwarded to the
Commission for evaluation and consideration. The Commission may
request an appearance by the Chief Executive Officer or their
designated representative before the Commission at a scheduled
meeting in order to initially evaluate the request.
(3) The Commission shall prepare an initial recommendation to the
City Council for approval/disapproval to proceed with the request.
§ 27-27 LAKE MILLS CODE § 27-27
1:40
(4) The City Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the initial request submitted by the Commission.
(5) In the event the City Council disapproves the request, an
application shall not be submitted from the same business or
industry for one year.
(6) In the event the City Council approves or conditionally approves
the request, the request shall be referred to the Commission for
preparation of a formal application for submission to the Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services.
(7) The Commission shall solicit proposals from qualified consulting
firms to prepare the application. The Commission retains the
authority to award contracts to qualified consulting firms provided
the total cost does not exceed $10,000 and the business/industry
applicant agrees to fund the cost of retaining the consultant to
prepare the application. In the event the cost exceeds $10,000 or
the applicant does not agree to pay the consulting fees in total, this
information shall be forwarded to the Council by the Commission
with a recommendation for resolution.
(8) Upon receipt of consulting fees, or other actions as directed by the
Council, the Commission shall award a contract with a consulting
firm to prepare the application.
(9) The Council shall conduct a public hearing, which has been noticed
as a Class II notice.
(10) The Council may, upon public hearing, adopt a resolution
approving the application and it may authorize the Council
representative on the Commission to sign all documents related to
the application.
(11) Upon award, the application shall be forwarded to the City
Manager for contract administration.
(12) The Commission shall have 90 calendar days to evaluate the initial
request and make a recommendation to the Council. The Council
shall have an additional 90 days to evaluate the request and either
approve, conditionally approve, or reject the application.
F. Community development block grant-economic development program
revolving loan request procedures. All requests from businesses or
industries located in the City of Lake Mills for financial assistance
under the Wisconsin Community Development Block Grant-Economic
Program Revolving Loan shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures outlined below and within the Economic Development
Revolving Loan Program Policies and Procedures Manual:
(1) Initial requests shall be prepared by the local business or industry
in letter format and contain the following information:
§ 27-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-27
1:41
(a) Name of business.
(b) Local address of business.
(c) Name of parent organization and address, if applicable.
(d) Amount of City-provided matching funds requested.
(e) Specific utilization of City-provided matching funds.
(f) Source of private matching funds. One dollar private matching
funds are required for each City-provided dollar requested.
Include documentation from private lender if appropriate.
(g) Number of full-time equivalent (FTE) jobs/positions to be
created by the proposed expansion. Applicants must create one
FTE position for each $20,000 of matching funds requested.
(2) All requests for financial assistance shall be forwarded to the
Commission for evaluation and consideration. The Commission may
request an appearance by the Chief Executive Officer or the
designated representative before the Commission at a scheduled
meeting in order to initially evaluate the request.
(3) The Commission shall conduct a public hearing, which has been
noticed as a Class II notice.
(4) The Commission shall prepare a recommendation in accordance
with the City of Lake Mills Revolving Loan Program Policies and
Procedures Manual for the Council to approve or disapprove. The
recommendation shall include the term of any loan and the interest
rates applied.
(5) The Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
request in accordance with the recommendation by the
Commission, the public hearing, Wisconsin Department of Safety
and Professional Services mandates for loan approvals, and the
City of Lake Mills Revolving Loan Program Policies and Procedure
Manual.
(6) Upon award by the Council, the application shall be forwarded to
the City Manager for contracting and administration.
(7) The Commission shall have 90 calendar days to evaluate the initial
request and make a recommendation to the Council. The Council
shall have an additional 90 days to evaluate the request and either
approve, conditionally approve, or reject the application.
G. Exercise other specific powers and duties as authorized from time to
time by resolution of the City Council.
§ 27-27 LAKE MILLS CODE § 27-27
1:42
ARTICLE IX
Joint CATV Regulatory Board
[Adopted 2-17-1998 by Ord. No. 798 (Title 2, Ch. 10, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 27-28. Establishment, membership and organization.
A. Establishment. A Joint CATV Regulatory Board is hereby established.
B. Membership.
(1) The Board shall consist of seven members, which shall be
appointed by the City and Town of Lake Mills in accordance with
the following formula:
The number of Board members to which each municipality shall
be entitled shall be determined by multiplying the total number
of Board members by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be
the number of dwelling units located in a given municipality which
units have subscribed to the CATV service, and the denominator
of which shall be the total number of dwelling units in the
municipalities who are appointing authorities to the Lake Mills
Joint CATV Regulatory Board which dwelling units have subscribed
to the CATV service. If the product resulting from application of
the foregoing formula is not a whole number, then the product
shall be rounded off to the nearest whole number. Notwithstanding
anything contained herein to the contrary, each municipality
appointing members to the Lake Mills Joint CATV Regulatory Board
shall be entitled to at least one representative on said Board.
(2) The City members of the Board shall be appointed in April to oneyear
terms by the Council President, subject to confirmation of the
Council. The Town members of the Board shall annually be
appointed by the Town Board in April.
(3) The total number of Board members may be reduced to five,
provided the formula in Subsection B(1) of this section is followed,
and provided the Council and Town Board both pass resolutions
approving the reduction in the number of Board members.
(4) Members of the Board shall not receive compensation for their
service on the Board. Each member shall take and file the oath
from § 19.01, Wis. Stats., prior to performing his or her duties.
C. Organization.
(1) The Board shall annually elect a chairperson and a secretary from
among its members, and may elect such other officers as the Board
deems appropriate.
(2) The Board may adopt such rules or policies as it deems necessary
to carry out the duties of the Board, provided such rules do not
§ 27-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-28
1:43
§ 27-29. Meetings.
§ 27-30. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Board shall be the following:
contravene any provision of this section or any other ordinances
enacted by the City or Town of Lake Mills, and provided all such
rules or policies shall not be in effect unless and until they have
been approved by majority votes of both the Town Board and the
Council.
A. Time and place. Meetings of the Board shall be held monthly and they
shall be noticed and held at a public building located in either the City
or the Town. Special meetings may also be called by the Chairperson.
B. The Chairperson of the Board shall provide public notice of meetings,
and the Secretary of the Board shall record the minutes of all meetings
of the Board. Copies of the minutes of meetings shall be filed with both
the City and Town Clerks for distribution to the Council and Town
Board. The original copy of the minutes shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
C. The City Clerk shall act as records custodian for all reports, policies,
notices, minutes, correspondence, and other records, including any
videotapes of City meetings. The Town Clerk shall act as records
custodian for any Town meetings videotaped by cablecasters.
A. Resolve disputes or disagreements between subscribers and the
franchisee after investigation if the subscriber and the franchisee are
not able to resolve their dispute or disagreement.
B. Receive and audit reports and other correspondence submitted by the
franchisee to the City and Town, as required under the municipalities'
ordinances, for the purpose of insuring that necessary reports are
completed and filed pursuant to the terms of the ordinances.
C. Review rules and regulations adopted by the franchisee incident to
providing service to subscribers.
D. Assure that all tariffs, rates and rules pertinent to the operation of the
CATV service in both municipalities are made available for inspection
by the public at reasonable hours and upon reasonable request.
E. Review rates and make recommendations regarding any proposed rate
change to the Council and Town Board.
F. Solicit and review comments and provide recommendations to the
Council and Town Board regarding compliance with the Town and City
CATV ordinances by the franchisee.
§ 27-28 LAKE MILLS CODE § 27-30
1:44
G. Insure that the franchisee makes public access channels available to all
residents of the City and Town on a nondiscriminatory basis and to
advise the franchisee of procedural rules for this purpose.
H. Assure that the operation of the public access channels are free of
program censorship to the extent provided by law.
I. Plan and develop production and programming on any dedicated public
access channels.
J. Perform such other duties as the Council and Town Board may assign.
K. Annually prepare and submit by September 1 a joint operating budget
to the Town and City.
§ 27-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-30
1:45

ARTICLE X
Joint Rock Lake Committee
[Adopted 3-3-1998 by Ord. No. 800A (Title 2, Ch. 11, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 27-31. Purpose.
The Town of Lake Mills and the City of Lake Mills recognize the importance
of coordinating with each other and with the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) as they establish policies which impact on the
quality of Rock Lake, and as they provide funding for activities related to
the lake, and as they balance public and private interests in navigation
and recreational activities. To help facilitate the joint efforts of the Town
and City in attaining their shared goals regarding the lake, and to aid in
exchange of information with the DNR and in attraction of state resources,
both entities wish to establish a committee, known as the "Joint Rock Lake
Committee."
§ 27-32. Statutory authority.
Under the authority of §§ 60.10(2)(C), 60.22(3), 61.34(1) and (2), and
§ 64.10, Wis. Stats., the Town Board of the Town of Lake Mills and the City
Council of the City of Lake Mills hereby exercise their respective powers to
enact separate ordinances providing for the creation of a joint committee to
act as an advisory body on issues related to Rock Lake.
§ 27-33. Establishment, membership, and organization.
A. Establishment. The Joint Rock Lake Committee is hereby established
upon the adoption of like ordinances by both the Lake Mills Town Board
and the Lake Mills City Council. The Committee may be altered or
reorganized by the amendment of the ordinances enacted by both the
City and Town which establishes this Committee. The Committee may
be abolished by the repeal of either the Town or City ordinance
establishing the joint committee.
B. Membership.
(1) The Joint Rock Lake Committee shall consist of five voting
members, and such other nonvoting, ex officio members designated
from time to time by the Committee.
(2) Three of the five voting members shall be Town of Lake Mills
residents and shall be appointed by the Town Board, which is the
Town's appointing authority. Two of the five voting members shall
be City of Lake Mills residents and shall be appointed by the City
Council President and confirmed by a majority vote of the City
Council.
(3) The terms of office of the members initially appointed shall be
staggered, such that two of the three Town appointees shall be
§ 27-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-33
1:47
§ 27-34. Compensation and oath.
Members shall receive no compensation for their service on the Committee.
Each voting member shall take and file his or her written oath of office
with the Clerk of the respective governing body within 10 days of notice of
appointment and prior to exercising the duties of office.
§ 27-35. Meetings.
appointed for a two-year term, and one of the Town appointees
and one of the City appointees shall be appointed for a one-year
term, and one of the City appointees shall be appointed to a twoyear
term. When these initial terms expire, all the vacancies on
the Committee shall be filled for two-year terms by the respective
appointing authority. Each term of office expires on April 30 in the
appropriate year of expiration of a term.
(4) If a member's position on the Committee becomes vacant for any
reason, the respective appointing authority may appoint a
successor to complete the remaining term of office.
C. Organization.
(1) The voting members of the Committee, upon its organization, and
annually thereafter by no later than May 31, shall elect a
chairperson from among their numbers to serve in that capacity for
one year. Ex officio members are not eligible to hold an office on the
Committee.
(2) The voting members of the Committee may elect a Vice Chair,
Secretary, and such other officers as the Committee may deem
necessary to carry out the duties of the Committee.
(3) The Committee may adopt such rules as the Committee may deem
necessary to carry out the duties of the Committee, provided those
rules do not contravene any provision of the ordinances
establishing the Committee, any other ordinances enacted by
either the City or the Town, or any state statutes.
(4) The Town Clerk shall serve as the Records Custodian of the
Committee.
(5) The Committee Chairperson shall serve as the person responsible
for providing proper public notice of meetings of the Committee.
A. The Committee shall meet at least monthly at a regular meeting at the
City of Lake Mills Municipal Building, and such meeting shall be open
to the public and properly noticed. Proper notice of a regular meeting
may be accomplished by posting a notice, including an agenda, in three
public buildings and by providing a copy of the notice, including an
agenda, to the Clerks of the Town and City by no later than seven days
prior to the meeting. Proper notice of a regular meeting also shall
§ 27-33 LAKE MILLS CODE § 27-35
1:48
§ 27-36. Powers and duties.
include publication of the notice, including an agenda, in the local
newspaper in the weekly issue published during the week preceding
the meeting. [Amended 4-20-2004 by Ord. No. 925; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Special meetings of the Committee may be called by the Committee
Chair, provided the place of the meeting is the City of Lake Mills
Municipal Building or other public place, and provided proper notice of
the special meeting is accomplished no later than three days prior to
the special meeting. Proper notice of a special meeting shall consist of
posting the notice, with agenda, in three public buildings, and by
providing copies of the notice with agenda to the Clerks of the Town
and City. [Amended 4-20-2004 by Ord. No. 925; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. No business, except adjournment, may be conducted at any meeting
unless a quorum of three voting members is present at a properly
noticed meeting. Discussion without a decision is defined as business,
which requires the presence of a quorum at a properly noticed meeting.
A. The Committee may review and recommend the adoption or
amendment of ordinances affecting Rock Lake, recognizing that
municipal power to regulate activities on or adjacent to the lake, such
as set forth in §§ 30.11, 30.13(2), 30.14, 30.16, 30.745, 30.77,
30.772(3), 30.773, and 30.81, Wis. Stats., are often shared powers
requiring identical ordinances and oversight by the DNR.
(1) Any recommendation regarding the adoption or amendment of any
ordinance requiring both the City and Town to enact identical
ordinances shall be forwarded to the Clerks of the Town and City.
(2) Any recommendation for the adoption or amendment of any
ordinance that only requires enactment by the municipality with
60% of the shoreline within its boundaries shall be forwarded to the
Town Clerk, but such recommendation may also be forwarded to
the City Clerk for comment from the City.
(3) All drafting of ordinances or amendments recommended for
adoption shall be responsibility of the Town, unless such
recommendation is for an ordinance requiring adoption by both
entities. Such ordinances may then be drafted by either the Town's
legal counsel or the City Attorney, and the attorney not drafting the
ordinance shall be provided with a copy of the proposed language
for comment prior to the introduction of the ordinance to either the
Town or the City for enactment.
(4) The Town Clerk shall forward all ordinances or amendments to the
DNR which require DNR approval before the ordinances or
amendments are effective.
§ 27-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-36
1:49
B. The Committee shall receive and review all correspondence or reports
from the DNR, and such documents or records shall be placed on file
with the Town Clerk. The Committee shall provide copies of all
correspondence from the Committee to the DNR to the Town Clerk. The
Committee may provide its own reports on communications from the
DNR to the Clerks of the Town and City.
C. The Committee may provide reports and recommendations to the Town
Board regarding public education for the safe and lawful use of Rock
Lake, and regarding public education efforts designed to increase
public involvement in or awareness of issues impacting on the
preservation or improvement of the environmental quality of Rock
Lake.
D. The Committee may monitor and report to the Town Board on the
proper maintenance or deployment of navigation aids, informational
and ordinance signs, and other similar items.
E. The Committee shall apply for DNR grants or other funding sources for
Rock Lake feasibility studies, and improvement or maintenance
projects, when authorized to do so by the Town Board.
F. The Committee shall prepare long-range plans for the improvement,
protection, or preservation of Rock Lake, and shall submit the plans
with recommendations to the Clerks of the Town and City for
forwarding to the Town Board and the City Council.
G. The Committee shall maintain communications with the DNR, the
Priority Watershed Project, the Rock Lake Improvement Association,
the City Parks and Forestry Director, the County Parks Department, and
any other organizations or entities with an interest in Rock Lake. Any
such written communication from or to the Committee shall be placed
on file with the Town Clerk.
H. The Committee shall annually prepare and submit recommended
budget proposals for all activities conducted on or for the benefit of
Rock Lake to the Clerks of the Town and the City by no later than
September 1. Such recommended budget proposals shall reflect as
sources of revenue any and all other sources of anticipated funding,
including gifts, grants, launch and other fees, boat patrol
reimbursements by the DNR, and fund-raising dollars contributed by
volunteer organizations. Any funds generated through the sale of
property and any unexpended funds from the previous year shall be
shown in the annual budget proposal prior to budget submission to the
City and Township.
(1) The adoption of an approved budget which allocates funds for
activities or projects related to Rock Lake shall be undertaken by
the Town and City, with either entity having the unilateral authority
to fund or not fund individual items within the context of each
entity's adoption of a municipal budget. Items to be budgeted
§ 27-36 LAKE MILLS CODE § 27-36
1:50
which both entities agree to fund jointly shall be funded at an
agreed-upon proportion by each entity.
(2) The City shall annually pay over to the treasury of the Town that
amount agreed upon during budget adoption for the funding of the
City's share of Rock Lake activities and projects.
(3) The Town shall administer the funding of any budgeted item
relating to Rock Lake. The Committee may not contract, purchase,
sell, or otherwise encumber any funds or property for any purpose,
as all funding of all activities or projects shall be administered by
the Town.
I. All members of the Committee shall comply with applicable state
statutes regarding conduct in public office, open meeting and open
records laws, and regarding duties of public officials.
§ 27-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-36
1:51
Chapter 38
CITY COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 10.
City Manager — See Ch. 44.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 153.
§ 38-1. Composition and salary.
A. Members. The City Council shall consist of five Council members
elected to staggered, three-year terms. A total of four members shall be
elected from two districts. One member shall be elected from the City
at-large. Of the four members elected from districts, two members shall
be elected from District 1 (Wards 1, 4, 5 and 8), and two members shall
be elected from District 2 (Wards 3, 7, 2 and 6). Upon passage of this
amendment, all Council members shall be elected to staggered, threeyear
terms, as follows: [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1133]
(1) At the regular spring election, beginning with the election in 2015,
one Council member shall be elected from the City at-large for a
term of three years.
(2) At the regular spring election in 2016, one Council member shall be
elected from District 1 (Wards 1, 4, 5 and 8) for a three-year term,
and one Council member shall be elected from District 2 (Wards 3,
7, 2 and 6) for terms of three years.
(3) At the regular spring election in 2017, a second Council member
representing District 1 and a second Council member representing
District 2 shall be elected to terms of three years.
(4) Council members previously elected from any wards in each of the
two new districts will continue to serve out their current terms of
office, which shall end in 2016 or 2017, respectively. If such
members seek reelection at the end of their existing terms, instead
of being a candidate in two wards, they will be candidates in four
wards in their respective districts.
B. One Council member shall be elected from the City at-large to a threeyear
term in 2018. One Council member representing District 1 and one
Council member representing District 2 shall be elected to three-year
terms in 2019. One Council member representing District 1 and one
Council member representing District 2 shall be elected to three-year
terms in 2020. Thereafter, all Council members shall be elected to
staggered three-year terms at regular spring elections. [Amended
9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1133]
§ 27-36 LAKE MILLS CODE § 38-1
1:52
§ 38-2. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the City Council shall be as set forth in §§ 64.07
and 64.08, Wis. Stats., and such powers shall be all legislative and general
ordinance powers, and such other powers as created by charter ordinances.
§ 38-3. Meetings; rules of procedure.
C. City Council President. The City Council shall, at its first regular
meeting, or at an organizational meeting if one is called for that
purpose, elect from its members a President and Vice President. The
City Council President, or in his/her absence, the City Council Vice
President, shall preside at all City Council meetings.
D. Salary. Effective May 1, 2006, Council members elected to terms
commencing in April 2006 or thereafter shall receive an annual salary
of $2,880, except the President of the Council, who shall receive
$3,600. In addition, effective May 1, 2015, whoever is elected as
Council Vice President shall receive an annual salary of $3,180 instead
of $2,880. [Amended 11-4-2014 by Ord. No. 1138]
E. City Council Vice President. In addition to presiding at Council
meetings whenever the Council President is absent from the meeting,
the Council Vice President shall be responsible for tracking and
periodically reporting on the Council's progress in fulfilling its goals as
stated in the Planning and Goal Setting Report approved by the Council.
A. Meetings.
(1) Regular meetings.
(a) Following the spring election of each year, the City Council
shall meet on the third Tuesday of April for the purpose of
organization. Regular meetings of the City Council shall be
held on the first and third Tuesdays of every month at 7:00 p.m.
at a place to be determined from time to time by a majority of
the Council.
(b) If a meeting date, as fixed by Subsection A(1)(a), falls on a legal
holiday, the meeting shall instead be canceled or held at a time
determined by a majority of the Council.
(2) Special meetings.
(a) The Council President or any two members of the Council may
call special meetings by written notice to each Council member
and by satisfying requirements for public notice, which shall be
coordinated with the City Clerk in advance of the special
meeting. The notice to Council members shall be delivered to
the individual members personally or left at their usual abode
at least 24 hours before the meeting, unless for good cause a
twenty-four-hour notice is impossible or impractical. In that
§ 38-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-3
1:53
case, a shorter notice may be given, but the notice may not
at any time be provided less than six hours in advance of the
meeting. The notice shall specify the time, place and purpose
of the meeting. Attendance by any Council member, other than
those members calling the meeting, is a waiver of any defect in
the notice.
(b) Special meetings shall be deemed regular meetings for the
purpose of transacting any business that may be permitted by
law.
(3) Executive or closed meetings.
(a) Executive or closed sessions of Council meetings shall conform
to provisions set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes regarding
notice and exemptions to open meeting requirements.
(b) Members and former members may not discuss the substance
of closed sessions until such time that minutes from such
meetings have been deemed no longer to be confidential and
the minutes are open to public inspection.
(c) Members may deliberate on items brought before the Council
in closed session, but members may not vote on items without
first reconvening into open session.
(4) Adjournment. Any Council member may move to adjourn a
meeting. If any agenda item is not considered before a motion to
adjourn is adopted, it shall automatically be referred to the
Council's next regular meeting, unless the motion provides for a
specific date and hour.
B. Quorum required. A quorum is necessary for the transaction of any
Council business. A majority of the entire Council shall constitute a
quorum.
C. Call to order. The Council President shall be the presiding officer and
shall at the hour appointed call the members to order. If the Council
President is absent from the meeting, the Council Vice President shall
call the Council to order and preside at that meeting.
D. Absence of member. If a Council member for any reason cannot attend a
regularly scheduled meeting, he or she shall contact the City Clerk
prior to the meeting in question to give an explanation of his or her
anticipated absence. The Council member's stated reasons for being
absent shall be entered verbally in the Council's record. If
circumstances render it impossible to give advance notice of an
absence, the Council member shall file a written statement with the
Clerk within one week of the absence. At the next regular meeting, the
Clerk shall enter the statement in the Council's record.
§ 38-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 38-3
1:54
E. Order of business. The business of the Council shall be conducted in the
following order:
(1) Call to order.
(2) Roll call. If a quorum is not present, the meeting shall automatically
adjourn to the next regular meeting.
(3) Correction and approval of the minutes of the preceding meeting.
(4) Correspondence.
(5) Questions and comments from the public, as authorized under
Subsection K.
(6) City Manager's Report.
(7) Acceptance of committee minutes.
(8) Public hearing(s).
(9) Council business, to include consent agenda, if any.
(10) Any other Council business.
F. Introduction of business.
(1) Introduction requirements. All ordinances, resolutions, memorials
or other communications shall be in writing, contain a brief
statement of their content, indicate the name of the presenting
member, and, prior to their consideration by the Council, be
delivered to the Clerk. At the first permitted opportunity, the Clerk
shall read and record each by title at a meeting of the Council. Any
Council member may require at any time the reading in full of any
matter while it is before the Council.
(2) Filing. Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be filed in the
office of the Clerk at least six working days prior to that scheduled
Council meeting at which the measure is to be introduced. If for
good cause this pre-filing is impossible or impractical, the Council
may waive this requirement.
(3) Placement on the agenda. All items of business to be presented to
the Council, or any of its standing committees, shall be placed on
the agenda for the appropriate meeting or meetings by the City
Manager, or in his or her absence, by the City Clerk. Any member of
the Council may request the placement of an item on the agenda,
and any applicant for a permit, approval, or license shall submit an
application or required materials to the City Manager or City Clerk
six working days prior to being placed on the agenda for
consideration.
G. Presiding officer.
§ 38-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-3
1:55
(1) Designation. The Council President shall be the presiding officer. In
the absence of the Council President, the Vice President of the
Council shall preside at the meetings of the Council.
(2) Function. The presiding officer shall preserve order, conduct the
proceedings of the Council, and be its parliamentarian. If a member
does not follow the Council's rules, the presiding officer may, on his
or her own motion, or shall, at any member's request, call the
offending member to order. The Council, if appealed to, shall decide
the matter.
(3) Questions of order. Any Council member may raise a point or
question of order. The question of order must be raised at the time
the alleged breach of order occurs. The presiding officer shall, in
turn, immediately rule on the question of order, subject to an
appeal by a member to the Council. The appeal may be sustained by
a majority vote of the members present, exclusive of the presiding
officer.
(4) Motion. The Council President may make any motion if he or she
vacates the chair and designates the Council Vice President to
preside temporarily.
H. Voting.
(1) Mode of voting. Any Council member may demand an aye and no
vote on any matter. However, the vote shall be by ayes and nays if
the Council is:
(a) Confirming appointments;
(b) Adopting any measure that assesses or levies taxes;
(c) Appropriating or disbursing money; or
(d) Creating any liability or charge against the City or any fund of
the City.
(2) Majority vote required. A majority vote of all members of the
Council in favor of any proposed ordinance, resolution or
appointment shall be necessary for passage or approval, unless a
larger number is required by law. In all other cases, a majority of
the votes cast shall be necessary for Council action, provided a
quorum has voted.
(3) Abstentions.
(a) A Council member shall not vote on any proposed ordinance,
order, resolution or proposition in which he or she has a direct
pecuniary or personal interest not common to other members
of the Council.
§ 38-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 38-3
1:56
(b) A Council member who is required by law to abstain from
voting on any particular matter shall not be counted for
determining:
[1] The number of "members present" if passage of that
measure requires a favorable vote by a majority or other
fractional vote (i.e., 2/3 or 3/4) of the members "present";
or
[2] The presence of a quorum for purposes of that particular
vote.
(4) Vote change. A Council member may change his or her vote on a
matter up to the time the result of the vote is announced.
I. Reconsideration of question. Any member who voted with the
prevailing side on any question may move for reconsideration of the
vote immediately after the vote or at the next succeeding regular
meeting of the Council. If a motion to reconsider is defeated, it may not
again be presented to the Council.
J. Ordinances.
(1) Reading of ordinances.
(a) All proposed ordinances shall be read a total of three times
before the Council may vote on any of them. Each ordinance
shall be read:
[1] At the time of its initial introduction in full, or in cases of
ordinances exceeding three pages in length, in summary,
unless objection is made by any member;
[2] In full at the time of the report of the committee or City
employee to which the ordinance was referred is
submitted to the Council for its consideration, unless the
ordinance exceeds three pages, in which case the
ordinance shall be summarized if no Council member
objects; and
[3] By title only immediately prior to the Council's actual vote
on it.
(b) By adoption of a motion to suspend the rules, the Council may
dispense with any of the required readings.
(2) Vote on. The Council may not vote on an ordinance at the same
meeting that it is introduced unless the Council suspends this rule
by an affirmative 2/3 vote.
(3) Committee reports. If an ordinance is referred to a committee and
the committee reports on the ordinance at a subsequent meeting,
the report shall be in writing, signed by a majority of the
§ 38-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-3
1:57
committee, and shall be the committee's final action on the
ordinance. If the committee reports an amended or substitute
ordinance, the report shall still be the committee's final action on
the ordinance, provided the substitution or amendment is germane
to the ordinance originally referred to the committee.
K. Persons' right to address Council.
(1) Right declared. A person may address the Council, provided one of
the following conditions is met:
(a) The person registers with the Clerk before the meeting is
called to order, and indicates his or her interest to address the
Council; or
(b) The person's comments relate to a matter on the agenda for
that meeting.
(2) Time limited. Except for informational and public hearings,
speakers shall be limited to three minute addresses unless the
Council consents, by a 2/3 vote of the members present, to extend
the time.
L. Manner of deliberation.
(1) Manner of. No Council member shall address the Council until
recognized by the presiding officer. The Council member shall then
address the presiding officer and keep all remarks to the question
under discussion. The Council member shall also avoid personal
confrontations when speaking.
(2) Recognition. When two or more members simultaneously seek
recognition, the presiding officer shall name the member who is to
speak first.
(3) Motions. No motion shall be discussed or acted upon until it has
been seconded, unless these rules specifically permit one Council
member to initiate action. No motion shall be withdrawn without
the consent of those Council members making and seconding the
motion.
(4) Motions, precedence of:
(a) When a question is under consideration, no motion shall be
entertained except a motion to:
[1] Adjourn.
[2] Recess.
[3] Lay on the table.
[4] Move the previous question.
§ 38-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 38-3
1:58
[5] Postpone to a certain day.
[6] Refer to a committee.
[7] Amend.
[8] Postpone indefinitely.
(b) These motions shall take precedence in the order listed.
(5) Termination of debate. Any member wishing to terminate the
debate may move the previous question. The presiding officer shall
then announce the question as, "Shall the question before the
Council now be put?" If 2/3 of the members present vote in the
affirmative, the question before the Council shall be taken without
further debate. The Council then votes, first on any pending
amendments and then on the main question.
M. Consent agenda.
(1) Clerk's responsibilities. The City Clerk may create a subsection on
any Council agenda entitled "consent agenda." In a consent
agenda, the Clerk shall place matters that, in the Clerk's judgment,
are routine and noncontroversial and do not require a special vote
or specific action by the Council.
(2) Procedure for adoption. The following procedure shall apply when
a consent agenda is used:
(a) No separate discussion or debate may be permitted on any
matter listed on the consent agenda.
(b) A single motion, seconded and adopted by a majority vote of all
members of the Council, shall be required to approve, adopt,
enact or otherwise favorably resolve all matters listed on the
consent agenda.
(c) Any Council member may request removal of any item or part
of an item included in the consent agenda. At the time the
consent agenda is considered, that item, as requested by the
Council member, shall be removed without debate or vote.
(d) If an item or any part of the item has been removed from the
consent agenda in accordance with this rule, the Council shall
consider that item at an appropriate time during the Council's
regular order of business.
N. Robert's Rules of Order to govern Council. In the absence of a standing
rule, the Council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly
Revised (11th ed.), unless contrary to state law. [Amended 5-7-2013
by Ord. No. 1110]
O. Suspension of rules. These rules or any part of them may be suspended
in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote
§ 38-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-3
1:59
§ 38-4. Council vacancy.
Except when § 9.10, Wis. Stats., applies, whenever a vacancy exists in the
office of Council member, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment by
the Council. At the Council meeting next following the vacancy, the Council
shall establish a date by which nominations to fill the vacancy shall be
submitted to the City Clerk. Nominations shall be restricted to electors of
the district represented by the Council member whose office is deemed
vacant. The dates by which such nominations shall be submitted and by
which the appointment shall be made shall be no sooner than 30 days after
the date of the vacancy and no later than 60 days after the vacancy. The
appointment to fill a vacancy on the Council shall be effective only until
a successor is elected and qualifies. A successor shall be elected for the
residue of the unexpired term on the first Tuesday of April next after the
vacancy happens, in case it happens no later than December 1 preceding
the first Tuesday in April, but if the vacancy happens after December 1
preceding the first Tuesday in April, but prior to the first Tuesday in April,
then the successor shall be elected on the first Tuesday in April of the next
ensuring year, but no election to fill a vacancy in such office may be held at
the time of holding the regular election for that office.
§ 38-5. Sponsorship of ordinances.
of a majority of all members of the Council. [Amended 3-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 1096]
P. Amending the rules. By a recorded vote of 2/3 of all the members of the
Council, these rules or any part of them may be amended.
Q. Length of regular Council meetings. After any regular meeting of the
Council has been convened for three hours, any member may bring a
motion to limit deliberations and debate to a total of 30 more minutes,
with any business not completed during the time remaining being
postponed to the next regular meeting of the Council, to be placed first
as business to be considered on that agenda. If such motion is made and
seconded, the motion may be considered even though another question
may be under consideration when the motion is made. If the motion
passes by a majority vote, then after 30 minutes of additional
deliberation or debate, motions to move the previous question, to table,
to postpone to a certain date, and to adjourn may be made and
considered in the order listed.
A. Unless specifically exempted in this section, all proposed ordinances
shall be sponsored by at least one member of the City Council prior to
the drafting of such proposed ordinance by the City Attorney.
B. Any member of the Council may sponsor any proposed ordinance
initiated by any citizen, any City official, or any board or commission,
but such sponsorship shall be obtained by the person or body seeking
sponsorship prior to the drafting of any proposed ordinance by the City
Attorney.
§ 38-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 38-5
1:60
§ 38-6. Referendum requirement.
Chapter 44
CITY MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 10.
City Council — See Ch. 38.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 153.
— See Ch.
C. All names of any Council members sponsoring a proposed ordinance
shall be included in the ordinance prior to its introduction to the
Council for consideration.
D. No Council member sponsoring a proposed ordinance may be
compelled to vote in favor of such ordinance simply because that
member has acted as its sponsor.
E. Ordinances for appropriation, annexation, codification, direct
legislation, zoning, and compliance with a state or federal mandate are
not required to receive sponsors prior to drafting by the City Attorney
or prior to their introduction to the Council.
A. Whenever the City Council contemplates the expenditure or borrowing
of any sum exceeding $500,000, and when that expenditure or
borrowing is for the purpose of constructing any building or addition to
any building, the City Council, by resolution, shall provide for a
referendum question on the approval or disapproval of the expenditure
or the borrowing.
B. Such referendum shall be held in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 67, Wis. Stats., if a referendum requirement exists within the
chapter for the building project in question.
C. If no such referendum is required under Chapter 67, Wis. Stats., then
the authority for requiring such referendum shall be this section, and
said referendum shall be held at the next spring or regular election, or
at a special election approved by a simple majority vote of the Council.
D. Any referendum required by this section shall be deemed by the Council
as advisory.
E. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the building construction project
provides essential public utility and public health services or if made
necessary by fire, flood or other calamity or if made necessary by state
or federal mandate, the provisions of this section are inapplicable.
§ 38-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1
1:61
§ 44-1. Appointment.
The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council.
§ 44-2. Powers and duties of Manager.
Chapter 59
ELECTIONS AND DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 10. City Council — See Ch. 38.
A. The City Manager shall have all executive and general administrative
powers of City government, and shall have all duties applicable to the
office as set forth in §§ 64.01 to 64.15, Wis. Stats.
B. The City Manager shall make appointments as set forth in § 10-3 of this
Code.
§ 44-1 LAKE MILLS CODE § 44-2
1:62
ARTICLE I
Registration and Voting
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Secs. 1-7-1, 1-7-3 and
1-7-4, of the 2009 Code of Ordinances]
§ 59-1. Voter registration. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Pursuant to the authority contained in § 6.27 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the
City hereby elects to require registration of electors. The Council further
elects to delegate control of the elector registration within the City to the
City Clerk.
§ 59-2. Election officials.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7.30, Wisconsin Statutes, the City
Clerk is authorized to select alternate officials, or two sets of officials, to
work at different times on election day. In the event the City Clerk elects to
select alternate officials or two sets of officials to work at different times on
election day, the additional officials shall be appointed in such a manner that
the total number of officials is an odd number and the predominant party
under the provisions of § 7.30(2), Wis. Stats., is represented by one more
official than the other party.
§ 59-3. Polling place.
A. Location of polls. The polling place for all official elections in the City of
Lake Mills, whether a general election, primary election or special
election, shall be located in the Community Center in the Lake Mills
Municipal Building, 200 Water Street.
B. The polling place shall be opened at 7:00 a.m. and closed at 8:00 p.m.
on election days; provided, however, that any voter awaiting his or her
turn to vote, whether within the polling booth or in the line outside the
booth at the time of the closing of the polls, shall be permitted to vote.
§ 59-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-3
1:63

ARTICLE II
Wards and District Boundaries
[Adopted 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 1083 (Sec. 1-7-2 of the 2009 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 59-4. Ward boundaries.
A. First Ward: Bounded to the north by northern property line between
Tyranena Park and Mulberry Street/County Highway "A." Bounded to
the west by Rock Lake, parcel 246-0713-0244-000, parcel
246-0713-0244-003 and parcel 246-0713-0243-008. Bounded to the
east by Mulberry Street and parcel 246-0713-0143-001. Bounded to the
south by Fremont Street from Rock Lake to Madison Street, West
Prospect Street from Madison Street to North Main Street, East
Prospect Street from North Main Street to Birch Street and East Grant
Street from Birch Street to Mulberry Street.
This shall be part of County Supervisory District #14.
B. Second Ward: Bounded to the north by East Lake Street from Main
Street to East Mills Drive and East Tyranena Park Road from Brewster
Drive to East Mills Drive. Bounded to the east by East Mills Drive and
Industrial Drive. Bounded to the south by American Way from South CP
Avenue to Industrial Drive, Jefferson Street and Rock Creek from Main
Street to Jefferson Street. Bounded to the west by South Main Street
and CP Avenue from Jefferson Street to American Way.
This shall be part of County Supervisory District #13.
C. Third Ward: Bounded to the north by Fremont Street from Lakeview
Avenue to Madison Street. Bounded to the east by Main Street from
Madison Street to Topel Street. Bounded to the south by Topel Street.
Bounded to the west by Rock Lake.
This shall be part of County Supervisory District #14.
D. Fourth Ward: Bounded to the north by Interstate Highway 94. Bounded
to the east by parcel 246-0714-0731-000, Brewster Drive from East
Tyranena Park Road to East Mills Drive and East Mills Drive from
Brewster Drive to East Lake Street. Bounded to the south by East Lake
Street from Madison Street to East Mills Drive. Bounded to the west by
Mulberry Street from Madison Street to Louise Street.
This shall be part of County Supervisory District #13.
E. Fifth Ward: Bounded to the north by Tyranena Park Road from Mulberry
Street to Owen Street. Bounded to the east by Owen Street from
Tyranena Park Road to Reed Street, Reed Street from Owen Street to
Louise Street. Bounded to the south by Louise Street and Washington
Street from Mulberry Street to Main Street. Bounded to the west by
Grant Street from Main Street to Mulberry Street and Mulberry Street
from Grant Street to Tyranena Park Road.
§ 59-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-4
1:65
§ 59-5. Council Districts. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1133]
The City shall be divided into two Council Districts, which shall consist of
the following wards:
§ 59-6. Map of wards.
The ward boundaries as described in § 59-4 and detailed on the map,
designated as "Exhibit A," are incorporated by reference. Said map shall be
and remain on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 59-7. Depiction of ward census blocks.
The census blocks that make up each ward are depicted in "Exhibit B."4
This shall be part of County Supervisory District #14.
F. Sixth Ward: Bounded to the north by Lake Street from Industrial Drive
to Harvey Road. Bounded to the east by Harvey Road. Bounded to the
south by southern portion of 246-0713-2441-000. Bounded to the west
by CP Avenue from Jefferson Street to southern end of parcel
246-0713-2411-000.
This shall be part of County Supervisory District #13.
G. Seventh Ward: Bounded to the north by Rock Creek from Main Street to
Jefferson Street and Jefferson Street. Bounded to the east by CP Avenue
from Jefferson Street to southern portion of parcel 246-0713-2441-000.
Bounded to the south by State Highway 89. Bounded to the west by
Main Street from Water Street to Topel Street.
This shall be part of County Supervisory District #13.
H. Eighth Ward: Bounded to the north by Prospect Street from Madison
Street to Birch Street. Bounded to the east by Birch Street from
Prospect Street to Grant Street, Main Street from Grant Street to
Washington Street and Washington Street from Main Street to
Mulberry Street. Bounded to the south by Mulberry Street from
Washington Street to Madison Street, Madison Street from Mulberry
Street to Lake Street and Lake Street from Main Street to Madison
Street. Bounded to the west by Main Street from Lake Street to
Madison Street, Madison Street from Main Street to Prospect Street.
This shall be part of County Supervisory District #14.
A. Council District 1: Ward 1, Ward 4, Ward 5, Ward 8.
B. Council District 2: Ward 2, Ward 3, Ward 6, Ward 7.
4. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 59-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 59-7
1:66
Chapter 64
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SERVICES
§ 64-1. Emergency Management Services Director.
The City Manager is hereby appointed to serve as the Director of
Emergency Management Services and shall have the power and duties as
set forth in § 323.15, Wis. Stats.
§ 64-2. Emergency management plan.
The Director of Emergency Management Services shall, in accordance with
§ 323.14(1)(b)1, Wis. Stats., develop an emergency management plan and
such plan shall be coordinated with the county's emergency management
plan.
§ 64-3. Cooperation with county. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
In consideration of the joint action provision of the Jefferson County
Emergency Government Ordinance, Section 7, the City hereby enters into
a joint action agreement with Jefferson County to provide for utilization
of existing services of the City in conjunction with efforts by the Office of
Emergency Management of Jefferson County.
Chapter 71
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 153.
A. In preparing and executing the emergency management plan, the
Director is authorized to utilize the services, equipment, supplies and
facilities of existing departments and agencies of the City to the
maximum extent practicable.
B. City officers and personnel of all City departments and agencies shall
cooperate with the Director and shall provide such services and
facilities as are requested.
C. The Director shall direct local management training programs and
exercises, direct participation in emergency management programs
and exercises ordered by the adjutant general and the county head of
emergency management services, and advise the county head of
emergency management programs in accordance with § 323.15(c)3,
Wis. Stats.
§ 59-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-3
1:67
§ 71-1. Purpose, intent, and applicability.
§ 71-2. Responsibility of public office.
Incumbents are agents of public purpose and hold their offices or have their
positions for the benefit of the public. As recipients of this public trust, they
are expected to conform their official acts to those that are consistent with
that trust. In so doing, they should strive always to:
A. The proper operation of democratic government requires that:
(1) Public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people;
(2) Government decisions and policies be made within proper channels
of the governmental structure;
(3) Public office not be used for personal gain;
(4) The public have confidence in the integrity of its government; and
(5) Guidance be provided to all City officials and employees on ethical
standards of conduct by stating those acts or omissions that would
be incompatible with the best interests of the City of Lake Mills or
that conflict with or are incompatible with the proper discharge of
duties and required independence of judgment.
B. This section applies to the following persons:
(1) Elected officials of the City;
(2) All appointed officers of the City;
(3) All members of City boards, committees, commissions,
subcommittees and ad hoc committees;
(4) All department directors and all employees; and
(5) Incumbents, which shall mean all persons included in Subsection
B(1), (2), (3) or (4), above.
A. Uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Wisconsin
Constitution, and carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and
city;
B. Discharge faithfully the duties of their office or position, regardless of
personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be
their prime concern;
C. Remain loyal to the objectives expressed by the electorate through
elected representatives, and to the programs developed to attain those
objectives;
§ 64-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 71-2
1:68
§ 71-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT or ACTION — Discussing, advising, recommending, or making either
mandatory or discretionary decisions in the context of one's office or
position, or in the context of performing one's duties or exercising one's
powers. For purposes of this chapter, an omission is an act.
ANYTHING OF VALUE — Any money or property, favor, service, payment,
advance, forbearance, loan, or promise of future employment, but does not
include compensation and expenses paid by the City, political contributions
which are reported as required under Ch. 11, Wis. Stats., or hospitality
extended for a purpose unrelated to City business by a person other than an
organization.
ASSOCIATED — When used with reference to an organization, includes
any organization in which an individual or a member of the individual's
immediate family is a director or officer or owns or controls, directly or
indirectly, and severally or in the aggregate, at least 5% of the outstanding
equity or indebtedness.
ECONOMIC INTEREST or FINANCIAL INTEREST — A business or cause in
which a person or that person's immediate family member has a concern,
responsibility, share, right or title in the ownership of property in a
commercial or financial undertaking which relates to the source,
production, distribution or use of the person's or immediate family
member's income, wealth or goods, including debts, or which affects or
is apt to affect the welfare or the material resources of the person or
immediate family member.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — An individual's spouse, a relative by marriage,
lineal descent or adoption who receives, directly or indirectly, 1/2 or more of
his or her support from the individual or from whom the individual receives,
directly or indirectly, 1/2 or more of the individual's support.
ORGANIZATION — Any public or private, profit or nonprofit, religious,
educational, charitable or political organization or entity, but does not
include governmental bodies.
PERSONAL INTEREST — Any interest greater than nominal, which is either
direct or indirect, arising from blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship or
from close business or other associations, such as political, fraternal, civic,
quasi-governmental or religious organizations, for which the incumbent
serves as an officer or director.
D. Exercise their authority in a manner consistent with the authority
lawfully entrusted to them, and without exceeding that authority or
breaching the law or asking others to do so;
E. Work in cooperation with other City officials and employees, unless
prohibited from so doing by law or by officially recognized
confidentiality of their work.
§ 71-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-4
1:69
§ 71-4. Standards of conduct.
A. Use of office or position. No incumbent may use or attempt to use his or
her position or office to obtain financial gain or anything of value or any
advantage, privilege or treatment for the private benefit of the
incumbent or the incumbent's immediate family, or for an organization
with which the incumbent or the incumbent's immediate family member
is associated. This subsection does not prohibit an incumbent from
using the title or prestige of office to obtain campaign contributions
that are permitted and reported as required by Ch. 11, Wis. Stats.
B. Influence and reward. No person or entity may offer or give to an
incumbent or member of an incumbent's immediate family, directly or
indirectly, and no incumbent may solicit or accept from any person or
entity, directly or indirectly, anything of value if it could reasonably be
expected to influence the incumbent's vote, official actions or judgment,
or if it could reasonably be considered as a reward for any official action
or inaction on the incumbent's part.
C. Limitations on actions. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection D,
no incumbent may:
(1) Take any official action affecting, directly or indirectly, a matter in
which the incumbent, or a member of the incumbent's immediate
family, or an organization with which the incumbent or a member of
the incumbent's immediate family is associated has a financial or
personal interest;
(2) Use the incumbent's office or position in a way that produces or
assists in the production of a benefit, direct or indirect, for the
incumbent, a member of the incumbent's immediate family either
separately or together, or an organization with which the
incumbent or the incumbent's immediate family member is
associated.
D. Subsection C, above, does not prohibit an incumbent from taking any
action concerning the lawful payment of salaries or employee benefits
or reimbursement of actual and necessary expenses, or prohibit an
incumbent from taking official action with respect to any proposal to
create, modify, or repeal a City ordinance, resolution or motion
benefiting or affecting the public and the incumbent in a like manner
and degree.
E. Privilege and advantage. No incumbent shall request or permit the use
of City-owned vehicles, equipment, materials, or property for personal
convenience or profit, or for that of another, except when the same are
available to the public generally or except as otherwise authorized in
employment policies or by the City Council. No incumbent may grant
any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond
that which is available to every other citizen.
§ 71-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 71-4
1:70
F. Outside employment. No incumbent may engage in or accept private
employment or render service for private interest, whether
compensated or uncompensated, when such employment or service is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or
would reasonably appear to impair his or her independence of judgment
or action in the performance of his or her official duties, unless
otherwise permitted to do so by law.
G. Disclosure of information. No incumbent may intentionally use or
disclose information gained in the course of or by reason of the
incumbent's official position or activities in a manner that could result
in the receipt of anything of value for the incumbent, for a member of
the incumbent's immediate family, or for any other person or entity if
the information has not been communicated to the public or is not a
public record.
H. Contracts or leases. No incumbent, member of an incumbent's
immediate family, nor any organization in which the incumbent or a
member of the incumbent's immediate family owns or controls at least
5% of the outstanding equity or indebtedness or voting rights, may
enter into any contract or lease involving a payment or payments of
more than $3,000 within a twelve-month period, in whole or in part
derived from funds administered by the City, unless the incumbent has
first made written disclosure of the nature and extent of such
relationship or interest to the City Council and to the department acting
for the City in regard to such contract or lease.
(1) Any contract or lease entered into in violation of this provision may
be voided by the City in an action commenced within three years of
the date on which the City Council, or the department or incumbent
acting for the City in regard to the allocation of funds from which
such payment is derived, knew or should have known that a
violation of this subsection had occurred.
(2) Nothing in this provision affects the application of criminal
penalties under § 946.13, Wis. Stats., as it exists or as it may be
amended in the future, relating to an incumbent's activity
concerning a direct or indirect financial interest in a City contract.
I. Receipt of anything of value. No incumbent may receive and retain any
transportation, meals, entertainment, fee, food, beverage, or
reimbursement therefore, nor any honoraria, service fee, gift, loan or
contract payment or anything of value except in accord with the
following:
(1) During his or her service to or employment with the City, no
incumbent shall receive and retain anything of value unless the
activity or occasion for which it is given did not arise from the
incumbent's use of the City's time, facilities, equipment, services or
supplies not generally available to all residents of the City, or
unless the thing of value was given for purposes unrelated to the
§ 71-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-4
1:71
incumbent's service or employment with the City and unrelated to
any legislation, policies, business or issues being or having been
considered by or affecting the City.
(2) During his or her service to or employment with the City, no
incumbent shall receive and retain from the City or on behalf of the
City any transportation, lodging, meals, food or beverage, or
reimbursement therefore unless the same were incurred or
received primarily for the benefit of the City and not primarily for
his or her private benefit or that of any other person.
(3) During his or her service to or employment with the City, no
incumbent shall receive and retain honoraria such as money or
anything of value other than commemorative or other items of
nominal value for or in recognition of activities related to or arising
from their City roles or positions. Such persons may accept and
retain from persons or entities other than the City the cost or
reimbursement of actual and reasonable expenses related to such
activities, whether or not such activities arise form their City roles
or positions, except that elected officials may not receive and retain
any such payments from a lobbyist or from a business or
organization or local government that employs a lobbyist.
(4) When incumbents perform or provide services for persons or
entities other than the City, and said services arise from the
incumbents' City employment, and the compensation and expenses
related thereto are paid for or reimbursed by the City, all monies
received by the incumbent from other persons or entities for those
services shall be paid promptly to the City Treasurer. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
(5) Elected officials may receive and retain from a political committee
under Ch. 11, Wis. Stats., transportation, lodging, meals, food or
beverages, or reimbursement thereof or payment or
reimbursements of costs permitted and reported in accordance
with Ch. 11, Wis. Stats.
(6) If an incumbent receives anything of value not authorized by this
section, the incumbent shall not retain it but shall within 10 days of
receipt thereof deposit the money or the equivalent cash value of
anything of value with the City Treasurer or return the payment or
thing to the payer or giver. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No.
1103]
(7) If the receipt of anything of value is permitted under this
Subsection I, whenever an incumbent receives anything of value
from, or has any fee or expense waived or reduced by, a person or
entity other than the City in connection with the incumbent's
official duties, the incumbent shall, within 10 days of the
occurrence, file a written report of such receipt with the City Clerk.
[Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
§ 71-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 71-4
1:72
J. Fair and equal treatment.
(1) No person shall receive preferential treatment in the selection
process or be appointed to or hired for or promoted in a City
position nor be denied appointment, employment or promotion
solely because that person is a member of an incumbent's family.
(2) No incumbent shall use his or her position to bring about the
appointment, employment or promotion of a member of the
incumbent's family.
(3) No member of an incumbent's family may be hired, appointed or
promoted, except through a competitive application or evaluation
process that shall not include any participation or influence by any
incumbent.
(4) No incumbent shall participate in any final decision in any
employment matter involving an employee who is a member of the
incumbent's family. For purposes of this subsection only, "final
decision" means any supervision, evaluation of performance,
training, establishment of compensation or benefit level, approval
of vacation or other leave requests, approval of any temporary or
permanent assignment or transfer affecting the employee either
directly or indirectly, recommendation or approval of any level of
funding directly or indirectly affecting the employee's employment
status, or any other similar decision.
(5) For the purposes of this subsection only, "family" means the
incumbent's spouse, child by blood or adoption, spouse's child,
sibling, parent, parent-in-law, brother- or sister-in-law, uncle, aunt,
niece, nephew, or the spouse thereof, grandparent or grandparentin-
law, or fiancé or fiancée.
K. Logrolling prohibited; freedom of debate.
(1) No member of the Council shall give, offer, or promise to give his or
her vote or influence in favor of or against any measure or
proposition pending or proposed to be introduced to the Council, in
consideration of or upon condition that any other person elected to
the Council will give or will promise or agree to give his or her vote
or influence in favor of or against any other measure or proposition
pending or proposed to be introduced to the Council or shall give,
offer or promise to give his or her vote or influence in favor of any
change in any other matter pending or proposed to be introduced
to the Council.
(2) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as prohibiting free
discussion and deliberation upon any question pending before the
Council by members thereof, nor as prohibiting agreements by
members to support any single measure pending, on condition that
certain changes are made in such measure.
§ 71-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-4
1:73
§ 71-5. Disclosure of interests.
(3) Whenever the word "Council" appears in this subsection, it is to be
construed to also include members of any board, committee,
commission, subcommittee or ad hoc committee.
L. No incumbent or candidate for elective office may, directly or by means
of an agent, give or offer or promise to give, or withhold, or offer or
promise to withhold, his or her vote or influence, or promise to take or
refrain from taking official action with respect to any proposed or
pending matter in consideration of, or upon condition that, any other
person make or refrain from making a political contribution, or provide
or refrain from providing any service or other thing of value, to or for
the benefit of a candidate, a political party, any person who is subject to
a registration requirement under Wis. Stat. § 11.05, or any person
making a communication that contains a reference to a clearly
identified local public official holding an elective office or to a candidate
for local public office.
A. Definitions. The following definitions apply in this subsection relating to
disclosure of interests:
APPOINTED OFFICIAL — Any officer of the City of Lake Mills
appointed pursuant to § 10-3 of the Municipal Code, and shall also
include all City of Lake Mills Department Heads, but shall exclude
election officials and board, commission and committee members.
CANDIDATE FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE OF THE CITY OF LAKE MILLS —
Any person who files nomination papers and a declaration under § 8.10,
Wis. Stats., for the purpose of appearing on the ballot for election to an
office of the City of Lake Mills or any person nominated for a City office
in an election through the write-in process and who files a declaration
pursuant to § 8.10, Wis. Stats.
ELECTED OFFICIAL — All officers of the City of Lake Mills established
pursuant to the provisions of § 64.04, Wis. Stats., or its authority, who
are elected by the voters.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Has the same meaning at defined in § 71-3.
STATEMENT OF INTERESTS — The factual statement filed pursuant to
the provisions of this subsection and which contains the information set
forth in section.
B. Disclosure of interests, by whom required: The following shall file a
statement of interests as provided in this section:
(1) Elected and appointed officials, except for board, commission and
committee members and election officials;
(2) Candidates for elective office of the City of Lake Mills.
C. Statement of interests, when to file.
§ 71-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 71-5
1:74
(1) All persons who file nomination papers for an elective office of the
City of Lake Mills shall at the time of filing of such nomination
papers also file a statement of interests with the City Clerk.
(2) The Clerk shall omit the name of any candidate from an election
ballot who fails to disclose her or his interests in accordance with
the requirement of this section.
(3) The Clerk shall notify by certified mail any candidate whose name
is to be omitted from a ballot as soon as practicable after the
decision is made to omit the name.
(4) Employees who are appointed to their positions subject to
conformation by the City Council shall file the statement with the
City Clerk at least 10 business days before their appointments are
submitted to the City Council for confirmation.
(5) All other appointed officials who are required to file the statement
shall file the statement with the City Clerk within 10 business days
after they begin work as City-appointed officials.
D. Annual filing. Each person required to file the statement shall annually
file an updated statement with the Clerk no later than the first Tuesday
in January of each year, except that this provision shall not apply to
candidates for elected office who have filed the statement with their
nomination papers pursuant to Subsection C of this section.
E. Amending the statement of interests.
(1) If, after filing the statement, the filer becomes aware of errors or
omissions in the original statement, she or he, as soon as possible,
shall attach an amendment to her or his original statement to
reflect accurately the required disclosures.
(2) If, after filing the annual statement, any elected official or
department or division head or other person required to annually
file a statement, becomes aware of any change in the information
contained in her or his current statement, she or he shall amend, as
soon as possible, her or his statement to reflect accurately the
change.
F. Any amendment to the statement which is filed after the filing of a
complaint against the person required to file shall not be a defense to
the complaint, but the Ethics Board may, in its discretion, consider the
amendment as mitigating circumstances.
G. Form of statement. The person filing any statement of interests
required under this section shall file such statement on the form
approved by the Ethics Board and provided by the City Clerk, and shall
supply the following information:
(1) The name and address of the filer and the City office held or sought
or the position of City employment.
§ 71-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-5
1:75
§ 71-6. Disclosure and disqualification due to conflict of interest.
(2) The name and address of all employers and positions of
employment held as of the date the statement is filed.
(3) The identity of every organization of which she or he or any adult
member of her or his immediate family is an officer or director and
the identity of every organization of which she or he or any member
of her or his immediate family owns or controls, directly or
indirectly, severally or in the aggregate, at least 5% of the
outstanding equity; provided, however, that membership only in an
organization need not be disclosed. [Amended 11-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 1136A]
(4) The identity of all real estate within the City of Lake Mills, or within
Jefferson County, other than primary or principal residence, in
which the person filing or any member of her or his immediate
family has a direct or indirect interest, and the identity of any
person or entity owning or controlling any real estate within the
City of Lake Mills, or within Jefferson County, in which the person
filing or any member of her or his immediate family has a direct or
indirect interest. [Amended 11-4-2014 by Ord. No. 1136A]
H. The Clerk shall send statement of interests forms to known filers at
least 45 days before the filing deadline and a filing reminder to all City
department heads at least 15 days before the filing deadline. The Clerk
shall notify any person who fails to timely file the required statement of
interests. The Clerk shall note the name of any person who has not filed
the statement within 10 days of the mailing of the Clerk's notice. The
Clerk shall withhold the compensation of any such person until the
statement is filed. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
A. Any incumbent who has or whose immediate family member has a
financial or personal interest in a matter coming before the City Council
or City Officer, or any board, committee, commission, subcommittee or
ad hoc committee, and who participates in discussion or
recommendation, or who gives an official opinion to such body, shall
disclose on the records of such body the nature and extent of such
interest. This provision requiring disclosure of interests shall not apply
if the incumbent disqualifies herself or himself from participating in
discussion of the matter and from otherwise taking action on the
matter.
B. Any incumbent shall disqualify herself or himself from discussing and
voting, or from taking any official action in a matter under
consideration by the City if such matter involves the incumbent's or the
incumbent's immediate family member's financial or personal interests
to the extent that such interests conflict or appear to conflict with the
incumbent's official duties or would impair or reasonably be expected to
impair the incumbent's independence of judgment or actions.
§ 71-5 LAKE MILLS CODE § 71-6
1:76
C. In the event that an incumbent is required to disqualify him or herself
from participating on a matter that comes for official action before the
City, or in the event that the incumbent voluntarily disqualifies himself
or herself, the incumbent shall perform the following duties of
disqualification:
(1) If the incumbent is a member of the City Council, the incumbent is
not required to disclose in writing the reasons for disqualification,
but the incumbent shall not participate in formal or informal
discussion of the item from which he or she has disqualified himself
or herself from action. Such disqualification from acting applies
equally to discussions both before and at the meeting at which the
item is to be considered. At such meeting, the incumbent shall
remove himself or herself temporarily from his or her seat on the
Council when the item comes before such body, and shall take a
seat in the audience or exit the meeting. The minutes of the
meeting shall reflect this temporary disqualification of the
incumbent from the Council, but no reason needs to be given
directly to the Council or the public for such temporary
disqualification, unless the incumbent chooses to voluntarily state
his or her reasons for disqualifying him or herself from
participating in an item before the Council.
(2) If the incumbent is a member of the City Council, and if the
incumbent is absent from the meeting at which the incumbent
would have otherwise disqualified himself or herself, the incumbent
shall notify the City Clerk in advance of the meeting of such
absence and such disqualification, and the notice of disqualification
shall then be made a part of the minutes of the Council meeting.
Failure to so notify the Clerk shall be considered a violation of this
section.
(3) If the incumbent is the City Manager, the incumbent shall disclose
in writing the reasons for his or her disqualification to the City
Attorney and Council President, who will then decide whether they
will act jointly in the City Manager's stead in discharging any duties
from which the City Manager has disqualified himself or herself, or
whether they will bring the matter to the Council in closed session,
if appropriate, for the purpose of substituting the Council's action
in the City Manager's stead in discharging the duties from which
the City Manager has disqualified himself or herself under this
section.
(4) If the incumbent is a Department Director, the incumbent shall
disclose in writing the reasons for disqualification to the City
Manager and the City Attorney. The City Manager shall then act in
the Director's stead in discharging duties for which the Director
has disqualified himself or herself under this section, and the City
Manager may delegate the actual decision or action to a
subordinate of that Director, if warranted, in the case of
disqualification by the Police Chief or Fire Chief.
§ 71-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-6
1:77
(5) If the incumbent is an employee under the supervision of a
Department Director, the incumbent shall disclose in writing the
reasons for disqualification to the Department Director and the
City Attorney. The Department Director shall then act in the
employee's stead in discharging duties for which the employee has
disqualified himself or herself under this section.
(6) If the incumbent is the City Attorney, the incumbent shall follow the
requirements of the Supreme Court Rules that pertain to conflicts
of interest, disclosure and disqualification, and if the incumbent
requires guidance with regard to options to pursue under these
rules, the incumbent may seek an ethics opinion of the standing
ethics board of the Wisconsin State Bar.
(a) In addition, if the procedures would not otherwise conflict with
the Supreme Court Rules or Ethics Opinion, the City Attorney
shall develop standardized procedures for obtaining outside
counsel or prosecutors to act in the City Attorney's stead and
such persons shall be funded from the City Attorney's budget
out of monies allocated for professional services.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Attorney is authorized
to seek outside legal opinions or consultation, when in the City
Attorney's professional opinion, such opinions or consultations
are warranted, and the fees for such services shall likewise be
funded from the City Attorney's budget out of monies allocated
for professional services.
(c) Finally, if outside legal assistance is required due to the
specialized area of law or long-term assistance necessary to
meet the needs of the City, the City Attorney is authorized to
seek an appointment by the Council of a special counsel to
represent the City in the limited matter to which the
appointment specifically pertains. Funding sources for such
special counsel shall be determined by the Council at the time
of any appointment.
(7) If the incumbent is a member of a City board, committee,
commission, subcommittee or ad hoc committee, the incumbent is
not required to disclose in writing the reasons for disqualification,
but the incumbent shall not participate either prior to or at the
meeting in formal or informal discussion of the item from which he
or she has disqualified himself or herself from action, and the
incumbent shall remove himself or herself temporarily from his or
her seat on the Board, committee, commission, subcommittee or ad
hoc committee when the item comes before such body. The
incumbent shall take a seat in the audience or exit the meeting
room during discussion of the item from which the incumbent has
disqualified himself or herself. The minutes of that meeting shall
reflect this temporary disqualification of the incumbent from the
§ 71-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 71-6
1:78
§ 71-7. Effect of disqualification on voting requirements.
body, but no reason needs to be given directly to the body or the
public for such temporary disqualification.
(8) If the incumbent is a member of a City board, committee,
commission, subcommittee or ad hoc committee, and if the
incumbent is absent during the meeting at which he or she would
have otherwise been required to temporarily disqualify himself or
herself from action on an item, the Chair or President or presiding
officer of the body shall be notified in writing prior to the meeting
that the incumbent, although absent from the meeting, is
disqualifying himself or herself from all discussion and action on
the particular item. This notification shall be made part of the
minutes of that meeting. Failure to so notify the appropriate person
of the disqualification, despite the member's absence, shall be
considered a violation of this section.
A. If an incumbent may not cast a vote due to a conflict of interest, and if
the incumbent has disqualified himself or herself from the vote, the lack
of vote by the incumbent shall be recorded as an abstention, and such
vote shall not be counted for determining: (1) the number of "members
present" if passage of that measure requires a favorable vote by a
majority or other fractional vote (i.e., 2/3 or 3/4) of the members
"present"; or (2) the presence of a quorum for purposes of that
particular vote.
B. If the vote requires that all members of the body be counted for
purposes of determining whether a majority of all the members voted,
as opposed to whether a majority of the members "present" voted, the
disqualified member's disqualification shall not be counted as a portion
of the total number of members for purposes of determining: (1)
whether a majority were present for quorum reasons for that vote; or
(2) whether a favorable vote was cast by a majority of the members or
other required fractional number of the total members.
C. By way of example, under Subsection A, if a body has five members and
a 2/3 vote of the members present is required, and one member is
absent and one member is disqualified and the vote is two in favor and
one against a measure, the disqualified person's lack of vote will not be
counted among the number of members "present," so the resulting vote
will be recorded as 2-1 and the measure will pass because a 2/3 vote of
the members present had voted in favor of the measure.
D. By way of example, under Subsection B, if a body has five members, but
one vacancy exists and only four members may then be present to vote
on any measure before the body until the vacancy is filled, the total
number of all members is still considered to be five. If one member is
disqualified and a simple majority vote is required for the measure to
pass, the majority of all members required for the vote to pass would be
three votes in favor. The three voting members at the meeting cast a
§ 71-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-7
1:79
§ 71-8. Ethics Board.
vote of 2-1. Under this scenario, only two members voted in favor of
the measure, but since three were needed, the measure fails. If, under
Subsection B, a body has five members, but one member is disqualified
from voting due to a conflict of interest, and a 2/3 or 3/4 vote is
required of all members, that disqualified member is not counted for
the purpose of determining if the required number of votes were cast
for the measure to pass.
E. Notwithstanding the foregoing subsections, if the effect of the
disqualification on the official duties is so pervasive and so permanent
in nature that a reasonable person would believe that a de facto
vacancy exists in the office or position, the incumbent is encouraged to
remove the source of the ongoing disqualification or resign.
A. The Ethics Board of the City of Lake Mills is hereby abolished and recreated.
The newly created Ethics Board shall consist of five members
who shall serve without compensation from the City.
B. All members of the Ethics Board shall be at least 18 years of age, be
residents of the City, and during their terms on the Ethics Board, no
member may hold any elective office in, be employed by, or be a
contracted, appointed official with the City of Lake Mills.
C. Each member of the Ethics Board shall have experience with the types
of situations presented when applying an ethics code to specific facts.
To satisfy the need for specialized experience, each applicant for
consideration for appointment to the Ethics Board shall meet one or
more of the following qualifications:
(1) Currently serving, or have in the past served, in an elective or
appointive office in a governmental entity;
(2) Currently are or have been employed by a governmental entity and
have been subject to similar ethics codes in such employment;
(3) Currently are licensed to practice law in the State of Wisconsin; or
(4) Possesses qualifications and experience similar to those listed in
this subsection.
D. The members of the Ethics Board shall be appointed by the Council
President to three-year terms, commencing on May 1 in the year of
appointment, subject to confirmation by the Council, except that of
those first appointed, two of the members shall be appointed for one
year, two members shall be appointed for two years, and the remaining
member shall be appointed for three years.
E. The members of the Ethics Board shall take and file an oath of office
prior to entering into their duties.
§ 71-7 LAKE MILLS CODE § 71-8
1:80
§ 71-9. Advisory opinions.
F. The Ethics Board shall elect its own Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary and
shall develop written rules of procedure to be submitted to the Council
for approval.
G. The Ethics Board shall have the powers and duties as set forth in
§ 19.59(5)(a) and (b), Wis. Stats., and its duties also include making
recommendations to the City Council for further action as appropriate.
H. The Ethics Board shall meet when it has business to conduct and it may
adjourn its meetings from time to time.
I. The Ethics Board may make recommendations with respect to
amendments to the Code of Ethics of the Lake Mills Municipal Code.
J. The City Attorney shall furnish the Board whatever legal assistance is
necessary in the carrying out of its functions.
K. The reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the Board may be
compensated if such expenses are approved by the City Council
through either a previously adopted budget or special action of the
Council.
A. When an incumbent has doubts as to the applicability of a provision of
this section to a particular situation in which he or she is or may
become involved, or definitions of terms used in the code, the
incumbent should apply in writing to the Ethics Board for an advisory
opinion and be guided by that opinion when given. The requester of an
ethics opinion shall include in such a request all pertinent information
regarding his or her interpretation of the facts at issue and of the
applicable provision(s) of the code before such advisory opinion may be
issued. It is prima facie evidence of intent to comply with this section
when a person refers a matter to the Ethics Board and abides by the
advisory opinion, if the material facts are as stated in the opinion
request.
B. When a request for an advisory opinion is made, the name of the
requester and the nature of the request may, at the requester's option,
be kept confidential. When confidentiality is requested, the Board shall
hear and determine the request in closed session. The agenda for the
meeting shall identify the session as a closed session to hear a request
for a confidential opinion pursuant to this section and § 19.59, Wis.
Stats.
C. When confidentiality is requested, the report of the Board shall also be
kept confidential, but the Board shall prepare a redacted summary of
the report as a public document; however, if the requester requests in
writing that the full report be made public, the entire opinion or report
shall become a part of the public record.
§ 71-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-9
1:81
§ 71-10. Complaints.
D. If the requester makes public any portion of the opinion or report, all
confidentiality is waived by the requester and the Board shall release
the full report with the redacted portions restored.
E. If the Ethics Board cannot meet in a timely manner, and a request for an
ethics advisory opinion has been submitted, the City Attorney may act
to provide such advisory opinion as if the City Attorney has the powers
and duties of the Ethics Board in this section. In addition, the City
Attorney shall provide a report in writing to the Ethics Board of the fact
that such request was made and if the requester has requested that the
request for the advisory opinion remain confidential, the City Attorney
shall nonetheless provide all information contained in the request and
the advisory opinion to the Board so that the Board may have such
information for the Board's records and use in accordance with this
section, as if the Board had actually met and provided the advisory
opinion.
A. Any resident of the City may complain to the Ethics Board about the
activity of any person or entity covered by the Code of Ethics in the
Lake Mills Municipal Code, pursuant to the rules and procedures of the
Ethics Board, which have been approved by the City Council. If a
complaint is brought under this section against any member of the
Ethics Board, the City Council shall hear the complaint, acting as the
Ethics Board, and following the same rules, procedures and precedents
of the Ethics Board.
B. The Ethics Board will charge the total costs of its proceedings to the
person bringing a complaint, if the Ethics Board determines that the
complaint was without merit, was frivolous in nature, or was brought
for the purpose of harassing the subject of the complaint.
C. The Ethics Board, or City Council when acting as the Ethics Board, may
issue subpoenas and administer oaths.
D. No action may be taken on any complaint which is filed later than 12
months after a violation of this Ethics Code is alleged to have occurred.
E. If the Ethics Board cannot act due to a lack of quorum or any reason
other than when a complaint is brought against a member of the Ethics
Board and the City Council is acting in its place, then complaints may
be submitted to the City Attorney, and if upon investigation, the City
Attorney finds probable cause to believe that the conduct that is the
subject of the complaint is in violation of the this chapter, the City
Attorney shall forward said complaint and any investigative materials to
the District Attorney for prosecution under Wis. Stats. § 19.59(8). If the
District Attorney fails to commence an action under § 19.59(8)(c) within
30 days after receiving a verified complaint forwarded under this
section from the City Attorney, or if the District Attorney refuses to
commence such action, the person who originally submitted the
§ 71-9 LAKE MILLS CODE § 71-10
1:82
§ 71-11. Sanctions.
Violation of any provision of this Ethics Code should raise conscientious
questions for the incumbent concerned as to whether voluntary resignation
or other action is indicated to promote the best interests of the City of Lake
Mills. If the Ethics Board determines that any person or entity has violated
any provision of this code, the Board may, as part of its report to the Council,
make any of the following recommendations:
§ 71-12. Other responsibilities of public office.
Nothing in this chapter supersedes or limits the responsibilities of public
officials and employees to be aware of and to abide by the other laws
affecting their conduct as public officials or employees. These other laws,
include, but are not limited to, §§ 19.59 and 946.10 through 946.18, Wis.
Stats., which apply to various violations for conflict of interest, bribery,
misconduct in public office, corrupt means to influence official actions, and
private interests in public contracts.
Chapter 80
FEES, MUNICIPAL
complaint to the City Attorney under this subsection may petition the
attorney general to act upon the complaint in accordance with
§ 19.59(8)(c).
A. In the case of an elected official, that the City Council consider
sanctioning, censuring or expelling the elected official;
B. In the case of a member of a board, committee or commission, that the
City Manager, City Council President, or other appointing authority
consider removing the member from the Board, committee or
commission;
C. In the case of an employee, that the employee's appointing authority
consider disciplining or discharging the employee;
D. In addition to the sanctions imposed herein, that any person or entity
violating § 71-4C(2) of this Ethics Code not be awarded any City
contract, grant, loan or any other thing of values for a period of 12
months from the date of the finding of a violation or that any such
contract, grant, loan or things of value be terminated, repaid, forfeited
or called in;
E. As an alternative, or in addition to the sanctions imposed herein, that
any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
nonreimbursable forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000
per violation in an action brought by the City. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 71-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-12
1:83

ARTICLE I
Annexation Review Fees
[Adopted 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103 (Sec. 1-9-9 of the 2009 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 80-1. Establishment of fees.
The City Council shall from time to time establish review fees to be charged
upon filing annexation petitions. Said fees shall be set forth in a resolution
filed with the City Clerk.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-1
1:85

ARTICLE II
Records Fees
[Adopted 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103 (Sec. 1-9-7I(1) of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 80-2. Charging fees for copies of public records or papers.
The Clerk is authorized and directed to charge a fee as directed by the
City Manager per copy for duplicating and furnishing copies of any public
records or papers. No copies of any nature shall be mailed to any requestor
unless prior arrangements are made with the Clerk for the payment of
postage and the prepayment of copying costs, if such costs exceed $5.
§ 80-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-2
1:87

ARTICLE III
Duplicate Tax Bill or Statement of Real Property Status Fees
[Adopted 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103 (Sec. 1-9-7I(2) and (3) of the
2009 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 80-3. Fee for duplicate tax bills.
The Clerk is authorized and directed to charge $1 for each duplicate real
estate tax bill that is requested by any person other than the owner of
the property in question. No copies of any nature shall be mailed to any
applicant unless prior arrangements are made with the Clerk for the
payment of postage.
§ 80-4. Preparation of status statements; fee.
The Clerk is authorized and directed to prepare a "Statement of Real
Property Status" from which shall include such information as is normally
sought by interested parties when ownership of real property is transferred.
The form may include, but not necessarily be limited to, the amount in
assessment, outstanding water bills, latest water bill, contemplated
improvements, floodplain status and violations of the building and health
codes. The Clerk is authorized and directed to charge $5 for each
"Statement of Real Property Status" requested. No copies of any nature
shall be mailed to any applicant unless prior arrangements are made with
the Clerk for the payment of postage.
§ 80-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-4
1:89

ARTICLE IV
Administrative Penalties for Reinspections
[Adopted 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 1061A (Sec. 1-12-1 of the 2009 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 80-5. Reinspection fees; liens; waivers; appeals.
If reinspection fees are issued in response to noncompliance with a
correction order issued under either § 402-7 or 479-8 of the Lake Mills
Municipal Code, such fees shall be charged against the real estate upon
which the reinspections were made, shall be a lien upon the real estate
and shall be assessed and collected as a special charge. If there has been a
change of ownership or occupancy after the City issues a correction order,
the reinspection fee may be waived if it is determined that the new owner
or occupant was not aware of the prior order to correct a violation or
condition. Correction orders may be appealed under § 16-1 of the Lake Mills
Municipal Code, and while any such appeal is pending, the collection and
imposition of further reinspection fees shall be stayed.
§ 80-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:91
Chapter 89
FINANCE AND TAXATION
§ 80-5 LAKE MILLS CODE § 80-5
1:92
ARTICLE I
City Budget, Claims and Expenditures
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Secs. 1-9-1 through 1-9-6
of the 2009 Code of Ordinances]
§ 89-1. Fiscal year.
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year.
§ 89-2. Tax roll; receipts. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
§ 89-3. Claims against City.
A. Aggregate tax stated on roll. Pursuant to § 70.65(2), Wis. Stats., the
Clerk shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate amount
of state, county, school and local taxes in a single column in the roll
opposite the parcel or tract of land against which the tax is levied, or, in
the case of personal property, in a single column opposite the name of
the person against whom the tax is levied.
B. Personal property taxes not paid when due shall accrue interest at a
rate of 1% per month from the date due until the date paid. Said
interest shall accrue on any unpaid balance of the personal property
taxes not paid when due.
A. Claims to be certified.
(1) Claims to be presented to the City, excepting claims which are
subject to § 893.80, Wis. Stats., may be paid by the City Clerk,
provided the City Manager first audits and approves each claim as
a proper charge against the treasury and endorses his or her
approval on the claim, and provided further that the City Manager
has determined that the following conditions have been complied
with:
(a) That funds are available therefor pursuant to the budget
approved by the City Council;
(b) That the item or service covered by the claim has been duly
authorized by the proper official, department head or board or
commission;
(c) That the item or service has been actually supplied or rendered
in conformity with such authorization; and
(d) That the claim is just and valid.
(2) The City Manager may require the submission of such proof and
evidence to support the claim presented to the City as may be
deemed appropriate under the circumstances. The City Manager
may designate the City Clerk to perform any of the duties required
of him or her by this subsection.
§ 89-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-3
1:93
§ 89-4. Budget.
B. Council review. The Clerk shall file with the City Council not less than
monthly a list of the claims approved and paid pursuant to Subsection A
of this section showing the date paid, the name of the claimant, the
purpose of the claim and the amount paid. The Council may act on any
claim which has been presented to the City, but which has not been paid
pursuant to the procedures set forth in Subsection A of this section.
Annually, the City Council shall authorize an annual detailed audit of its
financial transactions and accounts by a public accountant licensed
under Chapter 442, Wis. Stats. No action need be taken by the City
Council on any items presented to the City except those items which
have not been paid pursuant to this section. [Amended 12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 1103]
C. Payment of regular wages or salaries. Regular wages or salaries of the
City officers and employees shall be paid by payroll, certified by the
proper City official, department head or commission and filed with the
City Clerk in time for payment of the regular payday.
A. Format. Effective fiscal year 1995, the City will adopt and utilize a
modified program budget system.
B. Budget programs. The basic programs established under the program
budget system are as shown below; however, the City Council retains
the authority to create additional programs from time to time at their
discretion.
(1) Legislative program.
(2) Administration program.
(3) Treasurer program. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(4) Police Department program.
(5) Fire Department program.
(6) Library program.
(7) Parks/forestry program.
(8) Public works program.
C. Program directors. Each program identified in Subsection B, above, will
have a designated program director. Whenever possible, the program
director will be the department director. The City Manager will
designate the program director by name and position.
D. Subprograms assigned. The City Manager will determine which
subprograms are assigned to a specific program.
§ 89-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 89-4
1:94
E. Subdivision of accounts. Each program identified in Subsection B,
above, and all subprograms, will be subdivided into accounts as follows:
(1) Personnel account.
(2) Operations account.
(3) Capital expenditure account.
(4) Investment account.
F. Department estimates. On or before August 1 of each year, each
program director, officer, department or board shall file with the
Treasurer an itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out
the powers and duties of such officer or department during the
preceding fiscal year, and a detailed statement of the receipts and
disbursements on account of any special fund under the supervision of
such officer or department during such year, and of the condition and
management of such fund; also detailed estimates of the same matters
for the current fiscal year and for the ensuing five fiscal years. Such
statement shall be presented in the form prescribed by the Treasurer
and shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main divisions of all
departments. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
G. City Manager to consider estimates. The City Manager shall consider
such departmental estimates in consultation with the department head,
and shall then determine the total amount to be recommended in the
budget for such department or activity for the ensuing fiscal year and
four subsequent fiscal years.
H. Contents of budget. On or before October 1 of each year, the City
Manager shall prepare and submit to the Council a proposed budget
presenting a financial plan for conducting the affairs of the City for the
ensuing five calendar years.
(1) The budget shall include the following information:
(a) The expense of conducting each department and activity of the
City for the ensuing five fiscal years and corresponding items
for the current year and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons
for increases and decreases recommended as compared with
appropriations for the current year.
(b) An itemization of all anticipated income of the City from
sources other than general property taxes and bonds issued for
the ensuing five fiscal years, with a comparative statement of
the amounts received by the City from each of the same or
similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal years.
(c) An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general
property taxes, which, with income from other sources, will be
§ 89-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-4
1:95
§ 89-5. Appropriations; transfers.
§ 89-6. Expenditure of City funds.
No money shall be drawn from the Treasury of the City, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance
of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as
authorized in § 89-5 of this article. At the close of each fiscal year, any
unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general
fund and shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be
made by the Council, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in
furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be
completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in
force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished
or abandoned.
necessary to meet the proposed expenditures for the ensuing
fiscal years.
(d) Such other information as may be required by the Council and
by state law.
(2) The Council shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the
budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens.
I. Hearing. The City Manager shall submit to the Council at the time the
annual budget is submitted, the draft of an appropriation ordinance
providing for the expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal year.
Upon the submission of the proposed appropriation ordinance, the
Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget and the proposed
appropriation ordinance for the ensuing fiscal year as required by law.
Following the public hearing, the proposed appropriation ordinance
may be changed or amended and shall take the same course in the
Council as other ordinances.
A. With the exception of the operations account, upon written
recommendation of the City Manager or by unilateral City Council
action, the City Council may at any time, by a 2/3 vote of the entire
membership, transfer any portion of any unencumbered balance of any
appropriation to any other purpose or object. Notice of such transfer
shall be given by publication within eight days thereafter in the official
City newspaper.
B. Program directors, as identified in § 89-4B (except library), are
authorized to transfer any unencumbered balance from any subaccount
in the operations account to any other subaccount within the operations
account.
C. Library. Upon passage of the allocation ordinance by the City Council,
all library monies will be allocated to the library fund. Expenditures
from this fund will be in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 43.58.
§ 89-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 89-6
1:96
ARTICLE II
Assessments for City Services; Petition for Review
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 1, Ch. 10, Secs.
1-10-1 and 1-10-3 through 1-10-7, of the 2009 Code of Ordinances]
§ 89-7. Authority.
This article was enacted pursuant to §§ 62.11(5) and 66.0627 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 89-8. Procedure.
The City Treasurer shall, on October 15 of each year, give written notice
to the owner or occupant of each parcel or lot for which there has been
assessed special charges for current services during the year preceding
October 1. The written notice shall state the amount still owed, and shall
identify the current services for which the charge has been assessed, and
shall state that unless the amount is paid by November 1 an additional
penalty of 10% of the amount in arrears will be added thereto. The notice
shall further provide that, unless the amount in arrears plus the penalties
are paid by November 15, or unless the owner or occupant petitions the
Council for a review of the proposed assessment by November 15, the
amount will be levied as a tax on the lot or parcel served and for which
payment is delinquent. On November 16, the Treasurer shall certify to the
City Clerk a list of all parcels or lots for which payments are in arrears
and for which written notice has been given, excepting those parcels for
which a petition for review has been filed. Such certification shall include
the amount of the arrears, together with any penalty added thereto. Such
delinquent amounts, including any penalty, shall thereupon become a lien
upon the property and shall be placed on the tax roll.
§ 89-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CURRENT SERVICES — Includes snow and ice removal, weed elimination,
street sprinkling, oiling and tarring, repair of sidewalks or curb and gutter,
garbage and refuse disposal, recycling, stormwater management, including
construction of stormwater management facilities, tree care, removal and
disposition of dead animals under § 60.23(20), Wis. Stats., loan repayment
under § 70.57(4)(b), soil conservation work under § 92.115, and snow
removal under § 86.105.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
SPECIAL CHARGES — Refers to those charges made by the City, as
determined in accordance with standards and charges established by the
City Council from time to time.
§ 89-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-10
1:97
§ 89-10. Petition for review.
The owner or occupant of any parcel or lot receiving notice of a proposed
assessment for current services during the year preceding October 1 shall
have the right, on or before November 15 of the year in which such notice
is received, to petition the Council for review. Such petitions for review
shall be made in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons upon which the
owner or occupant believes the proposed assessment for current services
was in error or otherwise deficient, and shall be filed with the City Clerk not
later than the close of business on November 15 of the year in which the
notice is received. The City Clerk shall transmit all such petitions for review
to the Council not later than November 30. The Council shall thereafter
set a hearing which shall be between December 1 and February 28 of the
following year, and shall notify the owner or occupant of the time and date
of the hearing by written notice mailed to the owner or occupant at least
five days prior to the hearing. The Council shall, at the hearing provided
herein, review the petition and take testimony from the owner or occupant
with respect to the petition. The Council, after the close of the testimony,
shall either:
§ 89-11. Exemption for residential rental properties.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, liens shall not
be assessed against the owner of any residential rental property with
respect to electrical services provided the property by the City, provided
the owner of the property provides notice to the City Clerk as to the name,
address and other pertinent information requested by the City as to each
tenant or occupant of the property, the date of the inception of the lease
or rental agreement, and the date of the termination of the lease or rental
agreement. All such notices shall be in writing, and shall be on forms
prepared by the City Clerk from time to time. The City Clerk shall determine
the nature and extent of the information needed, provided, however, that
such information shall be limited to information reasonably necessary to
A. Affirm the proposed assessment for special charges and direct that the
assessment be placed on the tax roll for the tax year next following the
tax year in which the notice of the proposed assessment for special
charges was delivered or issued to the owner or occupant;
B. Modify the proposed assessment for special charges where the Council
finds that the proposed assessment is incorrect either as to amount,
user, occupant or property owner, and in such event shall direct the
Clerk to issue a revised assessment for special charges and shall direct
that the revised assessment for special charges be placed upon the tax
roll for the tax year next following the tax year in which the notice of the
proposed assessment for special charges was delivered or issued to the
owner or occupant; or
C. Direct the Clerk to remove the proposed assessment for special charges
from the City's records in the event the Council finds that the owner or
occupant has paid the proposed assessment for special charges.
§ 89-10 LAKE MILLS CODE § 89-11
1:98
determine the nature, history and use of electrical services by the tenant
or occupant. As to any leases or rental agreements in existence at the time
of the adoption of this ordinance, this exemption shall apply, provided that
the owner of the property provides the information requested by the City
to the City Clerk's office not later than May 15, 1987. As to all leases or
rental agreements created on or after the effective date of this article, this
exemption shall apply, provided that the information requested by the City
is submitted to the City Clerk's office within seven days of the inception of
the lease or rental agreement, and within seven days of the termination of
the lease or rental agreement.
§ 89-12. Severability.
This article shall not affect the right of the City to collect delinquent charges
by other means. If this article is found to be illegal, other chapters are not
affected thereby. If any portion of this article is found to be illegal, it shall
not affect the remainder of this article.
§ 89-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-12
1:99

ARTICLE III
Unpaid Taxes or Charges
[Adopted 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 493 (Secs. 1-9-8 and 1-10-2, of the
2009 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 89-13. Issuance of license conditioned on payment of taxes.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, no license
authorized or permitted under the Municipal Code of the City of Lake
Mills shall be issued to any person who, at the time of the issuance of the
license, is delinquent in payment of any taxes, whether real or personal, any
assessment, or any other forfeiture or obligation to the City.
§ 89-14. Lien for delinquent charges.
There is hereby created a lien upon any property in the City of Lake Mills to
secure payment for any delinquency in payment to the City of Lake Mills of
special charges for current services provided for the benefit of the property.
The lien shall be perfected by giving notice to the owner in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
§ 89-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-14
1:101
Chapter 96
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 362.
§ 89-14 LAKE MILLS CODE § 89-14
1:102
ARTICLE I
Establishment of Department; Organization
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 9, Ch. 1, Secs. 9-1-1
through 9-1-7, of the 2009 Code of Ordinances]
§ 96-1. Fire Department established.
The Lake Mills Fire Department consists of a Fire Chief, and such number
of officers and firefighters as shall from time to time be provided for by the
City Council and appointed by the Fire Chief. The Department is organized
under Wis. Stats. § 62.13, and it operates pursuant to the laws of the State
of Wisconsin and ordinances of the City of Lake Mills, under the direct
supervision of the Fire Chief, who is responsible for the program of fire
defense and prevention for the citizens and property within the City and
within any areas outside the City that are subject to fire service contracts.
§ 96-2. Composition of Fire Department.
§ 96-3. Board of Police and Fire Commissioners.
A. The Fire Department of the City of Lake Mills shall be comprised of a
combination of paid and voluntary paid-on-call personnel with salaries,
benefits, expenses, and payments to be determined from time to time by
the City Council.
B. The Fire Department of the City of Lake Mills shall consist of a Fire
Chief, who shall be the head of the Department and who shall be subject
to the general supervision of the City Manager, who may issue lawful
orders to the Chief, and who shall follow the chain of command in
supervising the Chief by:
(1) Upholding the Chief's authority as the head of the Department;
(2) Working with the Chief on any and all issues related to the
Department; and
(3) Working with subordinate officers or firefighters within the
Department with the knowledge and consent of the Chief and with
the express and specific authorization of the Chief.
C. The Chief shall appoint such deputies, Assistant Chiefs, Captains, and
Lieutenants as determined to be in the best interests of the
Department, provided funding has been appropriated by the Council for
such positions. The appointments of any such subordinate officers are
subject to approval by the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners.
D. The Chief shall appoint volunteer paid-on-call firefighters as
determined to be in the best interests of the Department and such
appointees are subject to the approval of the Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners.
§ 96-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-3
1:103
A. The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners is established and
operated under the provisions of Chapter 27, Boards, Committees and
Commissions, Article VI, Board of Board of Police and Fire
Commissionersers, of the Code of the City of Lake Mills and Wis. Stats.
§ 62.13. In addition, the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall:
(1) Appoint the Fire Chief, who shall serve an indefinite term unless
removed by the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners under
procedures established herein and under the authority of Wis.
Stats. § 62.13(5).
(2) Confirm the appointment of appointees of the Fire Chief, provided
such appointments are in compliance with the Rules of the Board of
Police and Fire Commissioners, and provided appropriations for all
such positions have been made by the Council.
B. The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners has the authority to
suspend, reduce in rank, suspend and reduce in rank or remove the
Chief or any member of the Department for just cause after hearing on
charges filed by the Commission, the Chief, or any aggrieved person in
accordance with the procedures of Wis. Stats. § 62.13(5), and in
accordance with written rules established by the Commission. The
Commission may also suspend the Chief, officer or firefighter pending
disposition of charges filed.
C. The City Manager may not file charges with the Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners regarding the Fire Chief unless any and all such
information supporting such charges has been investigated by the City
Attorney, or in the case of a conflict of interest found to exist by the City
Attorney, by a special counsel for labor and employment law, as
authorized by the City Council. If adequate appropriations have been
made in the City Attorney's budget for the special counsel's fees, then
no specific authorization for the special counsel is needed from the
Council before the City Attorney may authorize the use for the special
counsel's services, if such need exists. No charges may be filed unless
they are found to be based on probable cause, and unless such pending
charges have been prepared in writing by the City Attorney or the
special counsel.
D. When charges may be warranted, the City Manager may not file
charges with the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners regarding any
other officer or firefighter in the Department, unless:
(1) The special counsel for labor and employment law has made a
finding that the Fire Chief is incompetent to file such charges
against such subordinate due to a conflict of interest;
(2) Any and all information supporting such charges against a
subordinate or officer, other than the Chief, has been investigated
by the special counsel for labor and employment law; and
§ 96-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 96-3
1:104
§ 96-4. Fire Chief.
(3) Any such pending charges have been found by the special counsel
to be based on probable cause and such charges have been
prepared in writing by the special counsel.
E. The Fire Chief may not file charges with the Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners regarding any officer or firefighter unless any and all
such information supporting such charges has been investigated by the
City Attorney, or in the case of a conflict of interest found to exist by the
City Attorney, then by the special council for labor and employment law,
as funded or authorized by the City Council. No charges may be filed
unless they are found by the City Attorney or special counsel to be
based on probable cause, and unless such pending charges have been
prepared in writing by the City Attorney or special counsel.
F. Notwithstanding the foregoing subsections, the City Manager may
discipline the Fire Chief, and the Fire Chief may discipline
subordinates, for violations of state statutes or regulations, or this
article, or for violations of the written rules, policies and standard
operating guidelines of the Department, without filing charges with the
Board of Police and Fire Commissioners and without consulting with
the City Attorney or special counsel, if such discipline is not intended to
rise to the level of becoming a matter under the jurisdiction of the
Board of Police and Fire Commissioners. A matter falling within the
jurisdiction of the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners is any
discipline that may result in suspension, reduction in rank, or removal,
after the filing of charges, a hearing and a finding by the Board of Police
and Fire Commissioners that just cause under Wis. Stats. § 62.13(5) has
been met.
G. If either the City Manager or Fire Chief chooses to exercise authority to
discipline under Subsection F of this section, no subject of such
discipline may be threatened with demotion, suspension, removal or
charges being filed before the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners
for the conduct giving rise to the particular disciplinary action.
H. Judicial review. Decisions of the Commission under Subsection B are
subject to judicial review in the Jefferson County Circuit Court as
provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.13(5)(i).
A. Head of Department. The Fire Department shall be under the direction
of the Fire Chief, subject to the City Manager's general supervision
within the chain of command, as provided in § 96-2B, and subject to the
lawful orders of the City Manager.
B. Appointment; removal. The Chief of the Lake Mills Fire Department
shall be appointed by the City of Lake Mills Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners for an indefinite term, subject to suspension, reduction
in rank, or removal by the Commission for just cause under Wis. Stats.
§ 62.13(5) and the rules and regulations of the Commission. The Chief
§ 96-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-4
1:105
shall be selected on the basis of demonstrated qualifications in fire
prevention, control and management.
C. Duties and responsibilities. The Chief shall have the following duties
and responsibilities:
(1) To appoint, assign and promote individuals to Deputy Chief,
Assistant Chief, Captain, Lieutenant, and paid-on-call volunteer
firefighter within the Department in accordance with Wis. Stats.
§ 62.13, the appropriations necessary to fund such positions, the
rules and regulations of the Commission, and the written policies
and procedures of the Department. Appointments of Deputy Chief,
Assistant Chief, and any officer shall be made by promotion when
this can be done to advantage. All appointments and promotions
are subject to the approval of the Commission.
(2) To administer the Lake Mills Fire Department pursuant to the laws
and applicable regulations of the State of Wisconsin and the
ordinances and resolutions of the City of Lake Mills and any lawful
orders of the City Manager.
(3) To administer and enforce, or cause to be enforced, all laws
relating to fire prevention and control, including the provisions of
this chapter.
(4) To develop organizational structure, written Department policies,
and procedures to achieve the goals of the Department, or as
required by the State of Wisconsin.
(5) To develop written Department policies and standard operating
guidelines to provide for operation of the Department, or as
required by the State of Wisconsin. The prevention of accidents,
injuries, and occupational illnesses shall be primary considerations
at all times.
(6) To administer the annual Department budget in accordance with
§ 89-5 of the Code of the City of Lake Mills.
(7) To provide the City Manager, under § 89-4F, with projections of
needs and goals spanning five years. These reports should be
provided annually to the City Manager by August 1 and shall
include predicted annual budget requests for personnel, equipment
and capital expenditures. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(8) To identify the need for, negotiate and draft mutual and/or
automatic aid agreements with agencies of other communities.
(9) To maintain liaison with other City departments on matters of
importance to the goals of the Fire Department.
§ 96-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 96-4
1:106
§ 96-5. Firefighters.
(10) To provide all requested information to the City Manager to
facilitate contract negotiations with other municipalities entering
into agreements for Fire Department services.
(11) Destruction of property. During the progress of any fire, the Chief
of the Fire Department, or, in the case of the Chief's absence or
disability, the officer in charge, may order the removal or
destruction of any property necessary to prevent the further spread
of fire.
(12) To determine the duties and responsibilities of all Department
personnel and supervise such personnel in their execution of their
duties through the chain of command developed by the Chief for
the operations and management of the Department.
(13) To provide whatever reports that may be required by the City
Manager, the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners, or by the
City Council, with copies of any such reports being provided to the
Council and the City Manager.
(14) To seek clarification or interpretation from the City Attorney of
ordinances, state laws, or policies, and to seek guidance from the
City Attorney for the creation or modification of any Department
policies, procedures or operating guidelines.
(15) To delegate within the chain of command any duties or
responsibilities in this section to other officers of the Department
for performance in the absence or disability of the Chief. Any and
all such delegations of authority shall be at the discretion of the
Chief, who remains responsible for the ultimate performance and
execution of such delegated duties or responsibilities.
(16) If any unresolved dispute regarding written Department policy or
standard operating guidelines should arise between the Chief and
the City Manager, the particulars of such dispute shall be brought
to the attention of the City Council for resolution.
A. Selection. Firefighters shall be selected by the Chief, and all such
appointments are subject to confirmation by the Board of Police and
Fire Commissioners.
B. Compensation, reimbursements, and expenses. Persons receiving
appointments as firefighters shall receive such compensation,
reimbursements and expenses as from time to time are established by
the City Council. Such payments may be based upon participation in
Department activities including emergency response, training and
nonemergency activity. Except for failure to participate, rates of
payment shall not be reduced without previous recommendation of the
Commission.
§ 96-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-5
1:107
C. Chain of command. Firefighters and other members of the Department
shall observe the chain of command as set forth in this article or
Department policy.
D. Insubordination. Firefighters or other members of the Department may
be subject to discipline by the Chief if a lawful order is issued by a
superior to any subordinate and that order is ignored, disobeyed, or not
promptly obeyed.
E. Neglect of duty. Firefighters and other members of the Department may
be subject to discipline by the Chief if the firefighter fails to conform to
the policies, standard operating guidelines, rules and regulations of the
Department, fails to observe laws and ordinances related to the Fire
Department, or fails to follow the chain of command within the
Department.
F. Harassment. No firefighter or member of the Department may engage
in conduct with other members of the Department or members of the
public while performing duties of the Department if such conduct is
considered under state or federal law to be harassment on the basis of
age, race, creed, color, disability, marital status, sex, national origin,
ancestry, arrest or conviction record, military service, or the use or
nonuse of lawful products when not on Department premises or
performing Department duties.
G. Honesty. No firefighter or member of the Department may engage in
the falsification of records or the misrepresentation of material
information when performing duties or engaging in the business of the
Department.
H. Negligence in performing duties. No firefighter or member of the
Department may be negligent in performing duties or may engage in
conduct that constitutes the willful hindrance of the performance of
duties to the Department.
I. Layoffs and dismissals.
(1) When it becomes necessary, because of need for economy, lack of
work or funds, or for other just causes, to reduce the number of
subordinates, the emergency, special, temporary, part-time or
provisional subordinates, if any, shall be dismissed first, and
thereafter subordinates shall be dismissed in the order of the
shortest length of service in the Department.
(2) When it becomes necessary for reasons stated in § 96-5I(1) to
reduce the number of subordinates in the higher positions or
offices, or to abolish any higher positions or offices in the
Department, the subordinate or subordinates affected thereby shall
be placed in a position or office in the Department less responsible
according to his/her efficiency and length of service in the
Department.
§ 96-5 LAKE MILLS CODE § 96-6
1:108
§ 96-6. Deputy Fire Chief and fire inspectors.
A. To assist in the performance of the responsibilities and duties of the
Fire Chief, the position of Deputy Fire Chief is hereby created as a fulltime
position within the Lake Mills Fire Department.
B. Administration. The Deputy Fire Chief shall operate under the
supervision of the Chief and shall be appointed by the Chief to the office
of Deputy Fire Chief. This appointment is subject to confirmation by the
Board of Police and Fire Commissioners. The Deputy Chief shall be
responsible for direct administration and enforcement of the Lake Mills
Fire Prevention Code.5
C. Appointment of Deputy Chief and Fire Inspector. The Deputy Chief shall
be selected on the basis of the candidate's demonstrated qualifications
in fire prevention and public fire safety education. The Deputy Fire
Chief may also recommend to the Chief the appointment of such
number of inspectors as shall be authorized by the City Council.
Inspectors shall be selected on the basis of demonstrated qualifications
in fire prevention and public fire safety education. Any appointments to
Fire Inspector shall be made by the Chief, subject to the approval of the
Board of Police and Fire Commissioners.
D. Duties. The Deputy Chief and Fire Inspector shall have the following
duties and powers:
(1) To enforce all laws and ordinances of the City relating to prevention
of fires, storage, sale and use of combustible, flammable or
explosive materials, installation and maintenance of automatic
suppression fire alarm and other fire-extinguishing equipment; and
means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from factories, schools,
hotels, rooming houses, multiple-family dwellings, hospitals,
churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters, and all other places in
which numbers of persons work, live or congregate, from time to
time for any purpose.
(2) Any other duties assigned by the Chief to the Deputy Chief or Fire
Inspectors shall be as provided in the written job descriptions
created by the Chief and approved by the Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners, as may be amended from time to time, or as may
otherwise be imposed by law. In addition, duties of the Chief may
be delegated to the Deputy Fire Chief or Inspectors, subject to
§ 96-4C(15).
(3) The Deputy Chief and any Fire Inspectors shall be subject to § 96-5
in its entirety.
E. Permit inspections. The Deputy Chief or Fire Inspector shall inspect and
approve all locations and objects for any use or structure requiring a
permit under this Fire Code.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 362, Fires and Fire Prevention.
§ 96-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-6
1:109
§ 96-7. Assistant Chiefs, Captains, and Lieutenants.
F. Periodic fire inspections. The Deputy Chief or Fire Inspector shall
inspect all premises classified as public occupancies on a periodic basis
to determine compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable to fire
prevention.
G. Corrective orders. Whenever the Deputy Chief or Fire Inspector finds
any of the following conditions, the Deputy Chief shall order removal of
the dangerous matter, obstruction or remedy of the condition:
(1) Combustible or explosive matter.
(2) Dangerous accumulations of rubbish or flammable material.
(3) Obstructed means of exit.
(4) Obstructions likely to interfere with operations of the Department
or egress of occupants in case of fire. A corrective order shall be
served upon the occupant of the premises by delivering a copy to
the occupant personally or leaving it with any person of suitable
age and discretion in charge of the premises, or, in case no such
person is found upon the premises by affixing a copy thereof in a
conspicuous place on or near the entrance of said premises. The
owner of the premises shall be served personally or by delivering a
copy of the order to a person of suitable age and discretion at the
owner's residence or place of business, or, if such owner is absent
from the City, by mailing a copy by certified mail to the owner's last
known post-office address.
H. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any of the following decisions of the
Deputy Chief or Fire Inspector may appeal to the City Manager within
30 days after the decision and shall be entitled to review in accordance
Wis. Stats. Ch. 68, with a final determination, if necessary, being made
by the City Manager.
(1) Rejection of an application for any required permit, certificate or
approval.
(2) Revocation of any permit or certificate previously issued.
(3) Conditioning issuance of any required permit certificate or
approval upon compliance with any requirements other than those
established by this chapter or by any other applicable state,
federal, county or City laws or regulations.
A. To assist in the performance of the responsibilities and duties of the
Fire Chief, the positions of Assistant Chief, Captain, and Lieutenant are
hereby created as part-time, salaried positions as officers within the
Department.
B. Administration. The Assistant Chief, Captain and Lieutenant positions
shall operate under the supervision of the Chief and shall be appointed
§ 96-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 96-7
1:110
by the Chief in accordance with appropriations for such positions being
made by the Council. All such positions are subject to confirmation
by the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners. The Assistant Chief,
Captain and Lieutenant positions shall be responsible for duties as
assigned by the Chief.
C. Appointment of Assistant Chief, Captain and Lieutenant. The
appointees to the positions of Assistant Chief, Captain and Lieutenant
shall be selected on the basis of the candidates' demonstrated
qualifications in Fire Department leadership and training.
D. Duties. Any duties assigned by the Chief to the Assistant Chief, Captain
and Lieutenant positions shall be as provided in the written job
descriptions created by the Chief and approved by the Board of Police
and Fire Commissioners, as may be amended from time to time. In
addition, duties of the Chief may be delegated to the Assistant Chief,
Captain and Lieutenant positions, subject to § 96-4C(15).
E. Additional duties. All Assistant Chiefs, Captains, and Lieutenants shall
also be subject to § 96-5 in its entirety.
§ 96-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-7
1:111

ARTICLE II
Use of Fire Department Volunteer Funds
[Adopted 6-17-2003 by Ord. No. 909A (Sec. 1-9-10 of the 2009 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 96-8. Deposits of volunteer funds.
The Chief or Deputy Chief of the Fire Department may deposit volunteer
funds in an account in the name of the Fire Department in a public
depository as defined in Wis. Stats. § 34.01(5).
§ 96-9. Control of funds.
The Fire Department, through the Chief or Deputy Chief, shall have
exclusive control over the expenditure of Fire Department volunteer funds
in such account.
§ 96-10. Volunteer funds.
For purposes of this article, "Fire Department volunteer funds" shall mean
funds of the municipality that are raised by employees or volunteers of the
Fire Department or that are donated to the Department for the benefit of
the Department.
§ 96-11. Funds allowed.
There shall be no limit on the amount or type of funds deposited in said
account, provided the funds are Fire Department volunteer funds.
§ 96-12. Withdrawals.
Withdrawals from said account may be made by the Chief or Deputy Chief
and the funds may be expended for Fire Department purposes, but any
expenditure of such funds for equipment or other goods requiring future
expenditures from the City Treasury for ongoing maintenance or insurance
or similar costs shall be approved by the City Council prior to acceptance of
the equipment or other goods by the City.
§ 96-13. Reporting and audit requirements.
Reporting and audit requirements of the City shall be made applicable to
the Fire Department volunteer funds.
§ 96-14. Funds to be City property; counter signatures required for
withdrawals. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, all Fire Department volunteer
funds shall remain the property of the City until such funds are disbursed,
and as such, a counter signature by either the City Manager or the City
Treasurer shall be required for any withdrawal or any check drawn on said
§ 96-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-14
1:113
account, and the checks or drafts for the account shall at all times prior to
their use be kept in the Office of the City Treasurer.
§ 96-14 LAKE MILLS CODE § 96-14
1:114
Chapter 145
MUNICIPAL COURT
§ 145-1. Lake Mills Municipal Court.
A. Municipal Court established. There is hereby created and established a
Lake Mills Municipal Court under the provisions of Chapter 755 of the
Wisconsin Statutes which is incorporated by reference, including any
amendments, as though the chapter were written in its entirety herein.
(1) The Municipal Court hereby established shall be known as the
"Municipal Court for the City and Town of Lake Mills."
(2) To permit the Court herein established to become a court with two
member municipalities, both the City and the Town of Lake Mills,
pursuant to § 755.01(4), Wis. Stats., shall enact identical
ordinances and shall enter into an agreement pursuant to
§ 66.0301, Wis. Stats, for the exercise of powers relating to the
creation and administration of this Court.
(3) For purposes of creating this Court, the City and Town
acknowledge and agree that the terms of this chapter shall
constitute the terms of the agreement under § 66.0301, Wis. Stats.,
and that this chapter shall serve as the agreement as if it were
written and separately executed between the City and Town of
Lake Mills.
(4) This Court may not be abolished during any term for which a judge
has already been elected. Either the City or Town may abolish this
court, effective at the end of a judge's term of office, by adopting an
ordinance repealing that municipality's ordinance. Such ordinance
shall be in effect on December 1 in the year preceding the May 1
expiration of the judge's term, so that potential candidates for
judge are aware of the change in the status and jurisdiction of the
court. Any municipality that has not so acted to repeal its ordinance
shall also, prior to December 1 in the year preceding the May 1
expiration of the judge's term, amend its ordinance in a manner
that preserves the Municipal Court's jurisdiction for that
municipality, commencing on May 1.
B. Municipal judge. Such Court shall be under the jurisdiction of and
presided over by a Municipal Judge, who shall be an attorney licensed
to practice law in Wisconsin, and who shall reside in either the City of
Lake Mills or the Town of Lake Mills at the time of his or her election
and throughout his or her term of office.
(1) Such Municipal Judge shall be elected at large in the spring
election for a term of four years commencing on May 1. All
candidates for the position of Municipal Judge shall be nominated
by nominating papers as provided in § 8.10, Wis. Stats., and
§ 96-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-1
1:115
selection at a primary election if such is held as provided in § 8.11,
Wis. Stats. [Amended 11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 1091]
(2) The City Council of the City of Lake Mills and the Board of
Supervisors of the Town of Lake Mills shall provide for a primary
election in the event that more than two candidates file nomination
papers for such position of Municipal Judge, as provided in
§ 8.11(1)(a), Wis. Stats., and such primary election shall be held on
the third Tuesday of February as provided in § 5.02(22), Wis. Stats.
(3) Because a Municipal Court has previously been established by the
City of Lake Mills, and because the Judge presiding over the Court
has been elected to a term of office until May 1, 2010, the Judge of
the previously established Municipal Court shall preside over the
newly organized Municipal Court for the City and Town of Lake
Mills until the end of the existing term.
C. Elections. The Clerks of the City and Town of Lake Mills shall see to the
compliance with Wis. Stats. §§ 5.58(1c), 5.60(1)(b), 5.60(2), 7.10(1)(a),
7.60(4)(a) and 8.10(6)(bm) to provide for the election of a Municipal
Judge under § 755.01(4), Wis. Stats.
D. Oath and bond. The Judge shall, after his or her election or appointment
to fill a vacancy, take and file the official oath as prescribed in
§ 757.02(1), Wis. Stats., and at the same time execute and file an official
bond in the amount of $5,000. The Judge shall not act until the oath and
bond have been filed as required by § 19.01(4)(c), Wis. Stats., and the
requirements of § 755.03(2), Wis. Stats., have been complied with.
E. Salary and administrative costs. The salary of the Municipal Judge shall
be fixed by the City Council of the City of Lake Mills, and such salary
shall be in lieu of fees and costs. No salary shall be paid for any time
during a term for which such Judge has not executed the official bond or
official oath, as required by § 755.03, Wis. Stats., and filed pursuant to
§ 19.01(4)(c), Wis. Stats. The City Council annually shall by separate
ordinance allocate funds for the administration of the Municipal Court,
and shall provide for a location for records for the Municipal Court, and
shall provide office space for 16 hours per week for the Court Clerk
within City-owned or controlled facilities, such that persons having
business with the Court may access the Court Clerk during regularly
scheduled business hours.
F. Jurisdiction. The Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court shall have
such jurisdiction as provided by §§ 755.045 and 755.05, Wis. Stats., and
as otherwise provided by State Law. The Municipal Judge is authorized
to issue inspection warrants under § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
G. Location and hours. The Municipal Court shall be held in the Council
Chambers of the City of Lake Mills Municipal Building at 200 Water
Street. The Municipal Court shall be open at such times as determined
by the Municipal Judge.
§ 145-1 LAKE MILLS CODE § 145-1
1:116
§ 145-2. Municipal court procedure.
H. Forfeitures, costs and contributions. The Municipal Judge may impose
forfeitures, costs and contributions as provided by § 800.09, Wis. Stats.,
and as provided in the ordinances of the City of Lake Mills, Town of
Lake Mills, and any contracting municipalities. Court costs shall be
imposed in an amount of no less than $38 per citation for which a
deposit is made or for which the court has made a finding of guilt. Court
costs shall be increased to the maximum allowable amount whenever
authorized by statute. All forfeitures, fees, penalty assessments,
domestic abuse assessments, driver improvement surcharges, and the
fee to be paid to the department of administration, shall be paid to the
treasurer of the municipality within which the case arose within 30 days
after receipt of the money by the Municipal Judge or other court
personnel. At the time of the payment, the Municipal Judge shall report
the title of the action, the offense for which a forfeiture was imposed
and the total amount of the forfeiture, fees, penalty assessment,
domestic abuse assessment, driver improvement surcharge and costs, if
any. The treasurer of each municipality shall disperse the fees as
provided in § 814.65(1), Wis. Stats., and in accordance with the monthly
report provided by the Court Clerk, except that court costs, minus the
fee per citation payable to the department of administration, shall be
retained by the City of Lake Mills as payment towards the
administrative costs of the Municipal Court. The forfeitures received by
the respective treasurers from the Court shall be retained by the
respective municipality. [Amended 1-7-2014 by Ord. No. 1123; at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. The procedure in Municipal Court shall be as provided in this section
and the state law, including but not necessarily limited due to
enumeration, Chs. 66, 345, 751, 755, 757 and 800, Wis. Stats. The
provisions of Chapter 800, Wis. Stats., including any amendments
thereto, are hereby incorporated by reference as the procedures to be
followed in the Municipal Court for the City and Town of Lake Mills as
though they were set forth in their entirety herein.
B. The Municipal Judge may impose punishment and sentences as
provided by § 800.09, Wis. Stats., and as provided in the ordinances of
the City of Lake Mills, Town of Lake Mills, and any contracting
municipalities.
C. The Municipal Judge shall establish a schedule of deposits for violations
of City and Town ordinances, resolutions, bylaws, except traffic
regulations, which are and shall be governed by § 345.27, Wis. Stats.,
and boating violations, which are and shall be governed by § 23.67, Wis.
Stats. Such deposit schedule shall be approved by the respective
governing bodies creating and establishing or contracting with this
Court and shall be posted in the office of the Municipal Court Clerk and
the police departments of the respective municipalities. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 145-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-2
1:117
§ 145-3. Guardian ad litem.
The Municipal Court shall appoint a guardian ad litem for any defendant
that the Court has reason to believe is mentally incompetent.
Chapter 153
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
City Council — See Ch. 38.
City Manager — See Ch. 44.
Ethics — See Ch. 71.
D. Contempt procedure.
(1) The Municipal Judge may impose a sanction authorized under
§ 800.12(2), Wis. Stats., for contempt of court as defined in
§ 785.01(1), Wis. Stats., in accordance with the procedures under
§ 785.03, Wis. Stats.
(2) The Municipal Judge may impose a forfeiture for contempt under
§ 800.12(1), Wis. Stats., in an amount not to exceed $200 or, upon
nonpayment of the forfeiture and the penalty assessment, jail
assessment under § 302.46, Wis. Stats., and any applicable
domestic abuse assessment under § 973.055(1), Wis. Stats., a jail
sentence not to exceed seven days. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
E. Court authority to impose alternative juvenile dispositions and
sanctions.
(1) For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance, the
Municipal Court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions
listed in §§ 938.343 and 938.344, Wis. Stats., in accordance with
the provisions of those statutes.
(2) For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance and who also
violates a condition of a dispositional order of the court under
§§ 938.343 or 938.344, Wis. Stats., the Municipal Court is
authorized to impose any of the sanctions listed in § 938.355(6)(d),
Wis. Stats., in accordance with the provisions of those statutes.
(3) This section is enacted under the authority of § 938.17(2)(cm), Wis.
Stats.
§ 145-2 LAKE MILLS CODE § 145-3
1:118
ARTICLE I
Residency Requirements
[Adopted 10-20-1998 by Ord. No. 816B (Sec. 1-5A-5 of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 153-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to identify those City employees who are
required to reside within the City of Lake Mills or within a prescribed
distance of the City of Lake Mills corporate limits due to the potential need
to recall these employees in an emergency situation.
§ 153-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT — The individual appointed
by the City Council as the Director of Emergency Government.
FIREFIGHTERS — All full-time sworn firefighters.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — All sworn law enforcement officers,
including the Chief of Police, Captains, Lieutenants, Sergeants, and Patrol
Officers.
§ 153-3. Residency requirement. [Amended 11-5-2013 by Ord. No.
1115]
Full-time law enforcement officers of the Lake Mills Police Department, all
full-time firefighters of the Lake Mills Fire Department, and the Director
of Emergency Government shall reside within a fifteen-mile radius of City
limits. The fifteen-mile radius is measured as a straight line distance from
the individual's residence to the nearest point of City limits. All distances
are rounded down to the nearest whole mile. All individuals subject to
this section shall meet the residency requirement at the time of their
appointment or hire, unless approved otherwise by the City Manager. There
shall be no residency requirement for other City employees.
§ 153-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-3
1:119

ARTICLE II
Salaries and Compensation
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Sec. 1-5A-4 of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 153-4. Salaries of officials and employees.
Salaries and compensation of City officials and employees shall be as
determined by the City Council from time to time.
§ 153-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-4
1:121

ARTICLE III
Vacancy in Office of Public Works Director
[Adopted 3-1-2005 by Ord. No. 945 (Sec. 1-5A-7 of the 2009 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 153-5. Duties while Public Works Director position is vacant.
Whenever the position of Public Works Director is vacant, any references
in the Code to the duties or functions of the Public Works Director shall be
read and interpreted to mean "the City Manager or his designated official."
When the position of Public Works Director is no longer vacant, the original
meaning of Public Works Director shall be restored as it has been originally
written and interpreted in the Code.
§ 153-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-5
1:123

ARTICLE IV
Clerk and Treasurer
[Adopted 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103 (Title 1, Ch. 6, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 153-6. Office of City Clerk.
§ 153-7. Office of City Treasurer.
A. Appointment. The City Clerk shall be appointed to an indefinite term by
the City Manager subject to confirmation of the Council. The Clerk is
removable for cause by a 3/4 vote of the Council after a hearing.
B. City Clerk duties. The City Clerk shall perform all duties of office as
provided in the Lake Mills Municipal Code or the Wisconsin Statutes.
C. Deputy City Clerk.
(1) The Deputy City Clerk shall be appointed to an indefinite term by
the City Manager subject to confirmation of the Council. The
Deputy Clerk is removable for cause by a 3/4 vote of the Council
after a hearing.
(2) The Deputy Clerk shall act under the Clerk's direction and in the
Clerk's absence or disability, or in case of a vacancy shall perform
the Clerk's duties. The Deputy shall receive such additional
compensation as the Council may provide.
D. Human Resources Department.
(1) There is hereby established a Human Resources Department of the
City, which shall be staffed by the City Attorney, as the Human
Resources Director; the City Clerk, as the Human Resources
Officer; and the Deputy Clerk as the Human Resources Clerk.
(2) The HR Director, HR Officer, and HR Clerk shall perform the duties
of their respective positions as directed by the City Manager.
A. Appointment. The City Treasurer shall be appointed to an indefinite
term by the City Manager subject to confirmation of the Council. The
Treasurer is removable for cause by a 3/4 vote of the Council after a
hearing.
B. City Treasurer duties. The City Treasurer shall perform all duties of
office as provided in the Lake Mills Municipal Code or the Wisconsin
Statutes.
C. Deputy City Treasurer. The Treasurer may, in writing, filed in the office
of the Clerk, appoint a deputy who shall act under the Treasurer's
direction and in the Treasurer's absence or disability, or in case of a
vacancy shall perform the Treasurer's duties. The Deputy shall receive
such additional compensation as the Council may provide. The acts of
§ 153-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-7
1:125
§ 153-8. Liability for default.
such Deputy shall be covered by official bond as the Council shall
direct.
D. Finance Department.
(1) There is hereby established a Finance Department of the City,
which shall be staffed by the City Treasurer, as the Finance
Director; the Payroll Clerk, Billing Clerk, Risk Management Clerk,
and Collections Clerk.
(2) The Finance Director shall be directed by the City Manager, and
the remaining staff shall be directed by the Finance Director.
A. Bond eliminated. The City elects not to give the bond on the City
Treasurer provided for by § 70.67(1), Wisconsin Statutes.
B. City liable for default of Treasurer. Pursuant to § 70.67(2), Wis. Stats.,
the City shall be obligated to pay, in case the City Treasurer shall fail to
do so, all state and county taxes required by law to be paid by such
Treasurer to the County Treasurer.
§ 153-7 LAKE MILLS CODE § 153-8
1:126
ARTICLE V
Neighborhood Service Officer.
[Adopted 3-17-2020 by Ord. No. 1211]
§ 153-9. Powers and duties.
A. The Neighborhood Service Officer shall be delegated appropriate
authority by City departments for general enforcement of certain
sections of the City of Lake Mills Code of Ordinances, including
issuance of citations and correction orders to violations, in enforcement
of appropriate sections of the City of Lake Mills Code of Ordinances.
(1) Authority for general enforcement, including issuance of citations
and correction orders, for violations of Chapter 479, Nuisances,
may be delegated to the Neighborhood Service Officer by the Police
Chief, Fire Inspector, Parks and Forestry Director, Director of
Public Works, and Building Inspector.
(2) Authority for general enforcement, including issuance of citations
and correction orders, for violations of Chapter 573, Streets and
Sidewalks, Article I, Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks, Article II,
Sidewalks and Vaults, Article V, Obstructions and Encroachments;
Privileges in Streets, Article VII, Snow and Ice Removal, Article
VIII, Excavations, may be delegated to the Neighborhood Service
Officer by the Police Chief, Parks and Forestry Director, Director of
Public Works and Building Inspector.
(3) Authority for general enforcement, including issuance of citations
and correction orders, for violations of Chapter 650, Subdivision
Regulations, Article II, Administration and Enforcement, and
Chapter 660, Zoning Regulations, Article II, General Regulations,
Article VI, Signage, and Article IX, Zoning Procedures and
Administration, may be delegated to the Neighborhood Service
Officer by the Building Inspector.
(4) Authority for general enforcement, including issuance of citations
and correction orders, for violations of Chapter 271, Brush, Grass
and Weeds, and Chapter 594, Trees, may be delegated to the
Neighborhood Service Officer by the Parks and Forestry Director.
(5) Authority for general enforcement, including issuance of citations
and correction orders, for violations of Chapter 445, Licenses and
Permits, may be delegated to the Neighborhood Service Officer by
the Police Chief.
B. Authority delegated to the Neighborhood Service Officer may be
revoked in the same manner by which it is conferred.
§ 153-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-9
1:127
Chapter 161
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 573. Water and sewer — See Ch. 623.
§ 153-9 LAKE MILLS CODE § 153-9
1:128
ARTICLE I
Assessments6
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Secs. 7-4-1 through 7-4-4
of the 2009 Code of Ordinances]
§ 161-1. Required improvements.
§ 161-2. Installation of service pipes. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1103]
Whenever the City Council shall declare its intention to improve any street
in which water, gas or sewer, or any of them shall have been previously
laid or are to be laid, the Council shall also by resolution require water,
sewer and gas service pipes to be first laid in such street, at the cost of
the property fronting thereon, from the sewer, water and gas mains in such
street to the curbline on either or both sides thereof, at such intervals as
the Council shall direct along that part of said street to be improved, except
at street and alley crossings. Such work may be done by contract or by the
City directly without the intervention of a contractor, under the municipalowned
utility, under the supervision of such utility. The Director of Public
Works shall keep an accurate account of the expense of putting in service
A. Sewers. The subdivider or owner of land will be required to pay the
actual cost of all necessary sewer extensions, including engineering
costs, on a special assessment basis. All necessary house laterals shall
be provided by the subdivider or property owner, and no street shall be
permanently improved until every building lot shall be so serviced.
B. Water mains. The subdivider or owner of land will be required to pay
the actual cost of all necessary water main and lateral extensions,
including engineering costs, on a special assessment basis.
C. Grading and graveling. The subdivider or owner shall pay the costs of
grading, graveling and permanent surfacing on all streets. These
charges shall be assessed to the owners on a special assessment basis.
D. Street maintenance. The City will pay the cost of maintaining all
streets.
E. Streets with no prior assessment. On streets upon which no assessment
has been levied, the property owner shall pay the cost of construction
or reconstruction.
F. Subdivision developers. If required as a condition for approval of a
subdivision plat, every subdivision developer shall be required to grade
and improve streets and alleys, install curbs and sidewalks,
monuments, storm and sanitary sewers, stormwater inlets, water
mains, and street name signs in accordance with specifications
established by the City.
6. Editor's Note: See also § 650-33 of this Code.
§ 161-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-2
1:129
pipes in front of each lot or parcel of land, whether the work be done by
contract or otherwise, and shall report the same to the Treasurer, who shall
annually prepare a statement of the expenses so incurred in front of each
lot or parcel of land, and the amount therein charged to each lot or parcel
of land shall be, by such Treasurer, entered in the tax roll as a special tax
against said lot or parcel of land, and the same shall be collected in all
respects as are other taxes upon real estate.
§ 161-3. Surfacing of gravel streets.
Before any blacktop hard surfacing is ordered on residential streets, the
property owners shall request that curb and gutter be installed and pay
the actual cost, including engineering, on a special assessment basis, or
the City may on its own initiative order curb and gutter constructed on a
special assessment basis, unless from an engineering standpoint curb and
gutter is not practicable. Curb and gutter and sidewalk replacement to City
streets shall be assessed pursuant to § 161-4 of this article at the rate as
determined by the City Council of the City.
§ 161-4. Assessment provisions.
A. Special assessment procedure. The City, in levying and collecting
special assessments for the construction of sanitary sewers,
stormwater sewers, water mains, grading and graveling of roads,
paving of streets and construction of sidewalk, curb and gutter upon
any property located in the City, may proceed in the manner provided in
§§ 66.0701 through 66.0733, Wis. Stats. [Amended 12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 1103]
B. Corner lot assessments. Improvements on corner lots shall be assessed
for the full frontage, and the depth of the lot less 1/2 of the first 100
feet. Frontage of a lot with an existing building would be in the
direction in which the house faces.
§ 161-2 LAKE MILLS CODE § 161-4
1:130
ARTICLE II
Construction and Public Contracts
[Adopted 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 1079 (Secs. 7-4-5 and 7-4-6 of the
2009 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 161-5. City may perform public construction work.
The City may directly perform any class of public construction, or any part
thereof, without submitting the same for bids.
§ 161-6. Public works contracts.
Unless § 161-5 applies, all public construction, the estimated cost of which
exceeds $25,000, shall be let by contract to the lowest responsible bidder;
all other public construction shall be let as directed in this section.
A. Such work may be done under the supervision of the Public Works
Director. The Public Works Director shall keep an accurate account of
the expense of any such work performed directly by the City, and shall
report the same to the Board of Public Works.
B. Whenever any class of public work or any part thereof may be done
directly by the City without submitting the same for bids, the Board of
Public Works, or its designee, shall keep an accurate account of the cost
of the public work, including the necessary overhead expense. Upon the
completion of the work described, the Board of Public Works, or its
designee, shall make a complete report of the work to the Council,
stating in detail the items of cost and the total cost of doing the work.
The City Clerk shall publish the report as a part of the proceedings of
the Council.
C. For purposes of this section, the Board of Public Works may delegate its
duties by designating either the Public Works Director or the City
Manager to act in its stead whenever the Board of Public Works is
required to perform duties under Subsection B. Such designation shall
be carried out by adopting a resolution that shall remain in effect for all
such reporting requirements until such time as the Board of Public
Works shall revoke such delegated authority through the adoption of a
resolution revoking the same.
D. The City may not directly perform highway improvement projects if the
costs exceed $100,000 and:
(1) The project is funded either in part or in full by federal funds and
the construction commences after July 1, 2013; or
(2) The project is funded in full or in part with state funds, not
including funds received under the general transportation aids
program, and such construction begins after July 1, 2015.
A. If § 161-5 is not applicable, and if the estimated cost of any public
construction exceeds $5,000 but is not greater than $25,000, the Board
§ 161-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-6
1:131
of Public Works shall give a Class 1 notice of the proposed construction
before the contract for the construction is executed. This provision does
not apply to public construction if the materials for such a project are
donated or if the labor for such a project is provided by volunteers.
B. The provisions of this section are not mandatory for the repair and
reconstruction of public facilities when damage or threatened damage
thereto creates an emergency in which the public health or welfare of
the City is endangered. Such determination as to emergency shall be
determined by resolution of the Board of Public Works. Whenever the
City Council determines by majority vote at a regular or special meeting
that an emergency no longer exists, this subsection no longer applies.
C. For purposes of this section, the Board of Public Works may delegate its
duties by designating the City Clerk to act in its stead whenever the
Board of Public Works is required to perform duties under Subsection
A, and by designating the City Manager to act in its stead whenever the
Board of Public Works is required to perform duties under Subsection
B. Such designation shall be carried out by adopting a resolution that
shall remain in effect for all such reporting requirements until such
time as the Board of Public Works shall revoke such delegated authority
through the adoption of a resolution revoking the same. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
D. Whenever a public construction contract requires that such contract be
let to the lowest responsible bidder, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.15, 66.0901, and
66.0903 are incorporated herein by reference, including any
amendments thereto.
§ 161-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 161-6
1:132
Chapter 190
RECORDS
§ 190-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — Any of the following City entities having custody of a City
record: an office, elected official, agency, board, commission, committee,
Council, department or public body corporate and politic created by
constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted subunit
of the foregoing.
CUSTODIAN — That officer, department head, division head, or employee
of the City designated under § 190-3 or otherwise responsible by law to
keep and preserve any City records or files, deposit or keep such records
in his office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such
public records and who is required by this chapter to respond to requests
for access to such records.
RECORD — Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual,
or electromagnetic information or electronically generated or stored data
is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics,
which has been created or is being kept by an authority. "Record" includes,
but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts,
photographs, films, recordings, tapes, optical disks, and any other medium
on which electronically generated or stored data is recorded or preserved.
"Record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like
materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the
originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working;
materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have
no relation to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by
copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of
an authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or
which are available for inspection at a public library.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 190-2. Duty to maintain records.
A. Except as provided under § 190-7, each officer and employee of the City
shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his predecessor
or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his
office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the officer or
employee or his deputies, or to the possession or control of which he
may be lawfully entitled as such officer or employee.
B. Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term
of employment, or whenever the office or position of employment
becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his
§ 161-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:133
§ 190-3. Legal custodian(s).
§ 190-4. Public access to records.
successor all records then in his custody and the successor shall receipt
therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file said receipt with
the City Clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected or
qualified, such records shall be delivered to and receipted for by the
Clerk, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such successor
upon the latter's receipt.
A. Each elected official is the legal custodian of his records and the
records of his office, but the official may designate an employee of his
staff to act as the legal custodian.
B. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the City Clerk, or the Clerk's
designee shall act as legal custodian for the City Council and for any
committees, commissions, boards, or other authorities created by
ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
C. For every authority not specified in Subsection A or B above, the
authority's chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the
authority, but the officer may designate an employee of his staff to act
as the legal custodian.
D. Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his
absence or the absence of his designee.
E. The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and
to carry out the duties of an authority under Subchapter II of Chapter
19, Wisconsin Statutes, and this section. The designation of a legal
custodian does not affect the powers and duties of an authority under
this section.
A. Except as provided in § 190-6, any person has a right to inspect a record
and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in § 19.35(1),
Wis. Stats.
B. Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular
office hours.
C. If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records
are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon
at least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy. (Two
consecutive hours per week shall be established during which access to
the records will be permitted upon 24 hours' advance notice of intent to
inspect or copy.)
D. A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those
available to City employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
§ 190-2 LAKE MILLS CODE § 190-4
1:134
§ 190-5. Access procedures.
E. The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may
impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an
original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged.
F. A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and
copying records as follows:
(1) The cost of photocopying shall be as determined from time to time
by the City Manager. Said cost shall be calculated not to exceed the
actual, necessary, and direct cost of reproduction.
(2) If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual
and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing
shall be charged.
(3) The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in
printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and audio
or video tapes, shall be charged.
(4) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also
be charged.
(5) The actual cost incurred in locating a record, as that cost is
determined by the legal custodian of the record, shall be charged to
the party requesting a search to be undertaken to locate the
record.
(6) The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and
may require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if such
estimate exceeds $5.
(7) Elected and appointed officials of the City shall not be required to
pay for public records, they may reasonable require for the proper
performance of their official duties.
(8) The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge
or at a reduced charge where he determines that waiver or
reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
G. Pursuant to § 19.34, Wis. Stats., and the guidelines therein listed, each
authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for
inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a
notice containing a description of its organization and the established
times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the
methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to
records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of
records, and the costs thereof. (Each authority shall also prominently
display at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a copy of §§ 190-4
through 190-6 of this chapter.)
A. Requests.
§ 190-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-5
1:135
§ 190-6. Limitations on right to access.
(1) A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal
custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably
describes the requested record or the information requested.
However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as
to subject matter or length of time represented by the record does
not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally,
but a request must be in writing before an action to enforce the
request is commenced under § 19.34, Wis. Stats.
(2) Except as provided below, no request may be refused because the
person making the request is unwilling to be identified or to state
the purpose of the request. No request may be refused because the
request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a fee is required
under § 190-4F(6). A requester may be required to show acceptable
identification whenever the requested record is kept at a private
residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or
regulations so require.
B. Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as
practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the
requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole
or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after
conferring with the City Attorney, determines that a written request is
so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the
request may first be required to itemize his request in a manner which
would permit reasonable compliance.
C. A request for a record may be denied as provided in § 190-6. If a request
is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a
written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the
requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written
request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a
written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written
denial of a request shall inform the requester that if the request for the
record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review
upon petition for a writ of mandamus under § 19.37(1), Wis. Stats., or
upon application to the Attorney General or a district attorney.
A. As provided by § 19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt
from inspection under this section:
(1) Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal
law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law;
(2) Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law
enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require
exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a
condition of receipt of aids by the state;
§ 190-5 LAKE MILLS CODE § 190-6
1:136
(3) Computer programs, although the material used as input for a
computer program or the material produced as a product of the
computer program is subject to inspection; and
(4) Pursuant to § 905.08, Wis. Stats., a record or portion of a record
containing information qualifying as a trade secret as defined in
§ 134.90(1)(c), Wis. Stats. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. As provided by § 43.30, Wis. Stats., public library circulation records
are exempt from inspection under this section.
C. In responding to a request for inspection or copying of record which is
not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after
conferring with the City Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in
part, only if he determines that the harm to the public interest resulting
from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full access to the
requested record. Examples of matters for which disclosure may be
refused include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which
were necessary and given in order to obtain the information
contained in them.
(2) Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing.
(3) Records of current deliberations concerning employment,
dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensation, performance, or
discipline of any City officer or employee, or the investigation of
charges against a City officer or employee, unless such officer or
employee consents to such disclosure.
(4) Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or
prevention.
(5) Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of
City property, investing of City funds, or other City business
whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require
nondisclosure.
(6) Financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data
of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a
substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person
referred to in such history or data.
(7) Communications between legal counsel for the City and any officer,
agent or employee of the City, when advice is being rendered
concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in which the
City or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is likely to
become involved, or communications which are privileged under
§ 905.03, Wis. Stats.
§ 190-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-6
1:137
§ 190-7. Retention of records. [Amended 11-20-2018 by Ord. No.
1198; 1-15-2019 by Ord. No. 1200]
§ 190-8. Preservation through microfilm.
Any City officer or the director of any department or division of City
government may, subject to the approval of the City Council, keep and
preserve public records in his possession by means of microfilm or other
photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the standards
for photographic reproduction set forth in § 16.61(7)(a) and (b), Wis. Stats.,
and shall be considered original records for all purposes. Such records shall
be preserved along with other files of the department or division and shall
be open to public inspection and copying according to the provisions of
state law and of §§ 190-4 through 190-6 of this chapter.
Chapter 211
UTILITIES, MUNICIPAL
D. If a record contains information that may be made public and
information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record
shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the
information that may not be made public from the record before
release. The custodian shall confer with the City Attorney prior to
releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the City
Attorney when separating out the exempt material. If in the judgment of
the custodian and the City Attorney there is no feasible way to separate
the exempt material from the nonexempt material without reasonable
jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record
shall be withheld from disclosure.
A. General Records Schedule adopted. The City of Lake Mills hereby
adopts, by reference, the Wisconsin Municipal Records Schedule
(hereinafter, "Records Schedule"), pertaining to the retention and
destruction of public records, and approved by the State of Wisconsin
Public Records Board (hereinafter, "Records Board") on August 27,
2018. A copy of the Records Schedule will be kept on file in the City of
Lake Mills Clerk's office located at 200D Water Street, Lake Mills,
Wisconsin and made available for public viewing during normal
business hours.
B. Other records. In the event the City of Lake Mills creates a record not
contemplated by the Records Schedule, the City of Lake Mills may,
subject to the Records Board's prior approval, either adopt an
applicable records retention schedule set forth by the Records Board, if
available, or create its own retention schedule pertaining to the record.
§ 190-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 190-8
1:138
ARTICLE I
Utilities Management
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Sec. 7-9-1 of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 211-1. Utility management.
The municipal utilities of the City shall be managed and operated under the
rules, rates and regulations on file with and approved by the Public Service
Commission.
§ 211-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-1
1:139

ARTICLE II
Municipal Communications Utility
[Adopted 8-21-2001 by Ord. No. 862 (Sec. 7-9-2 of the 2009 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 211-2. Creation of utility.
Pursuant to Chapters 62 and 66 of the Wisconsin Statutes and, without
limitation, § 62.11(5), Wis. Stats., the City of Lake Mills ("City") hereby
exercises its authority to create a municipal communications utility.
§ 211-3. Responsibilities of utility.
The communications utility shall be responsible to plan, acquire, construct,
extend, improve, maintain, operate, lease, dispose of, regulate, and manage
a communications system to be constructed in order to provide, among
other things, telecommunications, data, fiber optic, Internet, cable
television, video and information services to the City, its departments, the
school district, and the public generally in and around the Lake Mills area.
§ 211-4. City Council to manage utility; powers.
The communications utility shall be under the charge and management of
the Lake Mills City Council, which may exercise all powers necessary or
desirable to effect its purposes.
§ 211-5. Benefits to City.
The City hereby finds that a municipal communications system will provide
public benefits by providing for the continued growth and economic
development of the City and is, thereby, in the best interests of the City.
The City hereby further finds that a municipal communications system
is in the public interest as a means of facilitating the provision of
telecommunications, data, fiber optic, Internet, cable television, video and
information services to the City, its departments, the school district, and the
public generally in and around the Lake Mills area.
§ 211-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-5
1:141
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 240
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 660.
§ 240-1. Findings of fact.
A. The City Council finds that adult-oriented establishments operating in
the City require special licensing by the City in order to protect and
preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the patrons of such
businesses as well as the citizens of the City.
B. Based a review of studies conducted in Phoenix AZ, Garden Grove CA,
Los Angeles CA, Whittier CA, Indianapolis IN, Minneapolis MN, St. Paul
MN, Cleveland OH, Oklahoma City OK, Amarillo TX, Austin TX,
Beaumont TX, Dallas TX, Houston TX, Newport News VA, Bellevue WA,
Seattle WA, New York NY, St. Croix County WI, and the Report of the
Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually
Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), and statistics
obtained from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the findings
incorporated in City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41
(1986); Coleman A. Young v. American Mini-Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50
(1976); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v.
Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); City of Erie v. Pap's a.m., 120 S.
Ct. 1382 (2000); East of the River Enterprises II v. City of Hudson; 2000
Wisc. App. Lexis 734 (Ct. App. Aug. 1, 2000); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of
Somerset, 316 F.3d 702, 2003 WL 132541 (7th Cir. 2003), the City finds
that adult-oriented establishments are frequently used for sexual
liaisons of a casual nature and unlawful sexual activities including
prostitution.
C. It has been documented that entertainers in adult-oriented
establishments offer to perform sexual acts for patrons, and that sexual
contact occurs between patrons and other employees of adult-oriented
establishments.
D. There is convincing documented evidence that booths, rooms or
cubicles in adult-oriented establishments have been used by patrons for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or in high-risk
sexual behavior and configuration of the interior of the premises is an
important factor in combating such activities.
§ 211-5 LAKE MILLS CODE § 240-1
1:142
E. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has published reports
that have been considered by the City relating to the subject of sexually
transmitted diseases and the concern over sexually transmitted
diseases is a legitimate concern of the City in order to protect the
health and well-being of its citizens.
F. There has been a steady increase in several types of sexually
transmitted diseases since 1986.
G. Researchers have found that contracting sexually transmitted diseases
may increase a person's vulnerability to human immuno-deficiency
virus (HIV), the virus that causes AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome) and some types of cancer.
H. AIDS is a sexually transmitted disease which destroys the body's
immune system.
I. The State of Wisconsin Division of Health reports that as of June 30,
1999, 4,217 cases of AIDS were reported in the state, including 2,507
that resulted in death and new cases of HIV infection have been
reported in Wisconsin each year.
J. The City is concerned with the protection of its minors from exposure to
age-inappropriate, sexually explicit materials and offenses.
K. Licensing is a legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to
ensure that the operators and employees of adult-oriented
establishments comply with reasonable regulations and to ensure that
operators and employees do not knowingly allow their establishments
to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation.
L. Information relating to pending charges and convictions of the
applicants is desired to further the City's interest in controlling the
secondary effects of adult-oriented establishments.
M. There is convincing documented evidence that adult-oriented
establishments have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses
around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent to them,
causing increased crime and the downgrading of property values.
N. The City Council has reviewed studies of the secondary effects of adultoriented
establishments and has concluded that if unregulated, they
present an increased risk of prostitution, high-risk sexual behavior and
crime, deleterious effects upon existing businesses and surrounding
residential areas, and decreased property values.
O. The City Council desires to minimize and control these adverse effects
and thereby protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizenry;
protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life;
preserve the property values and character of surrounding
neighborhoods.
§ 240-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-1
1:143
§ 240-2. Purpose and intent.
Based upon the findings stated above, it is the intended purpose of the
City to regulate adult-oriented establishments to promote the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations for the operation thereof so as to
minimize secondary effects of these establishments on the community. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor intent of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of
this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors
and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market.
The promotion of obscene materials which is not protected by the First
Amendment is subject to criminal sanctions under the state's penal code.
§ 240-3. Definitions.
The following terms have the meanings indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited,
wherein coin, slug, electronically, or mechanically controlled or operated
still or motion picture machines, projectors, computers, or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by depicting or describing specified sexual
activities.
P. It is not the intent of this chapter to suppress any speech activities
protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a content-neutral
ordinance which addresses the secondary effects of adult-oriented
establishments.
Q. It is not the intent of the City Council to condone or legitimize the
promotion of obscene material, and the City Council recognizes that the
law prohibits the promotion of obscene materials. The City Council
expects and encourages law enforcement officials to enforce antiobscenity
laws against any such illegal activities in the City.
R. Restricted hours of operation will allow law enforcement personnel to
concentrate on crime prevention during high crime hours and/or low
staffing hours by relieving them of enforcement duties relative to
prostitution, loitering, and criminal activity associated with adultoriented
establishments.
S. Prohibition of alcohol beverages on the premises will reduce the need
for law enforcement resources to respond to alcohol related problems
upon the premises, will reduce high-risk sexual activity and will
contribute to the reduction of secondary effects of adult-oriented
establishments.
§ 240-1 LAKE MILLS CODE § 240-3
1:144
ADULT BATHHOUSE — A commercial establishment which provides a bath
as a service and which provides to its patrons an opportunity for engaging
in specified sexual activities.
ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO — A commercial establishment wherein
patrons are afforded an opportunity to be painted or to paint images on
specified anatomical areas. An adult body painting studio does not include
a tattoo parlor.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — Any commercial establishment having as its stockin-
trade the sale, rental or lease for any form of consideration, any one or
more of the following:
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which features:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any motion picture, live
performance, display or dance of any type, which has as its dominant
theme, or is distinguished or characterized by specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR — A commercial establishment with or without
sleeping accommodations which provides the service of massage or body
manipulation, including exercise, heat and light treatment of the body, and
any form or method of physiotherapy, which also provides its patrons with
the opportunity to engage in specified sexual activities.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or other similar commercial establishment
which offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, film, motion
pictures, videocassettes, video reproductions, slides, or other visual
reproductions characterized by depicting or describing specified sexual
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, video reproductions, slides, or
other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas;
A.
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities;
B.
Facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment as defined herein,
including adult-oriented films, motion pictures, videocassettes, video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations for observation by
patrons therein.
C.
Live performances which are characterized or distinguished by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas; or
A.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, video reproductions, slides or
other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized
by depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
B.
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:145
activities or specified anatomical areas; and, has a sign visible from the
public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this type of adult
entertainment.
ADULT THEATER — An enclosed building such as a theater, concert hall,
auditorium or other similar commercial establishment which is used for
presenting adult entertainment.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes adult arcade, adult
bathhouse, adult body painting studio, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult
massage parlor, adult motel, adult theater, and any commercial
establishment presenting adult entertainment, whether or not such
establishment is operated or maintained for a profit.
APPLICANT — The individual or business entity that seeks to secure a
license under this chapter of the City municipal code.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council for the City of Lake Mills, Jefferson
County, Wisconsin.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including but not limited to operators,
entertainers, clerks, managers, janitors or other persons who work in or
at, or render any services directly related to the day-to-day operation of an
adult-oriented establishment. Employee, as used in this chapter, specifically
excludes independent contractors who are responsible for the improvement
or repair of the physical premises or who provide supplies to the
establishment, provided that these persons are not also in the position
of providing any other day-to-day services for the adult-oriented
establishment.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an adultoriented
establishment whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for
the entertainment and whether or not the entertainment is provided by
the person as an employee of the adult-oriented establishment or as an
independent contractor.
OPERATOR — The person who is designated on the license application to
be the person in charge of the daily operation of the premises and who is to
be the adult-oriented establishment's contact person for the municipality.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, corporation, association,
partnership, limited liability entity, or other legal entity.
PUBLIC AREA — Includes all areas of an adult-oriented establishment
except: a public rest room to the extent it is used for its proper purpose,
individual rooms rented in an adult motel, or areas to which patrons have
no physical or visual access.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
A.
§ 240-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 240-3
1:146
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following, simulated
or actual:
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF AN ADULT-ORIENTED
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
YOUTH FACILITY — Any facility where minors gather for educational or
recreational activities including but not limited to playgrounds, swimming
pools, libraries, licensed child-care facilities, or youth clubs.
§ 240-4. Licensing.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if opaquely
covered.
B.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
A.
Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio, cunnilingus, and anilingus.
B.
C. Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Excretory functions during a live performance, display or dance of any
type.
D.
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or other means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of the law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
A. License required for all adult-oriented establishments. From and after
the effective date of this chapter, no adult-oriented establishment shall
be operated or maintained in the City without first obtaining a license to
operate issued by the City. A license may be issued only for one adultoriented
establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person
desiring to operate more than one adult-oriented establishment must
have a license for each.
B. License required for all employees of adult-oriented establishments. In
addition to the license required by the establishment, all employees of
an adult-oriented establishment must also be licensed.
C. Change of name form. Any licensed adult-oriented establishment which
desires to change its name from that as listed on the original license
application must file a change of name form with the Clerk and pay a
fee as set by City Council at least 30 days prior to effectuating the name
change. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4
1:147
D. Effect of other licenses. The fact that a person possesses any other valid
license or permit required by law does not exempt that person from the
requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented establishment license under
this chapter.
E. Nontransferability of licenses. No license or interest in a license may be
transferred to any person. Any change in location for an adult-oriented
establishment shall require a new license application for that location.
F. License application procedure for adult-oriented establishments:
[Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
(1) Any person desiring to secure an adult-oriented establishment
license shall file an application together with two additional copies
of the application with the clerk.
(2) The application shall be on a form provided by the clerk.
(a) The following information shall be required of each applicant,
and must be provided under oath or affirmation:
[1] Name, including any aliases, date of birth, address, and
phone number.
[2] If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, limitedliability
corporation or limited-liability partnership, the
application shall include the name of the business entity;
the date of incorporation, registration or organization; the
state in which the entity was incorporated, registered or
organized; the name and address of the registered agent
where applicable; the names and addresses of all officers
and directors; operating or managing partners or general
partners; members or managers, whichever is applicable
for the particular form of business entity.
[3] If the applicant is an individual, written proof that the
applicant is at least 18 years of age and two copies of a
recent photo.
[4] If the applicant is a business entity, a statement that no
officer, director, partner, general partner, owner or
manager is less than 18 years of age.
[5] Name, address and phone number of the adult-oriented
establishment for which a license is being secured.
[6] Name and address of any other current or past adultoriented
establishment operated by the applicant whether
in this state or any other state or district within the United
States.
§ 240-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 240-4
1:148
[7] For any current adult-oriented establishments operated by
the applicant, the applicant shall describe the status of any
required license for the establishment.
[8] Nature and date of offense if the applicant has charges
pending or has been convicted of violating any of the terms
of this chapter.
[9] Offenses.
[a] Nature and date of offense if the applicant has charges
pending or has been convicted of any of the following
crimes in Wisconsin:
[i] Prostitution (§ 944.30, Wis. Stats.).
[ii] Patronizing Prostitutes (§ 944.31, Wis. Stats.).
[iii] Soliciting Prostitutes (§ 944.32, Wis. Stats.).
[iv] Pandering (§ 944.33, Wis. Stats.).
[v] Keeping a Place of Prostitution (§ 944.34, Wis.
Stats.).
[vi] Sexual Assault (§ 940.225, Wis. Stats.).
[vii] Sexual Gratification (§ 944.17, Wis. Stats.).
[viii] Lewd and Lascivious Behavior (§ 944.20, Wis.
Stats.).
[ix] Obscene Material or Performance (§ 944.21, Wis.
Stats.).
[x] Sexual Assault of a Child (§ 948.02, Wis. Stats.).
[xi] Engaging in Repeated Acts of Sexual Assault of
the Same Child (§ 948.025, Wis. Stats.).
[xii] Sexual Exploitation of a Child (§ 948.05, Wis.
Stats.).
[xiii] Causing a Child to View or Listen to Sexual
Activity (§ 948.055, Wis. Stats.).
[xiv] Incest with a Child (§ 948.06, Wis. Stats.).
[xv] Child Enticement (§ 948.07, Wis. Stats.).
[xvi] Soliciting a Child for Prostitution (§ 948.08, Wis.
Stats.).
[xvii] Exposing a Child to Harmful Material (§ 948.11,
Wis. Stats.).
§ 240-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4
1:149
[xviii] Possession of Child Pornography (§ 948.12, Wis.
Stats.).
[xix] Child Sex Offender Working with Children
(§ 948.13, Wis. Stats.).
[b] The statute numbers listed above are for reference
purposes only. In the event one or more of the crimes
listed above are renumbered or categorized
differently by an act of the legislature, the applicant
shall list those crimes for which the applicant has
been convicted that are similar in nature to those
listed above.
[10] Nature and date of offense if the applicant has charges
pending or has been convicted of an offense under a
statute analogous to those listed in Subsection F(2)(a)[9],
above, in a state other than Wisconsin, or under an
analogous ordinance of another municipal entity.
[11] Name, address and phone number of an individual who is
responsible for the day-to-day operation of the
establishment, who will be deemed the operator for
purposes of this chapter, and who will be the contact
person for the municipality.
[12] A statement that the applicant is familiar and in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter of the City's
municipal code.
[13] When the applicant is a business entity the information
requested of the applicant shall include the information
required in this chapter for each of the officers and
directors, partners and general partners, or other owners,
and managers of the business entity applying for the
license. This provision shall not apply to any owner of any
kind who holds an ownership interest of less than 10%.
(b) Each application shall be accompanied by:
[1] A building plan which meets all the requirements of this
chapter. Each application shall be accompanied by a
sketch or diagram showing the floor plan of the interior of
the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not
be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a 1/4
inch scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior
of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
[2] A written plan of operation which meets all the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 240-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 240-4
1:150
[3] A written site plan which meets all the requirements of
this chapter and the Zoning Code, if the Zoning Code for
the zoning district imposes any site plan requirements in
addition to those in this chapter.
(c) Each application shall be signed by the applicant.
(d) Each application shall be accompanied by payment of the
license fee as set by the City Council. Filing of the application
does not occur until this fee has been paid. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
(e) The Clerk shall date the filing of the application on the face of
the application.
(f) Upon filing of the application, each applicant shall place a sign
at the proposed business location providing notification of the
application. Each sign shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches
in size. The sign shall state "ADULT-ORIENTED
ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE APPLICATION PENDING" and
"APPLICATION FILED ON (fill in the date)." The letters on the
sign shall be no less than 1 1/2 inches high by two inches wide.
The sign must be placed in a conspicuous location so that it is
clearly visible to all passersby whether on the public road,
highway, sidewalk or parking lot.
(g) Upon receipt of the application, the Clerk shall immediately
distribute a copy of the application to the Building Inspector,
City Police Department, and the City Manager.
(h) The City Police Department shall notify the City Manager in
writing of any information bearing on the applicant's
qualifications, within 20 business days of the filing of the
application.
(i) The Building Inspector shall notify the City Manager in writing
as to whether or not the applicant's building plan, site plan,
and plan of operation comply with this chapter and the Zoning
Code,7 if the Zoning Code for the zoning district imposes any
requirements in addition to those in this chapter, within 20
business days of the filing of the application.
(j) The City Council shall within 45 days of the filing of the
application with the Clerk either grant the license or deny the
application after reviewing the application for compliance with
the licensing standards found in this chapter. If the City
Council fails to act upon the license application within 45 days
of the filing of the application with the Clerk, then the license
shall be deemed granted.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 660, Zoning Regulations.
§ 240-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4
1:151
(k) If the license is granted by the City Council, then the Clerk
shall issue the license on the next business day.
(l) If the City Council decides to deny the application for a license,
the City Council shall immediately notify the applicant in
writing of the reasons for denial. Such notice shall be sent to
the applicant within five days of the decision by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
(m) Any applicant aggrieved by such a decision of the City Council
shall be entitled to immediately appeal the City Council's
decision in circuit court. Such an appeal must be made within
30 days of the date of the written decision by the City Council.
The City explicitly elects not to be governed by Chapter 68,
Wisconsin Statutes, and to provide the review procedures
described in this chapter.
(n) Each license issued for an adult-oriented establishment shall
state on its face the name of the licensee, the name of the
establishment, the street address of the establishment, the
date of issue of the license and its expiration date.
G. License procedures for employees in adult-oriented establishments.
(1) Any individual desiring to secure an employee license shall file an
application together with two additional copies of the application
with the Clerk. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
(2) The application shall be on a form provided by the Clerk.
[Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
(3) The following information shall be required of each applicant, and
must be provided under oath or affirmation:
(a) Name, including any aliases, date of birth and address.
Pursuant to § 19.35(1)(am)2.a., Wis. Stats., the name and
address of any entertainer shall be considered as exempt from
disclosure under the public records law of the State of
Wisconsin because of potential danger to the life and safety of
such individuals from such disclosure.
(b) Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age and
two copies of a recent photo.
(c) Nature and date of offense and date if the applicant has
charges pending or has been convicted of any violations of any
of the terms of this chapter.
(d) Offenses.
[1] Nature and date of offense if the applicant has charges
pending or has been convicted of any of the following
crimes in Wisconsin:
§ 240-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 240-4
1:152
[a] Prostitution (§ 944.30, Wis. Stats.).
[b] Patronizing Prostitutes (§ 944.31, Wis. Stats.).
[c] Soliciting Prostitutes (§ 944.32, Wis. Stats.).
[d] Pandering (§ 944.33, Wis. Stats.).
[e] Keeping a Place of Prostitution (§ 944.34, Wis. Stats.).
[f] Sexual Assault (§ 940.225, Wis. Stats.).
[g] Sexual Gratification (§ 944.17, Wis. Stats.).
[h] Lewd and Lascivious Behavior (§ 944.20, Wis. Stats.).
[i] Obscene Material or Performance (§ 944.21, Wis.
Stats.).
[j] Sexual Assault of a Child (§ 948.02, Wis. Stats.).
[k] Engaging in Repeated Acts of Sexual Assault of the
Same Child (§ 948.025, Wis. Stats.).
[l] Sexual Exploitation of a Child (§ 948.05, Wis. Stats.).
[m] Child Enticement (§ 948.07, Wis. Stats.).
[n] Soliciting a Child for Prostitution (§ 948.08, Wis.
Stats.).
[o] Causing a Child to View or Listen to Sexual Activity.
(§ 948.055, Wis. Stats.).
[p] Incest with a Child. (§ 948.06, Wis. Stats.).
[q] Exposing a Child to Harmful Material (§ 948.11, Wis.
Stats.).
[r] Possession of Child Pornography (§ 948.12, Wis.
Stats.).
[s] Child Sex Offender Working with Children (§ 948.13,
Wis. Stats.).
[2] The statute numbers listed above are for reference
purposes only. In the event one or more of the crimes listed
above are renumbered or categorized differently by an act
of the legislature, the applicant shall list those crimes for
which the applicant has been convicted that are similar in
nature to those listed above.
(e) Nature and date of offense if the applicant has charges
pending or has been convicted of an offense under a statute
analogous to those listed in the subsection above in a state
§ 240-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4
1:153
other than Wisconsin, or under an analogous ordinance of
another municipal entity that is either in this or another state.
(f) A statement that the applicant is familiar with the provisions of
this chapter and is in compliance with them.
(g) A list of other similar or analogous adult entertainer or
employee licenses issued by any other municipalities, the name
and state of the municipality and the status of the license.
(h) Each application shall be signed by the applicant.
(4) Each application shall be accompanied by payment of the license
fee as set by the City Council. Filing of the application does not
occur until this fee has been paid. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(5) The Clerk shall date the filing of the application upon the face of
the application. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
(6) Upon receipt of the application, the Clerk shall immediately
distribute a copy of the application to the City Police Department
and the City Council. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
(7) The City Police Department shall notify the City Council in writing
of any information bearing on the applicant's qualifications as
required herein, within 20 business days of the filing of the
application.
(8) The City Council shall within 45 days of the filing of the application
with the Clerk, either issue the license or deny the application after
reviewing the application for compliance with the licensing
standards found in this chapter. If the City Council fails to act upon
the license application within 45 days of the filing of the application
with the Clerk, then the license shall be deemed granted.
[Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
(9) If the license is granted by the City Council, then the Clerk shall
issue the license on the next business day. [Amended 12-18-2012
by Ord. No. 1103]
(10) If the City Council decides to deny the application for a license, the
City Council shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for
denial. Such notice shall be sent to the applicant within five days of
the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(11) Any applicant aggrieved by such a decision of the City Council shall
be entitled to immediately appeal the City Council's decision in
circuit court. Such appeal shall be made within 30 days of receipt
by the applicant of the Council's written decision. The City
explicitly elects not to be governed by Chapter 68, Wisconsin
Statutes, and to provide the review procedures described in this
chapter.
§ 240-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 240-4
1:154
H. Procedures for alterations of licensed premises. Following the granting
of a license any licensee who wishes to alter any aspect of the licensed
premises which was required to be described in the building plan, site
plan or plan of operations required under this chapter, shall be required
to apply for a new license.
I. Licensing standards for initial licenses. The City Council shall grant an
initial license to an applicant unless it finds one or more of the following
to be true:
(1) The applicant is less than 18 years of age.
(2) The applicant has charges pending or has been convicted of
violating a provision of this chapter or an analogous ordinance of
another municipality within the five years immediately preceding
the date of application.
(3) The applicant has charges pending or has been convicted of a crime
specified in Subsection G(3)(d) or (e) above, and if convicted, for
which:
(a) Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a
misdemeanor offense;
(b) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a
felony offense;
(c) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are
for two or more misdemeanor offenses, or combination of
misdemeanor offenses, occurring within any twenty-fourmonth
period.
(d) The fact that an appeal has been taken from any of the abovementioned
convictions shall have no effect.
(4) The applicant provides false information on the application.
(5) The applicant fails to provide information, to post the required
notice, or to pay any fee required by this chapter.
(6) The adult-oriented establishment does not submit plans which meet
the requirements of Subsection F(2)(b)[1].
J. License expiration and renewal.
(1) Transfer of ownership or control of an adult-oriented establishment
shall result in automatic expiration of the existing license. Upon
§ 240-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4
1:155
§ 240-5. Location of adult-oriented establishments. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
If all the requirements for a license as stated in this regulation are met, an
adult-oriented establishment shall only be allowed to locate as a conditional
use in the I-2 Zoning District and shall be a prohibited use in any other
zoning district. (See § 660-93 of the Code.)
transfer of ownership or control, the procedures for a new license
application must be followed. In order to ensure continuous
operation, such procedures may also be commenced by a new
applicant prior to the expiration of the prior license.
(2) Every license issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate upon
the expiration of one year from the date of issuance unless sooner
revoked. Any licensee desiring to renew an initial license shall
make application to the Clerk. The application procedures
governing new licenses shall be followed by an applicant for a
renewal license. The application fee for a renewal license for an
adult-oriented establishment license or for an employee license
shall be as set by City Council. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1103; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(a) Any licensee desiring to renew an initial license shall file the
application for renewal no later than 60 days before the license
expires. Any licensee who fails to apply for a renewal license at
least 60 days before the license expires shall pay the same fee
as if the licensee were applying for an initial license.
(b) An existing license shall be allowed to continue until such time
as the City Council acts upon the renewal license application. If
the City Council fails to act upon the license application within
45 days of the filing of the application with the Clerk, then the
license shall be deemed granted.
(c) The City Council will not expedite the renewal procedure to
ensure that a license will not expire when the expiration of the
license is due to the licensee's untimely filing of a renewal
application. Upon expiration of a license under these
circumstances, the licensee is prohibited from operating or
serving as an employee until the new license is granted.
(d) A license may not be renewed if the City Council, following the
procedures found in this chapter, finds that a violation of this
chapter has occurred or that the applicant is not qualified to
hold the license.
(e) If the license is granted by the City Council, then the Clerk
shall issue the license on the next business day.
§ 240-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 240-6
1:156
§ 240-6. Operation of adult-oriented establishments.
A. No adult-oriented establishment is permitted to operate between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Further, no adult-oriented
establishment is permitted to operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and midnight on any Sunday or legal holiday as defined in § 995.20,
Wis. Stats.
B. No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall
permit to be performed, offer to perform, perform or allow patrons to
perform any specified sexual activity in the establishment or on the site.
This provision does not apply to adult motels, to the extent that such
specified sexual activity is not prohibited by law.
C. No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow
any minor to enter into, loiter around or to frequent an adult-oriented
establishment or to view adult entertainment.
D. The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary
manner at all times.
E. The operator shall maintain at least 10 footcandles of illumination in the
public areas of the establishment with the following exceptions:
(1) In a booth, room, or cubicle, if a lesser level of illumination is
necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment but at
no time shall there be less than 0.01 footcandle of illumination as
measured 30 inches from the floor;
(2) In an aisle adjacent to a booth, room, or cubicle, if a lesser amount
of illumination is necessary to allow the occupant to view the adult
entertainment, but at no time shall there be less than 1 1/2
footcandle of illumination as measured 30 inches from the floor.
(3) Adult theaters must maintain five footcandles of illumination in the
auditorium during intermission and no less than 0.01 footcandle
during a picture. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
F. All employees, while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified
anatomical area, shall maintain a three-foot distance from any patron or
other employee.
G. No rest room shall be designed, operated or maintained so that a patron
can view adult entertainment therein.
H. All performances in an adult cabaret shall be conducted upon a stage at
least 18 inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six
feet from the nearest employee or patron.
I. The selling, serving, possession, or consumption of alcohol beverages is
strictly prohibited at all times in all adult-oriented establishments.
§ 240-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6
1:157
§ 240-7. Design and layout.
J. No employee or operator shall knowingly work in or about or knowingly
perform any service directly related to the operation of any unlicensed
adult-oriented establishment in the City of Lake Mills.
K. All employees shall carry their license upon their person at all times
while working in the adult-oriented establishment and shall produce
said license upon demand for inspection by any law enforcement
authority. Entertainers are exempt from carrying their license upon
their person while providing entertainment, but shall be readily able to
produce said license upon demand for inspection by any law
enforcement authority.
L. The license for the adult-oriented establishment shall be displayed in a
conspicuous public place in the adult-oriented establishment.
M. No employee, operator, or owner may refuse law enforcement officials
entry into an adult-oriented establishment for purposes of inspecting
the adult-oriented establishment for compliance with these operational
standards during business hours, or at other times at a reasonable hour,
with reasonable notice.
N. The operator shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of
this chapter by the adult-oriented establishment, its employees and
patrons.
O. Every act or omission by any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs, either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
shall be accountable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
operator committed the act or caused the omission.
A. External visibility. At no time should any adult entertainment inside the
premises be visible to any persons who are outside the premises.
B. Booths. Any adult-oriented establishment having available for patrons
any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of adult
entertainment must comply with the following requirements:
(1) Access. Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to
and from aisles and public areas of the adult-oriented
establishment and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other
control-type devices.
(2) Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements:
(a) Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent
booths, rooms or cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
§ 240-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 240-7
1:158
§ 240-8. Exclusions.
All private and public schools as defined in Ch. 115, Wis. Stats., located
within the City are exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when
instructing pupils in sex education as part of its curriculum.
§ 240-9. Enforcement.
(b) All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended
from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light
colored.
(c) Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so
that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone
occupying the booth.
(d) Booths must be separated at least 12 inches from the exterior
walls of any other viewing booths by open space.
(3) Visibility. The interior of the booth, room or cubicle shall not be
blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes or any
other obstruction whatsoever.
(4) Lighting. Lighting for booth, room or cubicle shall comply with the
provisions of § 240-6E of this chapter.
(5) Occupants. Only one individual shall be permitted to occupy a
booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of the booth, room
or cubicle, shall be permitted to engage in any specified sexual
activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No
individual shall be permitted to damage or deface any portion of
the booth.
(6) Exception. This subsection does not apply to the individual rooms
located in adult motels.
A. License nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation.
(1) Causes for license nonrenewal, suspension or revocation. The City
Council may refuse to renew, suspend or revoke a license for any
violations of this chapter or if the applicant is not qualified to hold
the license.
(2) License nonrenewal, suspension and revocation procedures.
(a) In order to commence the procedure for a license nonrenewal,
suspension or revocation, the City shall notify the licensee in
writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the
alleged violation or cause and the intent of the City to seek a
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of the license.
(b) The licensee shall be entitled to a public hearing before the
City Council regarding the license nonrenewal, suspension or
§ 240-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9
1:159
revocation, upon written request to the City Clerk within 10
days of receipt of the notification required in Subsection
A(2)(a).
(c) Any public hearing requested pursuant to Subsection A(2)(b)
shall take place within 10 days of the filing of such written
request, unless the time limits are waived by both parties.
(d) At the hearing, both the City and the aggrieved party may be
represented by an attorney, present evidence, call and examine
witnesses, cross-examine witnesses of the other party, and
make opening and closing statements. Such witnesses shall be
sworn. The Council President shall be the presiding officer at
the hearing.
(e) Attorneys may issue subpoenas to compel attendance of
witnesses or the production of evidence. Subpoenas issued
must be in substantially the same form as provide in
§ 805.07(4), Wis. Stats., and must be served in the manner
provided in § 805.07(5), Wis. Stats. Copies of the subpoenas
must be served on the opposing party.
(f) The City Council shall cause the proceedings to be recorded by
a stenographer, the expense thereof to be paid by the City.
Costs for copies of any transcripts or transcription of a
recording shall be paid by the party requesting the transcript
or transcription. All exhibits shall be marked and preserved.
(g) Within 10 days of the completion of any hearing, the City
Council shall determine if cause for nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation exists. If no public hearing is requested, the City
Council shall make a determination within 20 days of the
notification date.
(h) The City Council shall issue its determination in writing and
provide it within five days to the licensee by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
(i) If a license period expires while a nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation procedure is pending, then the expiration of any
license shall be stayed pending the issuance of a determination
by the City Council on the nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation and during any pending judicial review of that
determination. The nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a
license shall become effective 30 days following the issuance of
a decision by the City Council, if judicial review is not
commenced as provided in this chapter.
(j) If judicial review of such determination by the City Council is
timely commenced, then license nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation shall not become effective until the Council's
determination is upheld.
§ 240-9 LAKE MILLS CODE § 240-9
1:160
Chapter 246
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 279. Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 362.
§ 246-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Lake Mills Alarm Systems Code."
This chapter shall be applicable to all alarm systems and users within the
City that fall under the jurisdiction of the City emergency services. Alarm
systems that fall under the jurisdiction of the City are those alarms to
which responses by public emergency services are requested. This chapter
(k) Any person aggrieved by the determination of the City Council
to nonrenew, suspend or revoke a license under this chapter
may seek judicial review of that decision in circuit court. Such
appeal to circuit court shall be made within 30 days of the
licensee's receipt of the written decision by the City Council.
The City explicitly elects not to be governed by Chapter 68,
Wisconsin Statutes, and to provide the review procedures
described in this chapter.
(l) Any person whose license is nonrenewed or revoked shall not
be eligible to receive a new license for a period of two years
from the effective date of the revocation. Any person whose
license is suspended shall not have said license reinstated until
the period of suspension has ceased.
B. Violations.
(1) Penalties. In addition to any other actions permitted by law or
taken by the Council, anyone who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-19 of the
Code of the City of Lake Mills. Each day that a violation exists shall
constitute a separate violation and be punishable as such.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) Injunction. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter may also
be enforced by an injunction properly issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction upon the request of the City.
(3) Nonexclusivity. The imposition of any penalty under this chapter or
the seeking of an injunction shall not impair the right of the City to
seek a nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a license as
provided in this chapter.
§ 240-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-1
1:161
does not apply to alarms or alarm systems installed for the sole purpose of
alerting occupants of a given building or structure to a potential hazard.
§ 246-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and
regulations applicable to burglar, fire and holdup alarm systems, alarm
businesses and alarm users. Both society in general and public safety in
particular will be aided by providing a useful and usable system of private
security which properly balances quick response by law enforcement and
fire protection personnel with minimization of time spent on alarms which
are false or otherwise not the intended function of private security systems.
The intent of this chapter is to minimize the amount of unwarranted time
and effort expended by the various departments by responding to false
alarms and to provide for a more efficient operation of emergency service
by the City.
§ 246-3. Definitions.
Within this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words and their
derivations have the meanings given herein.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any assembly of equipment or devices which, by means
of its design, is intended to warn of a hazardous or criminal incident to
which public emergency services are expected to respond. The term "alarm
system" shall include, but is not limited to, burglar alarm systems, holdup
alarm systems, and fire alarm systems. If the system emits an audible signal
or a signal by means of a lighting device, it shall be within the definition of
an alarm system and shall be subject to this chapter. The system shall be of
the type that shall not cause false alarms to be emitted due to power failure.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A telephone answering service providing among
its services the service of receiving on a continuous basis through trained
employees emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter
immediately relaying the message by live voice to the dispatch center of the
Police, Fire or Ambulance Departments.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — An alarm system which automatically
sends over regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
DIRECT CONNECT SYSTEM — An alarm system which has the capability of
transmitting system signals to the Police Department or Fire Department.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm signal, whether transmitted or relayed to the
Police Department, when an actual emergency does not exist.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner
or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents or other
undetermined cause when an actual emergency does not exist. "False
§ 246-1 LAKE MILLS CODE § 246-3
1:162
alarm" does not include alarms caused by tornadoes or other violent
climatic conditions.
INTERCONNECT — To connect an alarm system to a voice grade telephone
line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard
telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an
emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system.
SUPERVISOR ALARM — Any assembly of equipment or devices which, by
means of its design, is intended to warn of any variations in temperature,
humidity, water systems, electrical systems, sewage systems, or
communications systems.
§ 246-4. Administrative rules.
The Police Chief and Fire Chief may recommend to the City Council such
rules as may be necessary for the implementation of this chapter. The
Council may, by resolution, adopt such rules from time to time.
§ 246-5. Automatic dialing devices.
No person shall interconnect or permit the interconnecting of any automatic
telephone dialing device to the telephone lines of the Police Department or
Fire Department. Such devices may be connected to an answering service.
Relaying of messages shall be done on a person-to-person basis.
§ 246-6. Direct connections to Police Department and Fire
Department.
Direct connections to the Police Department and Fire Department are
prohibited, unless such installation is approved by the Chief of Police or Fire
Chief, respectively. All direct connections permitted shall be in compliance
with the standards of this chapter and any related rules adopted by the City
Council.
§ 246-7. Testing.
A. No alarm business or alarm system designed to transmit emergency
messages to the Police Department or Fire Department shall be tested
or demonstrated without prior notification and approval of the Police
Department or Fire Department dispatcher. Alarm businesses or alarm
system owners or lessors will be advised on proper test procedure.
B. No alarm system relayed through intermediate services to the Police
Department or Fire Department will be tested to determine the Police
Department's or Fire Department's response without first notifying the
appropriate authority. However, the Police Department may inspect or
test on-site alarm systems authorized under this chapter.
C. Alarm systems shall be in compliance with all pertinent response
policies of the Police Department or Fire Department.
§ 246-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-8
1:163
§ 246-8. Fee for answering false alarms.
A. Generally. Each false alarm requires response of public safety
personnel, involves unnecessary expense to the City, increases the risk
of injury to persons or damage to property and diminishes the overall
public safety protection to the City. Such false alarms constitute a
public nuisance.
B. Intentional. No person shall intentionally cause the activation of an
alarm device knowing that no criminal activity, fire or other emergency
exists.
C. False alarms; administrative charges. Any person, business,
corporation or other entity possessing an alarm system with alarm
device(s) at one or more locations within the City shall pay to the City a
charge for false alarms responded to at each location by the Police or
Fire Departments according to the following schedule for each calendar
year. Separate accounts shall be kept for false alarms relating to
criminal activity and false alarms for fire or other emergencies:
(1) The City shall not charge for one false alarm activated during a
one-year period, such period of time to be from the date of the first
or initial alarm, and terminate 365 days later.
(2) Fees.
(a) A fee shall be charged for each false alarm in excess of one per
each three-hundred-sixty-five-day period according to the
following schedule:
[1] Police Department response.
[a] Second through fourth: $25 each.
[b] Fifth through seventh: $50 each.
[c] Eighth and over: $100 each.
[2] Fire Department response.
[a] Second response: $50.
[b] Third response: $100.
[c] Fourth response: $200.
[d] Fifth response: $300.
[e] Sixth response: $500.
[f] Seventh response: $750.
[g] Eighth response: $1,000.
§ 246-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 246-8
1:164
§ 246-9. City liability.
The City of Lake Mills shall be under no duty or obligation to a subscriber or
to any other person concerning any provision of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, any defects in an alarm system or any delays in transmission
or response to any alarm.
Chapter 249
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 279. Sidewalk cafes — See Ch. 548.
(b) This subsection in intended to impose a strict liability on the
person, business, corporation, property owner or other entity
to whose premises the Police or Fire Departments has
responded and the fee shall be charged regardless of the cause
of the false alarm, excepting those alarms excluded from the
definition of "false alarm." Failure to pay within 30 days an
administrative charge imposed under this chapter shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
D. Police Department or Fire Department responses to supervisor alarms
constitute a nuisance and constitute a false alarm.
E. Owning, leasing, or otherwise controlling an alarm system which has
produced three or more false alarms in the previous 12 months to which
the Police or Fire Department has responded shall be presumed to be a
violation of this chapter, and such presumption may be overcome only
upon a showing that reasonable steps have been taken to eliminate the
future occurrence of false alarms generated by the alarm system.
F. Penalty. Any person, corporation or other entity violating this chapter
shall be subject to forfeiture as provided in § 1-19 of this Code. When
any premises located in the City is owned, leased or occupied by two or
more persons or entities, each person or entity may be subject to a
penalty upon violation of this chapter.
§ 246-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-9
1:165

ARTICLE I
Licenses and Permits
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 3, Ch. 1, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 249-1. State statutes adopted. [Amended 5-5-2020 by Ord. No.
1213]
The provisions of Chapter 125, relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages, including § 125.51(3)(b), Wis. Stats., excepting
§§ 125.66(3), 125.04(5), 125.09(6), 125.69 and 125.11(1), Wis. Stats.,
exclusive of any provisions thereof relating to the penalty to be imposed or
the punishment for violation of said statutes, are hereby adopted and made
a part of this chapter by reference.
§ 249-2. Licensing provisions.
A. Requirement generally. No person shall sell, barter, exchange, offer for
sale, or have in possession with intent to sell, deal or traffic in any
fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor, unless licensed as
provided in this section by the City Council of the City, nor without
complying with all the provisions of this chapter and all applicable
regulations of the City and of the State of Wisconsin.
B. Separate license requirement. A separate license shall be required for
each stand, place, room or enclosure or for each suite of rooms or
enclosures which are in direct connection where intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale; and no
license shall be issued to any person for the purpose of possessing,
selling or offering for sale any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverage in any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment.
C. Classes of licenses, fees. There shall be the following classes of licenses
which, when the fee specified is paid and the license issued, shall
permit the holder to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages as provided in § 125.51 , Wis. Stats.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(1) Class "A" Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer's License: $100 per
year.
(2) Retail "Class A" Liquor License: $500 per year.
(3) Class "B" Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer's Licenses: $100 per
year.
(4) Retail "Class B" Liquor License: $400 per year.
(5) "Class C" Wine: $100 per year.
§ 249-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-2
1:167
(6) "Class B" Wine Only - Winery License: $100 per year. [Amended
5-5-2015 by Ord. No. 1145]
(7) Reserve "Class B" Combination Liquor License: $10,000 initial
issuance fee/$500 per year renewal fee. [Amended 11-21-2007
by Ord. No. 1000B]
(8) Temporary "Class B" Wine License: $10.
(9) Temporary Class "B" Fermented Malt Beverages: $10.
(10) Part-time liquor licenses. A retail "Class A" or "Class B" liquor
license may be issued which shall expire on June 30 upon payment
of such proportion of the license fee as the number of months or
fraction of a month remaining to June 30 bears to 12. Such licenses
may also be issued for a period of six months in any calendar year,
for which 1/2 of the license fee shall be paid.
(11) Operator's license, which may be issued by the City Clerk under
§125.17(1), Wis. Stats.: $25 for a two-year license, expiring June 30
on each odd-numbered year. [Amended 11-17-2015 by Ord. No.
1156; 5-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1213]
(12) Provisional Operator's License, which may be issued by City Clerk
under § 125.17(5), Wis. Stats: $10. [Amended 2-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 1058]
(13) Provisional: Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B," and "Class C"
licenses, which may be issued by City Clerk under § 249-2J: $15
each.
(14) Manager's license: $25 per year.
(15) Publication costs: $15 per year.
(16) Temporary operator's license, which may be issued by City Clerk
under § 125.17(4), Wis. Stats.: $10 per license. [Added
10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 1182]
D. Manager's license, authority. All premises for which a Class "A" or Class
"B" license has been issued shall at all times be operated and managed
by the licensee; provided, however, that a person holding a manager's
license may operate or manage a licensed premises in the licensee's
absence. A person shall be deemed to operate and manage a licensed
premises if that person has the responsibility or authority for the
following:
(1) Personnel management of all employees, without regard to
whether the person is authorized to sign employment contracts;
(2) The terms of contracts for the purchase or sale of goods or
services, without regard to whether the person is authorized to
sign contracts for the goods and services; or
§ 249-2 LAKE MILLS CODE § 249-2
1:168
(3) The daily operations of Class "A" or Class "B" premises.
E. License quotas.
(1) Retail "Class B" Liquor License: as provided in § 125.51(4), Wis.
Stats.
(2) "Class A" Liquor licenses shall not be issued at a rate that exceeds
one license for every 1,000 in population or fraction thereof, as that
number is provided periodically by the Wisconsin Department of
Administration. [Amended 4-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1078A]
(3) Class "A" Beer licenses shall not be issued at a rate that exceeds
one license for every 700 in population or fraction thereof, as that
number is provided periodically by the Wisconsin Department of
Administration. [Amended 4-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1078A]
(4) If territory containing premises covered by a "Class A" Liquor
License or Class "A" Beer License is annexed into the City and if the
City's quota would not otherwise allow a Class A license for the
premises, the City's quota is increased to include the license of
each premises in the annexed territory. [Added 11-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 1156]
F. Application for license. Applications for intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverage licenses shall be in writing on a form
prescribed by § 125.04, Wis. Stats., and shall be sworn to by the
applicant and shall be filed with the Clerk not less than 15 days prior to
granting of such license. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
G. Granting of license. Opportunity shall be given by the City Council to
any person to be heard for or against the granting of any license except
a Temporary Class "B" License, Temporary "Class B" Wine License and
Temporary Class "AB" Fermented Malt Beverages. Each license shall be
numbered in the order in which issued and shall state the premises for
which issued, the date of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the
licensee.
H. Transfer of licenses. No license shall be transferable either as to
licensee or location.
I. In accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.26(1), the City
Council authorizes the City Manager to issue, under the following
conditions, either a Temporary Class "B" Fermented Malt Beverage
Licenses under Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6), or Temporary "Class B" Wine
Licenses under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(10), or both:
(1) The temporary license shall be for a period of time not to exceed 10
consecutive calendar days.
(2) Applicants shall state on the application form their intent as to
whether or not to allow underage people to be on the premises.
§ 249-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-2
1:169
§ 249-3. Restrictions to granting license.
In addition to the requirements imposed by the Statutes adopted in § 349-1
of this article, the following restrictions shall apply to the granting of
licenses under this section:
(3) All applications for a Temporary Class "B" License shall be
submitted at least 15 days prior to the period requested for the
license.
(4) The fee for all temporary Class "B" or "Class B" Licenses shall be
$10, unless both licenses are issued for the same event, in which
case, the fee shall be a total of $10 for both licenses.
(5) All restrictions and additional information listed on the application
for Temporary Class "B"/"Class B" Retailer's Licenses from the
State of Wisconsin are adopted and incorporated herein by
reference.
J. A provisional retail liquor license may be issued by the City Clerk only
to a person who has applied for a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class
B," or "Class C" license and authorizes only the activities that the type
of retail license applied for authorizes. Wis. Stats. § 125.185 is
incorporated herein in its entirety, including any future amendments
thereto.
A. No licenses shall be granted to any person who is not of good moral
character and a citizen of the United States and of Wisconsin and who
has not resided in this state continuously for at least 90 days prior to
the date of filing the application; nor shall any license be issued to any
person who has habitually been a petty law offender, or has been
convicted of a felony unless duly pardoned. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to a Wisconsin corporation, but such
provisions shall apply to all officers and directors of any such
corporation. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. No Class "A" or "B" license shall be granted to any person under legal
drinking age. Only an operator's license (bartender) can be issued to a
person 18 or older per § 125.04(5)(d)2, Wis. Stats. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. Delinquent taxes, assessments, or other claims owed the City:
(1) Premises. No initial or renewal of any alcohol beverage license
shall be granted for any premises for which taxes, assessments, or
other claims (including utility bills) are owing to the City and
remain delinquent and unpaid.
(2) Persons. No initial or renewal of an alcohol or operator's license
shall be granted to any person who owes the City any tax,
§ 249-2 LAKE MILLS CODE § 249-3
1:170
assessment or other claim (including utility bills), which
indebtedness is delinquent and unpaid.
(3) Revocation or suspension of licenses. Notwithstanding anything
contained herein to the contrary, where any alcohol beverage
license to be issued to any premises, or any alcohol or operator's
license to be issued to any person cannot be issued to that premises
or person for the reason that the premises or persons is indebted to
the City for taxes, assessments or other claims, including utility
bills, which remain delinquent and unpaid, the procedures for
revocations, suspensions or refusal to issue or renew as set forth in
§ 125.12, Wis. Stats., shall be followed. Where the premises or
person possesses a license that will expire before the conclusion of
any hearing to revoke, suspend or refuse to issue or renew a new
license, the City Clerk shall issue a conditional license that shall be
effective only until such time as the Council has concluded the
hearings provided by § 125.12, Wis. Stats.
D. No retail Class "B" license shall be issued unless the premises to be
licensed conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the
State Building Code,8 the State Plumbing Code,9 and the rules and
regulations of the State Department of Health Services applicable to
restaurants and to all ordinances and regulations adopted by the City.
E. Each premises for which a Class "B" license is granted must be
connected with City water and sewage facilities, must be properly
lighted and ventilated and supplied with separate toilet and lavatory
facilities equipped with running water for each sex.
F. No "Class B" liquor license shall be granted to any premises within 300
feet of any school, church, or hospital, nor in any residence district;
subject to the following conditions, definitions, and exceptions:
(1) A premises shall be deemed to be in a residence district if 2/3 of all
properties within 300 feet of the premises are used exclusively for
residential purposes.
(2) For the purpose of determining distances under this subsection, the
shortest route shall be measured from the main entrance of the
premises to the main entrance of the school, church, hospital, or
residence.
(3) The prohibition in this subsection does not apply to premises
covered by a license prior to the occupation of real property within
300 feet thereof by any school, church, or hospital.
(4) The prohibition in this subsection does not apply to restaurants, in
which the sale of alcoholic beverages accounts for less than 50% of
gross receipts, or to golf clubhouses, provided that a majority of the
8. Editor's Note: See § 279-1 of this Code.
9. Editor's Note: See § 279-3 of this Code.
§ 249-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-3
1:171
§ 249-4. Conditions of license.
electors in a residence district as defined herein sign and file with
the Municipal Clerk written consent for the issuance of a "Class
B" liquor license at a specified location. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
G. Subsection F shall not apply to a bona fide club, society or lodge in
existence not less than six months prior to the date of applications.
H. Except as otherwise provided for herein, there shall be upon the
premises operated under a "Class A" or "Class B" liquor license issued
by the City at all times the licensee or some other person who shall have
an operator's license issued pursuant to § 125.17, Wis. Stats. No
person, including members of the licensee's immediate family under the
age of 18 years, other than the licensee or agent, may serve fermented
malt beverages in any premises operated under a Class "A" or Class "B"
license or permit unless he has an operator's license.
I. Whenever any license shall be revoked, at least six months from the
time of such revocation shall elapse before another license shall be
granted for the same premises, and 12 months shall elapse before any
other license shall be granted to the person whose license was revoked.
J. No person other than a licensee or agent may serve fermented malt
beverages in any place operated under a Class "B" temporary license
issued by the City unless he has an operator's license or is under the
immediate supervision of the licensee or agent or person holding an
operator's license who is on the premises at the time of service.
A. Posting licenses for licensee. Every person licensed in accordance with
this chapter shall immediately post such license and keep the same
posted while in force in a conspicuous place in the room or place where
said beverages are drawn or removed for service or sale. No person
shall post such license upon premises other than those mentioned in the
application, or knowingly deface or destroy such license. Whenever a
license shall be lost or destroyed without fault on the part of the holder
or his agent or employee, a duplicate license in lieu thereof under the
original application shall be issued by the Clerk on satisfying himself as
to the facts.
B. Entry of officers; consent. Every applicant procuring a license thereby
consents to the entry of police or other duly authorized representatives
of the City at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and
search, and consents to the removal from said premises of all things
and articles there had in violation of City ordinances or state laws, and
consents to the introduction of such things and articles in evidence in
any prosecution that may be brought for such offense.
C. Health rules. Each premises shall be conducted in a sanitary manner
and shall be a safe and proper place for the purpose for which used. The
§ 249-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 249-4
1:172
City Council of the City is authorized and empowered to make
reasonable and general rules for the sanitation of all places of business
possessing licenses under this chapter. Such rules or regulations may
be classified and made applicable according to the class of business
conducted. All such rules and regulations shall have the same force as
this chapter and infraction thereof may be punished as a violation of
this chapter.
D. Special conditions upon a license may be imposed by a majority vote of
the City Council if those special conditions are not in conflict with the
provisions of Chapter 125, Wisconsin Statutes. These special conditions
shall be as determined by the Council on a case-by-case basis, given the
unique aspects or characteristics of the premises or other business
activities conducted on the premises. These special conditions may be
imposed at the time the license is initially granted by the Council or
upon application for renewal when the principal use of the premises is
modified by the applicant.
E. In addition to Subsection D above, which allows for special conditions
to be placed on a license by the City Council on a case-by-case basis,
provided those conditions are not in conflict with Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.,
the following conditions shall apply to all Class "A" fermented malt
beverage licenses:
(1) No sales of beer may occur between the hours of 12:00 Midnight to
6:00 a.m. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) All sales of beer shall take place in premises for which provisions
have been designed, reviewed and approved by the Council, under
Subsection D above, which minimize the ability of underage
persons to handle, sell or purchase beer, unless those underage
persons have an operator's license and are employed by the are on
duty at the licensed premises, and unless those persons so licensed
are acting within the scope of their licenses.
(3) Underage persons who enter or are on a Class "A" licensed
premises for the purpose of purchasing items other than alcoholic
beverages, may not remain on the premises after making said
nonalcoholic purchase, and may not loiter upon the premises.
(4) The City Council has the right not to grant a Class "A" license at
any time that it receives an initial application for any individual
premises and on any reasonable grounds.
F. In addition to Subsection D above, which allows for special conditions
to be placed on a license by the City Council on a case-by-case basis,
provided those conditions are not in conflict with Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.,
the following conditions shall apply to all "Class A" retail liquor
licenses:
§ 249-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-4
1:173
§ 249-5. Prohibited actions.
(1) No sales of intoxicating liquor may occur between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) All sales of intoxicating liquor shall take place in premises for
which provisions have been designed, reviewed and approved by
the Council, under Subsection D above, which minimize the ability
of underage persons to handle, sell or purchase intoxicating liquor,
unless those underage persons have an operator's license and are
employed by and are on duty at the licensed premises, and unless
those persons so licensed are acting within the scope of their
licenses.
(3) Underage persons who enter or are on a "Class A" licensed
premises for the purpose of purchasing items other than alcoholic
beverages, may not remain on the premises after making said
nonalcoholic purchase, and may not loiter upon the premises.
(4) The City Council has the right not to grant a "Class A" license at
any time that it receives an initial application for any individual
premises and on any reasonable grounds.
A. Employment of minors. No Class "B" retail liquor licensee shall employ
any person under 21 years of age, unless he or she has an operator's
license or is at least 18 years of age and is under the immediate
supervision of the licensee, permittee, agent or a person holding an
operator's license, who is on the premises at the time of the service.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Sales to intoxicated persons. No fermented malt beverage or
intoxicating liquor shall be sold to any person who is intoxicated.
C. Credit sales. No retail Class "A" or "B" licensee shall sell or offer to sell
any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage to any person on
credit excepting credit extended by a hotel to a resident guest or a club
to a bona fide member, and by grocers and druggists who maintain a
credit system in connection with other purchases as well. No licensee
shall sell intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages to any person
on a passbook or store order, or receive from any person any goods,
wares, merchandise or other articles in exchange for intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverages.
D. Disorderly conduct. Each licensed premises shall at all times be
conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent
conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises.
E. Gambling. No gambling or game of chance of any sort shall be
permitted in any form upon the licensed premises. Dice, slot machines,
§ 249-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 249-5
1:174
§ 249-6. Closing hours.
§ 249-7. License revocation and suspension.
§ 249-8. Restrictions on sale to and possession by minors.
or any device of chance are prohibited and shall not be upon the
premises.
F. Illegal beverages. No beverages of an alcoholic content prohibited by
the laws of the United States shall be sold, bartered, exchanged, offered
or exposed for sale, or kept in or about the premises.
G. Dancing. No dancing of any kind shall be permitted upon the premises
except by patrons.
H. Treating. There shall be no treating by the licensee at any time.
I. Club sales. No club, society or lodge shall sell intoxicating liquor except
to members and guests invited by members.
J. Sale by drink. All retail sales of intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverage to be consumed on the premises shall be by the individual
drink or pitcher, and the patron shall be charged by the individual drink
or pitcher for all such sales. The sale of any intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverage for consumption on the premises which would
permit the patron to consume an unspecified quantity of intoxicating
liquor or fermented malt beverage for a specified price is prohibited.
A. Liquor premises. The closing hours for all premises licensed under a
"Class B" liquor license or permit shall be as permitted in § 125.68(4),
Wis. Stats.
B. Beer-only premises. The closing hours for all premises licensed under a
Class "B" fermented malt beverage license or permit shall be as
permitted in § 125.32(3), Wis. Stats.
A. Liquor licenses. As provided in §§ 125.12(2)(b) and (c), 125.12(4) and
125.13, Wis. Stats.
B. License fee not to be refunded. Whenever any license shall be revoked,
no refund of any unearned portion of the fee paid shall be made, and at
least one year from the time of such revocation shall elapse before
another license shall be granted for the same premises. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
A. Restrictions relating to underage persons. No person may procure for,
sell, dispense or give away any fermented malt beverages to any
underage person not accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or
spouse who has attained the legal drinking age, or procure for, sell,
dispense or give away any intoxicating liquor to any underage person.
Any person who commits a violation shall be subject to a forfeiture of
§ 249-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-8
1:175
§ 249-9. Presence of underage persons in taverns prohibited.
not more than $500 if the person has not committed a previous violation
within 12 months of the violation, or not less than $200 nor more than
$500 if the person has committed a previous violation within 12 months
of the violation.
B. Underage persons. No underage person shall:
(1) Procure or attempt to procure alcohol beverages;
(2) Knowingly possess or consume intoxicating liquor;
(3) Enter or remain in any licensed premises except when
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or spouse who has
attained the legal drinking age; or
(4) Falsely represent his or her age for the purpose of receiving
alcoholic beverage from a licensee or permittee. Any underage
person who violates this section shall be subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in § 125.07(4)(bs), Wis. Stats.
A. Requirement generally. It shall be unlawful for any underage person not
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or lawful adult spouse to
enter or be on any premises for which a license or permit for the retail
sale of alcoholic beverages has been issued, for any purpose except the
transaction of business pertaining to the licensed premises with or for
the licensee or his or her employee. The business may not be
amusement or the purchase, receiving or consumption of edibles or
beverages or similar activities that normally constitute activities of a
customer of the premises. This prohibition does not apply to:
(1) Any underage person who is a resident, employee, lodger, or
boarder of the premises controlled by the proprietor, licensee or
permittee which licensed premises consists or is a part.
(2) Any underage person who enters or is on a Class "A" retail
intoxicating liquor license premises for the purpose of purchasing
edibles for beverages other than alcoholic beverages. Any
underage person so entering the premises may not remain on the
premises after the purchase.
(3) Hotels, drugstores, grocery stores, bowling alleys, regularly
established athletic fields, stadiums or public facilities as defined in
§ 125.51(5)(b)1.d, Wis. Stats., which are owned by a county or
municipality.
(4) Golf clubhouses.
(5) Premises operated under both a "Class B" and Class "B" license or
permit and a restaurant permit where the principal business
conducted is that of a restaurant. If the premises are operated
under both a "Class B" and Class "B" license or permit and a
§ 249-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 249-9
1:176
§ 249-10. Economic development grant.
restaurant permit, the principal business conducted is presumed
to be the sale of alcoholic beverages, but the presumption may be
rebutted by competent evidence.
B. Penalty.
(1) Any licensee or permittee who directly or indirectly permits any
underage person to enter or be on a licensed premises in violation
of this section is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $200 and not
more than $500 for each such violation.
(2) Any underage person who enters or is on a premises licensed for
the sale of alcoholic beverages in violation of Subsection A of this
section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $25, except
the disposition in proceedings against a person who is under 18
years of age on the date of disposition shall be as provided by
§ 938.344, Wis. Stats.
A. The City Council of the City of Lake Mills finds that the initial issuance
fee of $10,000 for reserve "Class B" liquor licenses, which has been
mandated by laws of the State of Wisconsin, exceeds the actual cost of
licensing the activity, and the fee thereby generates additional revenue
for the City. The Council also finds that it is in the interest of the public
welfare to use this additional revenue to:
(1) Provide economic incentives for new businesses with "Class B"
liquor licenses to locate in the downtown area;
(2) Encourage licensees to improve the interior or exterior of licensed
premises that reuse or redevelop existing structures in the
downtown area;
(3) Attract tourists to the City; and
(4) Generally enhance the economic and cultural climate by
redeveloping existing structures in the downtown of the City.
B. Within one year after any reserve "Class B" combination liquor license
is granted for which the initial issuance fee of $10,000 has been paid to
the City Clerk, the licensee may file an application with the Clerk for an
economic development grant of up to $9,500. [Amended 12-18-2012
by Ord. No. 1103]
C. The applicant that meets the initial grant criteria under Subsection B
shall state in its grant application how it has met the eligibility criteria
for an economic development grant by stating which of the following
applies to its establishment:
(1) Location in the downtown area of the City, with the downtown area
meaning a property that fronts on Commons Park or that is located
within one block of Commons Park.
§ 249-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-10
1:177
(2) The applicant has improved the exterior of the structure since
applying for the license. Photographs that show the exterior before
and after the improvements should be included with the grant
application.
(3) The applicant has improved the interior of the structure since
applying for the license. Photographs that show the interior before
and after the improvements should be included with the grant
application.
D. The Clerk shall verify the accuracy of the information with respect to
the criteria listed in Subsections B and C, and shall determine the
amount of the grant for which the applicant may be eligible by
determining which of the following conditions have been met by the
applicant: [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
(1) Locating in the downtown area shall be valued at $4,000 under the
grant.
(2) Improving the exterior of the structure shall be valued at $2,500
under the grant, provided the actual value of the improvements
completed, excluding signage, is equal to or greater than $2,500.
(3) Improving the interior of the structure shall be valued at $3,000
under the grant, provided the actual value of such improvements is
equal to or greater than $3,000.
E. The Clerk shall determine whether the licensee is operating in
compliance with the approved license. The Clerk may require the
recommendation of the Building Inspector, Police Chief, and Fire
Inspector in making such determination. If the Clerk determines that
the licensee is so operating, the Clerk shall authorize the approval of
the economic development grant in accordance with Subsections B, C
and D and in an amount not to exceed a maximum of $9,500.
[Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
F. If the Clerk determines that the applicant is not in compliance with the
approved license, or the applicant has not met the eligibility criteria
under Subsection B or C, no economic development grant may be
authorized and the Clerk shall provide the applicant with written notice
of such determination of noncompliance. [Amended 12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 1103]
G. If the applicant disagrees with the Clerk's determination of
noncompliance or ineligibility, the applicant may file a written notice of
appeal within 10 business days with the Clerk, who shall relay the
notice of appeal to the City Council which shall hold a hearing at which
the Council may affirm or reverse the Clerk's determination.
[Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
H. If the Clerk's determination is upheld by the Council, appeal may be
made to circuit court pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 753.04. If the Clerk's
§ 249-10 LAKE MILLS CODE § 249-10
1:178
determination is reversed by the Council, the Clerk shall authorize the
payment of the economic development grant. [Amended 12-18-2012
by Ord. No. 1103]
I. If the applicant for a grant under this section has already received a
grant for any of the purposes listed in Subsection D, that applicant may
not receive any future grant money for the same purpose for which the
money has already been granted. If either the interior or the exterior of
the structure at which the licensed premises is located is improved
after receiving the reserve license, but a grant has already been
awarded for locating the business downtown, the applicant may still
apply for grant money for the improvements made, provided the
application is received within one year of the issuance of the reserve
liquor license.
§ 249-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-10
1:179

ARTICLE II
Offenses
[Adopted 7-18-2006 by Ord. No. 985 (Sec. 5-1-6 of the 2009 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 249-11. Liquor on public ways prohibited.
No person may have in his or her possession any open can, bottle, or
other container containing malt beverages or intoxicating liquor, or may
consume alcoholic beverages on any public way, public street, public park,
sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, safety zone, alley or public parking lot or
on or in any motor vehicle parked on a public way, public park, public
street, alley or public parking lot. There shall be an exception for Tyranena
Park and Sandy Beach Park, where possession and consumption of malt
beverages or intoxicating liquors by persons who are not underage shall
be permitted. The City Council may grant temporary exemptions for this
section for such time and at such places as they may specifically designate.
The Council may, through issuance of a sidewalk cafe license, permit the
serving and consumption of fermented malt and other alcoholic beverages
on the portion of the public sidewalk that is licensed for sidewalk cafe
purposes, but such service and consumption must be in strict compliance
with the conditions of the license and the requirements of Chapter 548,
Sidewalk Cafes, of this Code.
§ 249-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-11
1:181
Chapter 255
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 279.
Firearms; hunting and trapping — See Ch.
354.
Nuisances — See Ch. 479.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 660.
§ 255-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 255-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — To be off the premises of the owner and not under the control
of some person either by leash or otherwise restrained or confined to a
vehicle. "At large" refers to all streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public or
private property which may be about the owner's premises.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL — An animal that does not possess a wild nature,
and such animal that has been developed by humans from a naturally
occurring species through long-term selective breeding of a captive
A. The City Council finds that it is necessary to regulate the ownership of
certain animals and to prohibit the possession of other animals because
of the City's interest in and duty to protect and promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of its residents.
B. The City Council finds that the ownership and certain treatment of
many animals are already regulated by the state, and where the state
statutes already address an area of regulation adequately, the City
Council finds it unnecessary to further regulate such matters through
the Municipal Code.
C. The City Council deems it necessary, however, to regulate in areas of
local concern where the state has not regulated the possession and
treatment of certain animals, and to promote and encourage
responsible pet ownership, while discouraging and deterring the
possession or treatment of animals which creates a nuisance or
potential threat to residents and their property.
D. The City Council finds that most animals within the City of Lake Mills
are the property of the State of Wisconsin, because they are wild
animals, and except for the purpose of prohibiting the private
ownership of such animals within the City, the Council's primary intent
in this chapter is to establish regulations applicable to the possession
and treatment of domesticated, non-wild animals.
§ 249-11 LAKE MILLS CODE § 255-2
1:182
population to produce a distinct, new form exhibiting specific physiological,
morphological and behavioral characteristics which are desirable or useful
to humans, and which set it apart from its wild ancestor. A "domesticated
animal" shall also mean an animal species that exists exclusively or
primarily in association with humans and is generally dependent on humans
for its survival, and that exhibits certain "domestic" behavioral
characteristics, among which is a lack of inherent fear of humans, a lack of
aggression, a docile nature, sociability, a tendency to be comfortable in the
human environment and a desire for human contact.
EXOTIC ANIMALS — Include, but are not limited to, poisonous snakes,
constricting snakes, tarantulas, poisonous spiders and insects, nonhuman
primates, rats, raccoons, skunks, wolves, wolf/dog mixed breeds, bats,
squirrels, fox, leopards, panthers, tigers, lions, lynx, other warm-blooded
animals which normally and primarily are found in the wild state, and any
member of the crocodilian family, including, but not limited to, alligators,
crocodiles, caimans and gavials. For purposes of this section, a bird, simply
because it is commonly referred to as being an "exotic" type of bird, does
not automatically classify such bird as an exotic animal.
FUR-BEARING ANIMALS — Include, but are not limited to, otter, beaver,
mink, muskrat, marten, fisher, skunk, raccoon, fox, weasel, opossum,
badger, wolf, coyote, wildcat and lynx.
GAME ANIMALS — Include, but are not limited to, deer, moose, elk, bear,
wild rabbits, squirrels, fox and raccoon.
GAME BIRDS — Include, but are not limited to, wild geese, brant, wild
ducks, wild swan, rails, coots, gallinules, jacksnipe, woodcock, plovers,
sandpipers, ruffed grouse (partridge), pinnated grouse (prairie chicken),
sharp-tailed grouse, pheasants, Hungarian partridge, Chukar partridge,
bobwhite, quail, California quail and wild turkey.
GAME FISH — Include all varieties of fish except rough fish and minnows
native to the waters of the state.
LIVESTOCK — Includes, but is not limited to, chickens, domestic ducks,
domestic geese, turkeys, peacocks, pigeons, ostriches, emus, goats, pigs,
potbelly pigs, swine, mules, donkeys, burros, horses, ponies, cattle, sheep,
buffalo, mink and any other domesticated farm animal, excluding dogs and
cats.
NONGAME SPECIES — Any species of wild animal not classified as a game
fish, game animal, game bird or fur-bearing animal.
OWNER — A person who owns, harbors, keeps or controls an animal.
POSSESS — To own, restrain, keep in captivity or transport an animal.
PROTECTED WILD ANIMALS — Includes, cougar, badger, moose, elk,
wolverine, flying squirrel, white deer, woodchuck, prairie chicken, Canada
spruce grouse (spruce hen), mourning doves, swans, cranes, bittern,
plovers, kingfishers, cormorants, heron, sandpipers, grebes, eagles, hawks,
falcons, owls, hen pheasants, and any endangered or threatened species
listed in Ch. NR 27, Wis. Admin. Code.
§ 255-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-2
1:183
VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Any animal, reptile, insect or fish
that constitutes a physical threat to human beings.
WATERFOWL — Wild geese, brant, wild ducks, rails, coots, gallinules,
jacksnipe, woodcock, plovers, sandpipers and wild swan.
WILD ANIMAL — Any mammal, bird, fish, or other creature of a wild
nature endowed with sensation and the power of voluntary motion. "Wild
animal" also means any undomesticated mammal, bird, or other animal. If
a particular animal has never known the wild, if members of its species
possess a wild nature and typically are found in the wild, such particular
animal shall be deemed to be a wild animal.
§ 255-3. Prohibited animals.
A. No person may possess, own, or sell any live game animal, game bird,
game fish, fur-bearing animal, waterfowl, protected wild animal, or
nongame species of wild animal within the City of Lake Mills, unless
such person has been licensed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources to rehabilitate specific, injured wild animals, or unless such
person possesses an animal specifically trained to assist a disabled
person residing on the premises with daily living activities.
B. No person may possess, own, or sell any live, wild or domestic skunk
within the City. A wild skunk means any skunk except a domestic skunk.
A domestic skunk means any skunk raised on a fur animal farm licensed
by the state.
C. No person may possess or own any livestock within the City in any area
not zoned agricultural, except that no more than six chicken hens, but
not roosters, may be kept on single-family residential properties,
provided a current, annual license for the keeping of chickens has been
granted under § 255-6D. [Amended 3-6-2012 by Ord. No. 1097A]
D. No person may possess or own any dangerous, vicious or exotic animal
within the City.
E. In addition to any penalty that may be imposed for violating this
section, the City may also seek any other lawful remedy to remove or
abate a public nuisance.
F. The provisions of Subsections A, C and D of this section may be
temporarily waived with respect to possession of prohibited animals if
an application for a permit by a civic, religious, educational or
charitable organization is presented to the City Manager prior to an
event requiring such waiver and permit, and if the City Manager grants
the permit. The City Manager may require information on location and
transportation of prohibited animals, and the City Manager may require
proof of insurance prior to granting the permit. A decision by the City
Manager not to grant the permit may be appealed within 30 days to the
City Council. The granting of the permit does not waive any other
provisions of this chapter, nor does it waive any applicable
§ 255-2 LAKE MILLS CODE § 255-3
1:184
§ 255-4. Restricted animals.
The keeping of unlimited numbers of nonprohibited animals as pets in
residential areas may give rise to conditions which present a threat to
human health, safety, and general welfare. If such conditions are
determined to exist, nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from
seeking any lawful remedy to remove or abate a public nuisance.
§ 255-5. Keeping of animals.
requirements under state or federal law. [Amended 8-6-1997 by Ord.
No. 755]
A. The provisions of § 95.21, Wisconsin Statutes, and any amendments,
shall be followed with respect to the rabies control program. For the
purposes of enforcing these provisions, the City Council hereby
authorizes employees of the Jefferson County Humane Society to act as
officers, in addition to the City's law enforcement officers, for purposes
of quarantining or sacrificing animals suspected of biting persons or of
being infected or exposed to rabies. Any violations of § 95.21, Wis.
Stats., may be referred to the Jefferson County District Attorney for
prosecution.
B. The provisions of Ch. 174, Wisconsin Statutes, and any amendments,
shall be followed with respect to the impoundment of dogs for running
at large, and the employees of Jefferson County Humane Society, and
the City's law enforcement officers, are empowered and authorized as
officers to carry out the procedures of impoundment as set forth in the
statutes.
C. Prohibitions.
(1) Because of the potential threat to the safety of persons and their
property and to the general welfare, it shall be unlawful for any
person to harbor or keep an animal that:
(a) Assaults, attacks, bites or injures any person or domesticated
animal without provocation or charges at the boundary of the
owner's premises or at the end of its leash or other restraint in
an attempt to attack without provocation. Acts of provocation
include:
[1] Any person who attacked such animal or who engaged in
conduct reasonably calculated to provoke such animal to
attack or bite a person or domesticated animal;
[2] Any person engaged in attacking or molesting another
person; or
[3] Any person, dog, cat or domesticated animal engaged in
unlawful or unauthorized entry into or upon the fenced or
enclosed portion of the premises upon which such animal
§ 255-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-5
1:185
§ 255-6. Licensing of animals.
is kept, or into any automobile or other vehicle in which
such animal is confined.
(b) Habitually leaves its owner's property to pursue any vehicle
upon any public street, alley or highway in the City.
(c) Trespasses on school grounds, or cemeteries, or are in parks
where pets are prohibited by ordinance under § 496-12 of this
Code.
(d) Is at large within the City limits.
(e) Damages private or public property.
(f) Habitually howls, yelps, barks, crows or otherwise make noises
that unreasonably annoy or disturb other residents within the
City.
(g) Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have
been bitten by an animal known to be infected with rabies.
(h) In the case of a dog or cat, is not licensed as required under
§ 255-6.
(2) In addition to other penalties imposed for violating this provision,
an animal running at large may be impounded. In addition to
penalties that may be imposed for violating this provision, the City
may also seek any other lawful remedy to remove or abate a public
nuisance.
D. Because of the potential threat to the health and general welfare of
persons, it shall be unlawful for any person who owns or possesses an
animal to neglect to remove or to cause the removal of feces deposited
by the animals on public or private property, including said person's
own property. In addition to penalties that may be imposed for violating
this provision, the City may also seek any other lawful remedy to
remove or abate a public nuisance.
A. The provisions of Ch. 174, Wisconsin Statutes, and any amendments,
shall be followed with respect to the licensing of dogs, owner's liability
for damage caused by dogs, court orders to kill a dog, impoundment of
dogs for running at large and for not being licensed, and penalties. Any
violations of Ch. 174, Wis. Stats., may be referred to the Jefferson
County District Attorney for prosecution.
B. Every owner of a dog or cat in the City of Lake Mills shall license every
dog or cat that is owned, harbored, or kept within the City within 30
days of commencement of ownership or possession, or within 30 days of
the dog's or cat's attainment of five months of age, and such license
shall be obtained every year thereafter on or before January 1. If such
license is not obtained prior to March 31 in any given year after the dog
§ 255-5 LAKE MILLS CODE § 255-6
1:186
or cat is five months old, then a $5 late fee shall be imposed, in addition
to any other penalty. Proof of current rabies vaccination of every dog to
be licensed shall be required prior to the issuance of the license. The
fees for licensing of dogs and cats within the City shall be set by the
Council by resolution from time to time.
C. Every person who owns or possesses a dog or cat within the City that is
over five months old and who has owned or possessed such animal for
more than 30 days shall have a current license tag attached to the
animal whenever the animal is outdoors unless the dog or cat is
securely confined to a fenced area.
D. No person may keep chickens on property not zoned agricultural,
unless that person has been granted an annual backyard chicken
license by the City Clerk under this section, and unless the keeping of
chickens under the license continuously meets the following conditions
and requirements: [Amended 3-6-2012 by Ord. No. 1097A]
(1) The fee for the backyard chicken license shall be $10 and is payable
by January 1 of any license year, subject to a late fee of $10 if said
license fee is not paid by March 31.
(2) The applicant for the backyard chicken license shall apply on forms
obtained from the City Clerk and shall obtain a building permit for
the required enclosure from the Building Inspector, or shall have a
site plan approved by the Building Inspector if the enclosure
already exists and is not being modified, prior to receiving an initial
or modified backyard chicken license.
(3) No more than six chickens may be kept under the backyard chicken
license, and all chickens under said license shall be kept on a
parcel or lot with a single-family dwelling.
(4) No chickens subject to the backyard chicken license may be
roosters or guinea hens.
(5) All chickens under the license shall be provided with a covered
enclosure for which a building permit for an accessory structure
has been obtained under the Building and Zoning Codes,10 or for
which a site plan approval has been received from the Building
Inspector if the covered enclosure was a preexisting structure, and
all chickens shall be kept at all times within the covered enclosure
or within a fenced enclosure area that is contiguous with the
covered enclosure.
(6) As a condition of licensing, no covered enclosure or fenced
enclosure area may be located within 15 feet of any property line,
nor may such structure or fenced area be located nearer to an
abutting public street than the single-family dwelling that is
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 279, Building Construction, and Ch. 660, Zoning Regulations.
§ 255-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-6
1:187
§ 255-7. Cruelty to animals.
The provisions of Ch. 951, Crimes Against Animals, of the Wisconsin
Statutes shall be followed, and any violations of Ch. 951 may be referred to
the Jefferson County District Attorney for prosecution.
§ 255-8. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-19
of this Code. Each violation and each day on which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not preclude
the City from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a
violation of this chapter.
located on the parcel or lot that is subject to the backyard chicken
license.
(7) A licensee shall apply for a modification to the backyard chicken
license if substantial modifications to the covered enclosure or
fenced area are made during any license year.
(8) No chickens may be slaughtered within the boundaries of the City
unless such slaughtering activity occurs on property zoned
agricultural.
(9) Failure to maintain the covered enclosure and fenced enclosure
area in a nuisance-free manner by regularly removing droppings
and disposing of them properly so as to not attract insects or
rodents, or failure to maintain the covered enclosure and fenced
enclosure so as not to become unsightly or cause objectionable
odors, may be considered to be violations of the conditions of the
license and may also be grounds for enforcement under the
nuisance ordinances in Chapter 479, Nuisances, of this Code.
(10) Violations of the licensing requirements in this section may result
in nuisance enforcement by the Building Inspector under § 479-6 or
479-8, or may result in license revocation if there are three or more
violations within any twelve-month period.
(11) Owning or possessing live chickens on property that is not zoned
agricultural without obtaining the backyard chicken license may be
deemed to be a violation of this chapter and may be enforced under
§ 255-8 of this chapter, in addition to being enforced under § 479-6
or 479-8 of Chapter 479, Nuisances.
§ 255-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 255-8
1:188
Chapter 264
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 615.
§ 264-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals and
having wheels any two of which are not less than 14 inches in diameter. For
purposes of this chapter, a bicycle is a vehicle.
HIGHWAY — All public ways and thoroughfares and bridges on same. It
includes the entire width between the boundary lines of every way open
to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular
travel. For the purposes of this chapter, "highway" also means "street" and
"roadway."
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PEDESTRIAN — The operator of a vehicle is
required to reduce speed or stop if necessary, to avoid endangering,
colliding with or interfering in any way with pedestrian travel.
§ 264-2. Registration requirements.
A. No person shall operate a bicycle upon any street within the City unless
said bicycle shall first have been properly registered and tagged as
herein provided.
B. Every owner or operator of any bicycle within the City shall file with the
Police Department a complete description of such bicycle, and such
filing shall constitute a registration of such bicycle for the purposes of
this chapter. Such registration shall be serially numbered and be kept
on file by the Police Department as a public record.
C. Immediately upon the registration of a bicycle, the Lake Mills Police
Department employee shall affix to such bicycle an identification tag
serially numbered to correspond to the registration of such bicycle.
Such tag shall thereafter remain affixed to such bicycle unless removed
for replacement with another tag upon reregistration.
D. The fee for registering bicycles shall be $5, and the registration shall be
effective for the period of time during which ownership remains
unchanged.
§ 255-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-2
1:189
§ 264-3. Bicycle equipment.
§ 264-4. Bicycles prohibited on specified sidewalks.
The riding of bicycles is prohibited on sidewalks adjacent to the following
streets: Main Street between Water Street and Madison Street; East Lake
Street between Ford Court and Main Street; West Lake Street between
Main Street and a point 260 feet west from the west line of Church Street
where Church Street intersects West Lake Street.
§ 264-5. Riding on sidewalks.
Except for the prohibition in § 264-4, riding of bicycles is permitted on all
City sidewalks, subject to the following provisions:
§ 264-6. Regulations for riding bicycles on streets.
E. Within 10 days after the ownership of a registered bicycle has been
transferred, the new owner shall reregister the bicycle and shall pay
the registration fee.
A. No bicycle shall be permitted on any street or highway of the City
between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise without
a clear, white light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from
the front thereof for not less than 500 feet indicating the approach or
presence of the bicycle.
B. No bicycle shall be permitted on any street or highway of the City
between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise without
a red light or reflex mirror attached to and visible for 500 feet from the
rear thereof.
C. No person on a bicycle shall install or use a siren.
A. Every person operating a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield the rightof-
way to any pedestrian and shall exercise due care and give an audible
signal when passing a bicycle rider or pedestrian proceeding in the
same direction.
B. The provisions of § 264-6A through D apply when riding upon a
sidewalk.
A. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
B. Except as provided in Subsection C, no bicycle may be used to carry or
transport more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed.
C. In addition to the operator, a bicycle otherwise designed to carry only
the operator may be used to carry or transport a child seated in an
auxiliary child's seat or trailer designed for attachment to a bicycle if
§ 264-2 LAKE MILLS CODE § 264-6
1:190
§ 264-7. Parental responsibility.
Any parent or guardian of any child who authorizes or knowingly permits
such child to violate any provisions of this chapter may be issued a citation
and may be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of $20 plus costs for a first
offense, and a fine of $50 plus costs for subsequent offenses within one year
of the first offense.
§ 264-8. Violations and penalties.
the seat or trailer is securely attached to the bicycle according to the
directions of the manufacturer of the seat or trailer.
D. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the operator from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars, and no person operating a bicycle shall, for any other
reason, do so without keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
E. No person riding a bicycle shall attach himself or herself or his or her
bicycle to any vehicle upon a roadway or street.
F. Unless preparing to make a left turn, every person operating a bicycle
upon a roadway or street carrying two-way traffic shall ride as near as
practicable to the right edge of the unobstructed traveled roadway.
Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway or street shall
exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in
the same direction, allowing a minimum of three feet between the
bicycle and the vehicle.
G. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway or street shall ride single file.
H. Every rider of a bicycle shall, upon entering a roadway or street, yield
the right-of-way to vehicles.
I. Every person riding a bicycle upon any street in the City shall observe
all traffic signs and signals and shall stop at all stop signs.
J. No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper and
every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard for the safety of
the operator and every person upon the streets of the City.
K. No person shall operate a bicycle upon any street of the City while
under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
A. Any person 16 or older violating any provision of this chapter may be
subject to a forfeiture of not more than $20 for the first offense, and not
more than $50 for second and subsequent offenses within one year,
along with the costs of prosecution. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Any person between the ages of 12 and 16 years violating any provision
of this chapter may be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $10, plus
costs, for the first offense, and to a forfeiture of not more than $25, plus
§ 264-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-8
1:191
Chapter 271
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 479. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 573.
§ 271-1. Mowing requirements.
No owner of property within the City shall permit to grow or pollinate upon
the owner's property any noxious weeds or grasses which may cause hay
fever in human beings, produce unpleasant or noxious odors, conceal filthy
deposits or provide a place for the accumulation of trash or litter. In order to
prevent such growth and pollination, it shall be the duty of every property
owner to mow or cause to be mowed upon the owner's property all grasses
or weeds exceeding eight inches in height, unless that property is exempt
under the provisions listed in the next section.
§ 271-2. Exempt properties.
costs of prosecution, for second and subsequent offenses within one
year.
C. Any person under 12 years of age violating any provision of this chapter
may be issued a violation warning notice along with the following
additional actions:
(1) First offense in one year: a warning letter sent to the parent or
guardian.
(2) Second offense in one year: a warning letter sent to the parent or
guardian requiring their signature and return of the warning notice
to the Police Department.
(3) Third and subsequent offenses in one year may be subject to a
citation being issued to the parent or guardian for violation of
§ 264-7.
D. Other remedies. Any person violating any provision of this chapter may
be subject to other remedies available by law, whether those remedies
are authorized by ordinance, statute, regulation, or order.
A. Properties exempt from the mowing requirement in § 271-1 are the
following:
(1) Vacant improved lots, unless an existing house abuts the vacant lot.
However, in the case of this exemption, the grasses and weeds shall
be mowed to a height not exceeding 12 inches. An improved vacant
§ 264-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 271-2
1:192
§ 271-3. Noxious weeds and grasses.
Noxious weeds and grasses are defined as and shall include any and all
weeds and other vegetation prohibited by Wis. Stats. § 66.0407, or which
have been designated by the City herein:
Common Name(s) Latin Name(s)
Canada thistle Cirsium arvense
Leafy spurge Euphorbia esula
Field bindweed (Creeping Jenny) Convolvulus arvensis
§ 271-4. Enforcement.
Upon written complaint by an adjoining property owner, the Weed
Commissioner, who shall also be the Parks and Forestry Director, and who
shall have the powers established herein and under Wis. Stats. § 66.0517,
may enforce the mowing requirement of this chapter. All enforcement is
to be commenced by mailing or serving the property owner with a notice
of violation that orders the property owner to mow the noxious weeds or
grasses within seven calendar days from receipt of the notice. In addition,
the Commissioner has authority to make his own determination that a
notice of violation should be provided to the property owner, absent a
written complaint by an adjoining property owner.
lot is a lot that has the necessary infrastructure that would allow
for development, but has not yet been developed.
(2) Vacant, unimproved lots that are in remote locations, except the
mowing requirements listed for vacant improved lots shall apply.
(3) Lands that are zoned or mapped as wetlands.
(4) Lands that are located in designated, environmentally sensitive
areas.
(5) Lands that are considered to be rough, wet or wild by the Parks and
Forestry Director.
(6) Lands used for agricultural purposes and that are subject to only
one seasonal harvest.
(7) Lands subject to government programs, such as a state forest land
management program or a crop set-aside program for agricultural
lands.
(8) Natural landscapes approved by the Weed Commissioner.
B. The Weed Commissioner may require a mowed or maintained buffer
zone of a minimum of three feet between exempted property and
adjoining properties. This requirement may be enforced by using the
same procedures to enforce the mowing requirement of this chapter.
§ 271-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-5
1:193
§ 271-5. Mowing by City. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
If any person shall fail to comply with the written order, the Weed
Commissioner may cause the property to be mowed and report the cost
thereof in writing to the Treasurer in the manner provided in Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0517. Such costs shall be placed on the tax roll and charged against
the property as a special tax to be collected in the same manner as other
taxes, unless the property is exempt from taxation.
§ 271-6. Nuisance or invasive weeds and grasses.
In addition to the requirement that properties be mowed to prevent the
growth or pollination of noxious weeds and grasses, the City Council deems
it to be in the interest of the general welfare of the public to regulate
nuisance or invasive weeds and grasses in accordance with the following
provisions:
A. Nuisance or invasive weeds and grasses are defined as those nonindigenous
species or strains that tend to replace native vegetation by
establishing themselves in natural plant communities and wild areas.
Nuisance or invasive weeds and grasses include, but may not be limited
to, the following:
Common Name(s) Latin Name(s)
Burdock (Yellowdock) Arctium lappa
Garlic mustard Alliaria petiolata
Goatsbeard (oyster plant) Tragopogon porrifolius
Marijuana Cannabis sativa
Nettle Urtica dioica
Oxeye daisy Chrysanthemum leucanthemum
Pigweed (lambs quarters) Chenopodium album
Poison ivy Rhus radicans
Purple loosestrife Lythrum salicaria
Quackgrass Bromus brizaeformis
Ragweed (common) Ambrosia artemisiifolia
Ragweed (great) Ambrosia trifida
Spotted knapweed Centaurea maculosa
Thistle bull Cirsium vulgare
Thistle must or nodding Carduus nutans
Thistle star (caltrops) Centaurea calicitrapa
Thistle sow (field) Sonchus arvensis
Thistle sow (common) Sonchus oleraceus
Thistle sow (spiny leaved) Sonchus asper
§ 271-5 LAKE MILLS CODE § 271-6
1:194
§ 271-7. Complaints of nuisance or invasive weeds and grasses.
Upon a written complaint by any adjoining property owner or by the Weed
Commissioner's own determination, the Commissioner may inform the
property owner of the complaint or determination and provide written,
educational materials to the property owner regarding the harms likely to
occur through the growth and proliferation of nuisance or invasive weeds
and grasses. In the case of rough, wet or wild areas that have a proliferation
of invasive or nuisance weeds or grasses, the Commissioner may order the
property owner to provide a buffer zone of three feet between the invasive
or nuisance weeds and grasses and any adjoining property. Said order may
be provided in the same manner as are orders to enforce the mowing
requirement for noxious weeds and grasses.
Chapter 279
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 246.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 286.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 292.
Housing code — See Ch. 402.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 565.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 573.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 650.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 660.
B. The Weed Commissioner is authorized to add other weeds and grasses
to the list of nuisance weeds and grasses when he deems the
designation to be appropriate, given the prevalence and severity of the
invasiveness of nonindigenous species not so designated upon passage
of this chapter.
§ 271-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-7
1:195

ARTICLE I
Uniform Building Code
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I).]
§ 279-1. Scope.
The provisions of the Wisconsin Uniform Building Code (this code) shall
govern the design, construction, alteration, demolition and moving of all
buildings and structures constructed prior to the effective date of the State
of Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services (SPS) Uniform
Dwelling Code.
§ 279-2. Title.
These regulations shall be known and cited as "City of Lake Mills Building
Code" and shall be construed to secure their expressed intent and to
ensure public safety, health and welfare insofar as they are dependent upon
building construction.
§ 279-3. Adoption of Commercial Building Code.
The following Wisconsin Administrative Codes, their referenced codes and
standards, and subsequent revisions are hereby made a part of this code
and adopted for municipal enforcement by the Building Inspector, who
shall be certified as a SPS Commercial Building Inspector by the State of
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services:
ICC Codes
2009 International Building Code (IBC), with Wisconsin amendments
2009 International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), with Wisconsin
amendments
2009 International Mechanical Code (IMC), with Wisconsin amendments
2009 International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), with Wisconsin amendments
2009 International Existing Building Code (IEBC), with Wisconsin
amendments
Wisconsin Commercial Building Code
SPS 360, Erosion control, sediment control & stormwater management
SPS 361, Administration & enforcement
SPS 362, Buildings & structures
SPS 363, Energy conservation
SPS 364, Heating, ventilating & air conditioning
SPS 365, Fuel gas appliances
SPS 366, Existing buildings
SPS 360 - 366, Appendixes A & B
§ 279-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-4
1:197
§ 279-4. Application of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code.
The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, Chapters SPS 320 through 325,
inclusive and all amendments thereto, are hereby made a part of this
code by reference and shall apply to all one and two-family dwellings and
alterations and additions thereto. This code shall also apply to alterations
and additions to all one and two-family dwellings constructed prior to the
effective date of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. A copy of said code
is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 279-5. Application of Wisconsin Uniform Building Code.
All buildings and structures hereafter erected, altered, repaired, moved or
demolished that are used or designed to be used for the purpose herein
defined shall comply in full with the requirements of this code.
A. Zoning laws. No provision of this code shall be construed to repeal,
modify or constitute an alternative to any lawful zoning regulations.
B. New buildings. The construction requirements of the Wisconsin
Uniform Building Code shall apply to all buildings not covered under
§§ 279-3 and 279-4.
C. Existing buildings. This code shall also apply to buildings and
conditions described in this section.
(1) An existing building to be occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling
which building was not previously so occupied.
(2) An existing structure that is altered or repaired, when the cost of
such alterations or repair during the life of the structure exceeds
50% of the equalized value of the structure, said value to be
determined by the Assessor of the City.
(3) Additions and alterations, regardless of cost, made to an existing
building shall comply with the requirements of this code. The
provisions of Subsection D of this section shall also apply.
(4) Roof coverings. Whenever more than 25% of the roof covering of a
building is replaced in any twelve-month period, all roof covering
shall be in conformity with applicable sections of this code.
(5) Additions and alterations. Any addition or alteration, regardless of
cost, made to a building shall be made in conformity with
applicable sections of this code.
D. Alterations and repairs. The following provisions shall apply to
buildings altered or repaired:
(1) Alterations. When not in conflict with any regulations, alterations
to any existing building or structure, accommodating a legal
occupancy and use but of nonconforming type of construction
which involves either the structural members of floors or roofs,
§ 279-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-5
1:198
§ 279-6. Building Inspector.
There is hereby created the Department of Building Inspection. The
Building Inspector, appointed by the City, shall act as head of this
department.
beams, girders, columns, bearing or other walls, room heating
and air-conditioning systems, arrangement, light and ventilation,
changes in location of exit stairways or exits or any of the above,
then such existing construction shall be made to conform to the
minimum requirements of this code applicable to such occupancy
and use and given type of construction.
(2) Repairs. Repairs for purposes of maintenance or replacements in
any existing building or structure which do not involve the
structural portions of the building or structure or which do not
affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or
efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection or exterior
aesthetic appearance and which do not increase a given occupancy
and use, shall be deemed minor repairs.
(3) Alterations when not permitted. When an existing building or
structure, which for any reason whatsoever does not conform to the
regulations of this code, has deteriorated from any cause
whatsoever to an extent greater than 50% of the equalized value of
the building or structure, no alterations or moving of such building
or structure shall be permitted. Any such building or structure shall
be considered a menace to public safety and welfare and shall be
ordered vacated and thereafter demolished and debris removed
from the premises.
(4) Alterations and repairs required. When any of the structural
members of any building or structure have deteriorated from any
cause whatsoever to less than their required strength, the owner of
such a building or structure shall cause such structural members to
be restored to their required strength; failing in which the building
or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and shall
be vacated and thereafter no further occupancy or use of the same
shall be permitted until the regulations of this code are complied
with.
(5) Extent of deterioration. The amount and extent of deterioration of
any existing building or structure shall be determined by the
Building Inspector.
(6) Use of unsanitary building. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use or
permit the occupancy or use of any building or structure that is
unsanitary or dilapidated, or deteriorated, or out of repair, thereby
being unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use until the
regulations of this code have been complied with.
§ 279-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-6
1:199
§ 279-7. Permits.
A. Duties. The Building Inspector is vested with the authority and
responsibility to enforce all laws controlling safe building construction.
He shall make periodic inspection of existing public buildings to
determine their safety. He shall make inspections at the site of buildings
damaged, by any cause whatsoever, to determine the safety of buildings
affected thereby.
B. Rights. The Building Inspector, or his authorized agent, shall have the
power and authority, at all reasonable hours, for any proper purpose, to
enter upon any public or private premises and make inspection thereof
and to require the production of the permit for any building, plumbing,
electrical or heating work being done or the required license therefor.
No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such
premises to the above described representatives of the City while in the
performance of their duties.
C. Records. There shall be kept, in the Department of Building Inspection,
a record of all applications for building permits in a book for such
purpose and each permit shall be regularly numbered in the order of its
issue. Also, a record showing the number, description size of all
buildings erected indicating the kind of materials used and the cost of
each building and aggregate cost of all buildings in the various classes,
shall be kept. There shall be kept, in the Department of Building
Inspection, a record of all inspections made of all removal and
condemnation of buildings and a record of all fees collected showing
the date of their receipt. The Building Inspector shall make a written
annual report to the governing body of the City relative to these
matters.
A. Permits required. No building or structure, or any part thereof, shall
hereafter be built, enlarged, altered or demolished within the City or
moved into, within or out of the City except as hereinafter provided,
unless a permit therefor shall first be obtained by the owner or his
agent from the Building Inspector. Permits required are as follows:
(1) Building.
(2) Air conditioning.
(3) Wrecking or razing.
(4) Heating.
(5) Moving of buildings.
(6) Occupancy.
(7) Reroofing and residing.
(8) Other permits as required by the City.
§ 279-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-7
1:200
B. Application for permits. Application for a building permit shall be made
in writing upon a blank form to be furnished by the Building Inspector
and shall state the name and address of the owner of the building and
the owner of the land on which it is to be erected, the name and address
of the designer and shall set forth legal description of the land on which
the building is to be located, the location of the building, the house
number thereof and such other information as the Building Inspector
may require. With such application, there shall be submitted, to the
Building Inspector, three complete sets of plans, specifications and
three copies of a survey.
(1) Survey. The survey shall be prepared and certified by a surveyor or
registered by the State of Wisconsin; shall be made, in no case,
prior to one year prior to the issuance of a building permit; and
shall bear the date of the survey. The certified survey shall also
show the following:
(a) Location and dimensions of all buildings on the lot, both
existing and proposed.
(b) Dimensions of the lot.
(c) Dimensions showing all setbacks to all buildings on the lot.
(d) Proposed grade of proposed structure, to City or village datum.
(e) Grade of lot and of road opposite lot.
(f) Grade and setback of adjacent buildings. If adjacent lot is
vacant, submit elevation of nearest buildings on same side of
the road.
(g) Type of monuments at each corner of lot.
(h) Watercourses or existing drainage ditches.
(i) Seal and signature of surveyor.
(2) Plans and specifications.
(a) All plans shall be drawn to a scale not less than 1/4 inch per
foot, on paper or cloth in ink, or by some other process that will
not fade or obliterate, and shall disclose the existing and
proposed provisions for water supply, sanitary sewer
connections and surface water drainage. All dimensions shall
be accurately figured. Drawings that do not show all necessary
detail shall be rejected. A complete set of plans for residential
construction shall consist of: all elevations; all floor plans;
complete construction details; fireplace details (3/4 inch per
foot) showing cross section of fireplace and flues; plans of
garage when garage is to be built immediately or location of
garage when it is to be built at a later date.
§ 279-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-7
1:201
(b) All plans shall remain on file in the office of the Building
Inspector until at least one year after the completion of the
building, after which time the Building Inspector may return
the same to the owner, may keep them for public record or may
destroy them.
C. Waiver of some requirements. At the option of the Building Inspector,
plans, data, specifications and survey need not be submitted with an
application for permit to execute minor alterations and repairs to any
building, structure or equipment, provided the proposed construction is
sufficiently described in the application for permit.
D. Drainage; grading of lots. The plans shall show the present and
proposed grades of the lot on which it is proposed to erect the building
for which a building permit is sought and of the immediately adjoining
property in sufficient detail to indicate the surface water drainage
before and after the completion of the grading. No permit shall be
issued if the erection of the building and the proposed grades shall
unreasonably obstruct the natural flow of water from the surface of
adjoining property or obstruct the flow of any existing ravine, ditch,
drain or stormwater sewer draining neighboring property, unless
suitable provision is made for such flow by means of an adequate ditch
or pipe, which shall be shown on the plans and shall be constructed so
as to provide continuous drainage at all times.
E. Inspector may revoke permits.
(1) The Building Inspector may revoke any permit, certificate of
occupancy or approval issued under the regulations of this code
and may stop construction or use of approved new materials,
equipment, methods of construction, devices or appliances for any
of the following reasons:
(a) Whenever there is a violation of any regulation of this code or
of any other ordinance, law or lawful orders or Wisconsin
Statute relating to the same subject matter.
(b) Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes
dangerous to life or property.
(c) Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provision of
the application for permit or of the permit.
(d) Whenever, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, there is
inadequate supervision provided on the job site.
(e) Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been
made in the application for permit, plans, drawings, data,
specifications or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance
of the permit or approval was based.
§ 279-7 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-7
1:202
§ 279-8. Approved plans.
(f) Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an
approval or occupancy given by the Building Inspector for the
use of any new materials, equipment, methods of construction
devices or appliances.
(2) The notice removing a permit, certificate of occupancy or approval
shall be in writing and may be served upon the applicant for the
permit, owner of the premises and his agent, if any, and on the
person having charge of construction.
(3) A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the building
structure, equipment or premises in question by the Building
Inspector.
(4) After the notice is served upon the persons as aforesaid and posted,
it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any
construction operation whatsoever on the premises and the permit
which has been so revoked shall be null and void and before any
construction or operation is again resumed, a new permit, as
required by this code, shall be procured and fees paid therefor and
thereafter the resumption of any construction or operation shall be
in compliance with the regulation of this code.
F. Fees. Before receiving a building permit, the owner or his agent shall
pay the fee as set by the City Council. In applying the provisions of this
code, in respect to new work, existing buildings, alterations and
repairs, the physical value of the work shall be determined by the
Building Inspector on the basis of current costs or as otherwise
provided in the local ordinances.
A. A weatherproof card, signed by the Building Inspector, indicating the
permit has been issued shall be posted at the job site during
construction. After issuance of a building permit, the approved plans
shall not be altered unless any proposed change is first approved by the
Building Inspector as conforming to the provisions of this code.
B. Expiration of permit.
(1) Existing buildings and any alterations or additions thereto,
accessory buildings and accessory structures. The building permit
shall become void unless operations are commenced within four
months from the date the permit is issued or if the building or work
authorized by such permit is suspended at any time after work is
commenced, for a period of more than 60 days. The building permit
shall expire 12 months from the date the permit is issued. Time
periods referenced herein may be extended by the Building
Inspector if the delay was due to conditions beyond the control of
the applicant. No additional permits for the same work will be
§ 279-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-8
1:203
§ 279-9. Moving buildings.
issued unless a timetable of completion is agreed upon by the
Building Inspector.
(2) New dwellings. The building permit shall expire 24 months after
issuance if the dwelling exterior has not been completed.
Administrative service fees may be charged after permit expiration
at the discretion of the Building Inspector.
(3) New commercial buildings. The building permit shall become void
unless operations are commenced within four months from the date
the permit is issued or if the building or work authorized by such
permit is suspended at any time after work is commenced, for a
period of more than 60 days. The building permit shall expire 12
months from the date the permit is issued. Time periods referenced
herein may be extended by the Building Inspector if the delay was
due to conditions beyond the control of the applicant. No additional
permits for the same work will be issued unless a timetable of
completion is agreed upon by the Building Inspector.
C. Before any work is commenced or recommenced after the permit has
lapsed, a new permit shall be issued at 1/2 the regular fee rate.
A. General. No person shall move any building or structure upon any of
the public rights-of-way of the City without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the Building Inspector and upon the payment of the
required fee. Every such permit issued by the Building Inspector for the
moving of a building shall designate the route to be taken, the
conditions to be complied with and shall limit the time during which
said moving operations shall be continued.
B. Moving damaged buildings. No building shall be repaired, altered or
moved within or into the City that has deteriorated or has been
damaged by any cause (including such moving and separation from its
foundation and service connections in case of moved buildings) 50% or
more of its equalized value and no permit shall be granted to repair,
alter or move such building within or into the City.
C. Continuous movement. The movement of buildings shall be a
continuous operation during all the hours of the day, and day by day and
at night, until such movement is fully completed. All of such operations
shall be performed with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares.
No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street
crossing or intersection, or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to
any fire hydrant or any other public facility. Lighted lanterns shall be
kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during the night.
D. Street repair. Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall,
within one day after said building reaches its destination, report the
fact to the Building Inspector who shall thereupon, in the company of
§ 279-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-9
1:204
the Public Works Director, inspect the streets and highways over which
said building has been moved and ascertain their condition. If the
removal of said building has caused any damage to any street or
highway, the person to whom the permit was issued shall forthwith
place them in good repair as they were before the permit was granted.
On the failure of the said permittee to do so within 10 days thereafter
to the satisfaction of the governing body, said body shall repair the
damage done to such streets and hold the person obtaining such permit
and the sureties on his bond responsible for the payment of same.
E. Conformance with code. No permit shall be issued to move a building
within or into the City and to establish it upon a location within the City
until the Building Inspector has made an investigation of such building
at the location from which it is to be moved and is satisfied from such
investigation that said building is in a sound and stable condition and of
such construction that it will meet the requirements of this Building
Code in all respects. A complete plan of all further repairs,
improvements and remodeling, with reference to such building, shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector, and he shall make a finding of fact
to the effect that all such repairs, improvements and remodeling are in
conformity with the requirements of this Building Code and that when
same are completed, the building, as such, will so comply with said
Building Code. In the event a building is to be moved from the City to
some point outside of the boundaries thereof, the provisions, with
respect to the furnishing of plans and specifications for proposed
alterations to such building, may be disregarded.
F. Bond.
(1) Before a permit is issued to move any building over any public way
in this City, the party applying therefor shall give a bond to the City
in a sum, to be fixed by the Building Inspector, and which shall not
be less than $25,000. Said bond is to be executed by a corporate
surety or two personal sureties to be approved by the governing
body or designated agent conditioned upon, among other things,
the indemnification to the City for any costs or expenses incurred
by it in connection with any claims for damages to any persons or
property, and the payment of any judgment, together with the costs
or expenses incurred by the City in connection therewith, arising
out of the removal of the building for which the permit is issued.
(2) Unless the Building Inspector, upon investigation, shall find it to be
a fact that the excavation exposed by the removal of such building
from its foundation shall not be so close to a public thoroughfare as
to permit the accidental falling therein of travelers or the location,
nature and physical characteristics of the premises and the falling
into such excavation by children under 12 years of age unlikely, the
bond required by Subsection F(1) shall be further conditioned upon
the permittee erecting adequate barriers and within 48 hours,
filling in such excavation or adopting and employing such other
means, devices or methods approved by the Building Inspector and
§ 279-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-9
1:205
reasonably adopted or calculated to prevent the occurrences set
forth herein.
G. Insurance. The Building Inspector shall require, in addition to said bond
above indicated, public liability insurance covering injury to one person
in the sum of not less than $500,000 and for one accident in a sum not
less than $1,000,000, together with property damage insurance in a
amount not less $500,000, or such other coverage as deemed
necessary.
H. Planning Commission or other assigned board or commission.
(1) No such permit shall be issued unless it has been found as a fact by
the Planning Commission of the City by at least a majority vote,
after an examination of the application for the permit which shall
include exterior elevations of the building and accurate
photographs of all sides and views of the same and in case it is
proposed to alter the exterior of said building, plans and
specifications of such proposed alterations and after a view of the
building proposed to be moved and of the site at which it is to be
located, that the exterior architectural appeal and functional plans
of the building to be moved or moved and altered, will not be so at
variance with either the exterior architectural appeal and
functional plan of the buildings already constructed or in the
course of construction in the immediate neighborhood or in the
character of the applicable district established by the zoning
ordinances of the City or any ordinance amendatory thereof or
supplementary thereto, as to cause a substantial depreciation in
the property values of said neighborhood within said applicable
district. In case the applicant proposes to alter the exterior of said
building after moving the same, he shall submit, with his
application papers, complete plans and specifications for the
proposed alterations. Before a permit shall be issued for a building
to be moved and altered, the applicant shall give a bond to the
City's Planning Commission, which shall not be less than $1,000 to
be executed in the manner provided in Subsection F hereof to the
effect that he will, within a time to be set by the Planning
Commission, complete the proposed exterior alterations to said
building in the manner set forth in his plans and specifications. This
bond shall be in addition to any other bond or surety which may be
required by other applicable ordinances of the City. No occupancy
permit shall be issued for said building until the exterior alterations
proposed to be made have been completed.
(2) Upon application being made to the Building Inspector, he shall
request a meeting of the Planning Commission to consider
applications for moving permits which he has found comply, in all
respects, with all other ordinances of the City. The Planning
Commission may, if it desires, hear the applicant for the moving
permit in question and/or the owner of the lot on which it is
proposed to locate the building in question, together with any other
§ 279-9 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-9
1:206
§ 279-10. Razing of buildings.
persons, either residents or property owners, desiring to be heard,
giving such notice of hearing as they may deem sufficient. Such
hearing may be adjourned for a reasonable length of time and
within 48 hours after the close of the hearing, the Planning
Commission shall, in writing, make or refuse to make the finding
required by Subsection H hereof and file it in the office of the Clerk,
who shall send a copy of it to the Building Inspector.
A. Razing of buildings. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to act
for the City under the provisions of § 66.0413 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
relating to the razing of buildings and all acts amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto. The City Treasurer is authorized to place the
assessment and collect the special tax as therein provided.
B. Before a building can be demolished or removed, the owner or agent
shall notify all utilities having service connections within the building,
such as water, electric, gas, sewer and other connections.
C. Demolition:
(1) Permits are required prior to any demolition. The City may require
a performance bond. The City may also require erosion control,
plumbing, street occupancy, cutting, and wrecking permits.
(2) Any potential asbestos, lead and other hazards shall be identified
and removal can only occur after a notice of intent shall be filed
with the Department of Natural Resources.
(3) Erosion control methods must be in place and approved by the
Building Inspector prior to any demolition.
(4) Sewer, water, electric, gas and other connections to the property
shall be properly abandoned in a safe manner that shall be
approved by the building, electrical, and Plumbing Inspector prior
to demolition.
(5) The use of a torch for cutting may require a permit and approval by
the fire inspector.
(6) Street occupancy permits may be required for any street material
or dumpster storage or pavement cuts.
(7) All City sidewalks, curbs, approaches, and other public property
shall be protected from damage.
(8) The site shall be protected by a fence and maintained secure at all
times.
(9) Sanitary facilities shall be required for on-site workers.
(10) Hours of demolition shall be approved by the Building Inspector.
§ 279-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-10
1:207
§ 279-11. Inspections.
(11) Demolition shall be performed from the top down, floor by floor.
(12) Chutes shall be used to transfer materials above one story.
(13) Dust control methods shall be required at all times.
(14)Waste material shall be removed and not stored on-site.
(15) Burning of waste materials shall be prohibited.
(16) Floor slabs, footings, and foundations shall be removed or broken
into pieces less than one foot in diameter, unless approved by the
Building Inspector.
(17) All disturbed areas shall be graded to match adjoining grades or to
the satisfaction of the Building Inspector.
(18) Topsoil (two inches minimum) and grass are required if the lot is to
be left vacant.
(19) Special demolition methods utilizing explosives shall be approved
by the governing body.
(20) A final site inspection shall be required.
A. Coordinated inspections. All provisions of the laws and regulations of
the City and of legally adopted rules of local fire and health officials in
respect to the operation, equipment, housekeeping, fire protection,
handling and storage of flammable materials, liquids and gases and the
maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions of use in occupancy in all
buildings shall be strictly enforced by the administrative officials to
whom such authority is delegated. Whenever inspection by any
authorized enforcement officer discloses any violation of the provisions
of this code, or of any other rules, regulations or laws, he shall
immediately notify the administrative officer having jurisdiction of the
violation.
B. Certified report. The Building Inspector may require a certified report
of all required inspections as regulated by this code from the registered
architect or registered engineer supervising the construction of any
building, structure or equipment requiring their supervision. Such
certified report shall state, in detail, that all construction work has been
executed in accordance with all of the regulations of this code,
approved plans, specifications, terms of the permit and, further, that
such construction work was executed in accordance with accepted
architectural and engineering standard procedures.
C. Zoning Board of Appeals or other assigned board or commission. Any
person feeling himself aggrieved by any order or ruling of the Building
Inspector may appeal from such ruling to the Zoning Board of Appeals
within 20 days after written notice of such ruling shall have been
§ 279-10 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-11
1:208
§ 279-12. Stop-work order.
Whenever the provisions of this code or of the plans approved there under
are not complied with, a stop-work order shall be served on the owner
or his representative and a copy thereof shall be posted at the site of
the construction. Such stop-work order shall not be removed except by
written notice of the Building Inspector after satisfactory evidence has been
supplied that the violation has been corrected.
§ 279-13. Certificate of occupancy.
delivered to him. Such appeal is to be in writing, setting forth the order
appealed from and the respects in which said person feeling himself
aggrieved claims that said order on ruling is erroneous or illegal. Said
notice of appeal shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall thereupon notify
the Building Inspector of said appeal, and the appeal shall be heard
at the next meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The said Zoning
Board of Appeals, after consideration thereof, shall affirm, reverse or
modify said ruling as is just in the premises. The ruling or order of
the Inspector shall be enforced until changed by said Zoning Board of
Appeals.
A. Inspections.
(1) The Building Inspector shall make a final inspection of all new
buildings, additions and alterations. If no violations of this or any
other ordinance can be found the Building Inspector may issue a
certificate of occupancy, stating the purpose for which the building
is to be used.
(2) No building, nor part thereof, shall be occupied until such final
inspection or certificate has been issued, nor shall any building be
occupied in any manner which conflicts with the conditions set
forth in the certificate of occupancy.
B. Use discontinued.
(1) Whenever any building or portion thereof is being used or occupied
contrary to the provisions of this code, the Building Inspector shall
order such use or occupancy discontinued and the building, or
portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person using or
causing such use or occupancy to be continued and such person
shall vacate such building or portion thereof within 10 days after
receipt of the notice or make the building, or portion thereof,
comply with the requirements of this code.
(2) Any building, structure or premises, or any part thereof, hereafter
vacated or damaged by any cause whatsoever so as to jeopardize
public safety or health, shall not hereafter be occupied or used
under an existing certificate of occupancy or without the same,
§ 279-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-13
1:209
§ 279-14. General requirements for garages and accessory
buildings.
until an application has been filed and a new certificate of
occupancy issued.
C. Change. It shall be unlawful to change the use of any building,
structure, premises or part thereof, without first obtaining, from the
Building Inspector, an approval of such change in the occupancy or use
and a certificate of occupancy therefore.
D. Hardship. The Building Inspector shall have the authority and power to
permit the occupancy of any building or structure in the City, prior to
issuance of an occupancy certificate, in all such cases of hardship, as in
his judgment and discretion, warrant occupancy before final stage of
completion as set forth in this code. Before granting such permission,
the Building Inspection shall first examine the premises and determine
if it is safe and sanitary. The Building Inspector shall determine the time
within which such building or structure can be completed. Such time
should not exceed 120 days.
A. Definitions.
(1) An "attached private garage" shall mean a private garage attached
directly to the principal building, or attached by means of an
enclosed or open breezeway, porch, terrace or vestibule, or a
private garage so constructed as to form an integral part of the
principal building.
(2) A "detached private garage" shall mean a private garage entirely
separated from the principal building.
(3) Accessory buildings shall conform to all requirements of this
section.
B. Locations. Detached garages shall be governed by the following unless
otherwise provided for in appropriate codes:
(1) Garages of wood frame construction shall be located not less than
10 feet from any residence building, except that such distance may
be reduced to not less than five feet when the adjacent wall is
protected as required for attached garages in SPS 321.08(1). Such
separations shall be measured as the perpendicular distance from
the exterior dwelling wall to the closest exterior garage or
accessory building wall.
(2) Garages of masonry wall construction shall not be located less than
five feet from any residence building.
C. Area. All private detached garages shall be governed by the following
unless otherwise provided for in appropriate zoning codes:
(1) Masonry bearing wall, 1,200 square feet, maximum.
§ 279-13 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-14
1:210
(2) Metal frame construction, 720 square feet, maximum.
(3) Wood frame construction, 720 square feet, maximum.
D. Foundations and footings. Attached private garages shall be provided
with the same type footings and foundations as required herein for the
principal building. Concrete floors shall be not less than four inches in
thickness. Detached private garages may be built with a continuous
floating slab of reinforced concrete not less than four inches in
thickness. Reinforcement shall be a minimum of number 10 six-inch-bysix-
inch wire mesh. The slab shall be provided with a thickened edge all
around, eight inches wide and eight inches below the top of the slab.
The thickened edge shall have two #4 horizontal reinforcement bars
placed at the center. The lower reinforcement bar shall be set two
inches above the bottom of the thickened edge and the upper
reinforcement bar shall be set six inches above the bottom of the
thickened edge. Exterior wall curbs shall be provided not less than four
inches above the finished ground grade adjacent to the garage. Bolts 3/
8 inches in diameter with nuts and washers attached, six inches long,
shall be embedded three inches in the concrete curb of detached
garages, eight feet on centers.
E. Floor surface. The floor in all private garages shall be of concrete
construction and sloped toward the exterior garage door or opening. No
openings or pits in the floor shall be permitted, except for drainage.
F. Construction. Private garages shall be constructed as follows:
(1) Unless designed through structural analysis, load-bearing
foundation walls and partitions shall be constructed as per sections
SPS 321.15 through 321.18.
(2) Detached private garages of wood frame construction shall be
constructed with the following requirements:
(a) Studs may have a maximum spacing of 24 inches on centers.
(b) Diagonal corner bracing shall be installed on both walls at each
corner. Diagonal corner bracing may be applied on the inside
surface of studs.
(c) Corner posts may consist of two two-inch-by-four-inch studs or
a single four-inch-by-four-inch stud.
(d) Collar beams at the top plate and collar ties in the upper 1/3 of
the roof shall be installed with a maximum spacing of 48 inches
on center. Collar beams may be two-inch-by-six-inch. Collar
ties shall be at least two-inch-by-four-inch for roof slopes less
than four inches per foot. A one-inch-by-six-inch collar tie may
be used for roof slopes four inches per foot or greater.
(e) Detached garage roofs shall be framed in accordance with the
applicable requirements of section SPS 321.28.
§ 279-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-14
1:211
§ 279-15. Prefabricated storage enclosures.
G. Heating, ventilating and air conditioning. The provisions of Chapter
SPS 323 shall apply to the design, installation and construction of all
heating, ventilating and air-conditioning systems installed in detached
garages and accessory buildings.
A. Definition. A prefabricated storage enclosure means an accessory
storage enclosure manufactured primarily of plastic, vinyl or resin, or
stamped metal panels, and is designed to be assembled on site.
(1) A prefabricated storage enclosure may not comply with the
minimum construction requirements of the Uniform Building Code,
including but not limited to snow and wind loads.
(2) A prefabricated storage enclosure does not allow the use of
shipping containers or containers used for moving or storage of
personal belongings.
(3) A prefabricated storage enclosure is used to store personal
property for residential use.
(4) Prefabricated storage enclosures are not designed and
manufactured to conform to all the requirements of the Uniform
Building Code, Chapter III.
(5) Excluded from this definition are the following:
(a) Membrane structures: small enclosures five feet or less in
height and 24 square feet or less in area used for storing trash
and recycling containers.
B. Prefabricated enclosure regulations.
(1) Only one prefabricated enclosure is allowed per property.
(2) The area of the storage enclosure shall not exceed 120 square feet
or as allowed by local zoning.
(3) The height of the prefabricated enclosure is limited to 11 feet in
height. Height shall be measured from the grade immediately
adjacent to the door side of the prefabricated enclosure to the
highest point of the roof.
(4) A prefabricated storage enclosure is reviewed and inspected only
for compliance with the City's zoning setbacks and other Zoning
Code provisions, including separation from the dwelling and other
buildings located on the property.
(5) A prefabricated storage enclosures shall be located a minimum of
10 feet from a dwelling or buildings on the site.
(6) A prefabricated storage enclosure shall only be used to store
personal property for residential use.
§ 279-14 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-15
1:212
§ 279-16. Decks.
§ 279-17. Swimming pool/spa requirements.
(7) A prefabricated storage enclosure shall be installed on a concrete
slab or treated wood floor, or other floor acceptable to the City.
(8) A minimum of four hold-down restraints shall be required, one on
each corner of the prefabricated storage enclosure or as approved
by the City.
(9) A municipality may opt to not issue building permits for
prefabricated storage enclosures. The City may choose to issue a
location approval when the prefabricated enclosure is in
compliance with the City's zoning setback requirements.
(10) Prefabricated storage enclosures shall not be connected to gas or
electrical service.
(11) Prefabricated storage enclosures may not be located within an
easement, without approval of the party granted the easement.
(12) Applications for location approval shall include the following
information or additional information as required by the City:
(a) Two copies of a site plan or survey showing the location of the
prefabricated storage enclosure, and the proposed setbacks to
the property lines and other buildings on the same property.
(b) The manufacturer's specifications for the prefabricated
storage enclosure.
(c) An application form as provided by the City.
(d) Fees shall be as established by the City Council.
A. General requirements. Section SPS 321.225(1) and (2), Wis. Adm.
Code, are hereby adopted by reference and shall apply to attached and
detached decks.
B. Exception. Detached decks not serving as part of the means of egress
from the dwelling unit shall not be required to have frost-protected
footings but shall have footings placed on nonorganic material at a
uniform depth below grade. (Note: The above exception would typically
apply to "detached" pool, spa, patio and other yard decks. All other
provisions in § 279-16 would apply.)
A. Type of pools requiring permits.
(1) Aboveground pools (except wading pools having a depth of less
than two feet and which are readily movable).
(2) Temporary or permanent air inflatable pools with a sidewall height
greater than two feet above grade.
§ 279-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-17
1:213
(3) In-ground pools.
(4) Public pools. All public pools constructed shall be built and
maintained in accordance with the rules of the SPS 390.
(5) Spas (outdoor).
B. General pool regulations.
(1) Location.
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall have a swimming pool or
spa located in the front yard or side yard setback unless
specifically allowed in the local zoning code.
(b) Side and rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet from
the property line or as regulated by the local zoning code.
(c) Swimming pools shall not be located closer than four feet to
any wall, fence or structure.
(d) Swimming pools shall be located from well and septic systems
in accordance with the Wisconsin State Plumbing Code,
Chapter SPS 383.
(2) Access.
(a) A fence or other solid structure of not less than 3 1/2 feet in
height shall completely enclose said premises and/or
swimming pool. There shall be no opening in said fence or wall
larger than six inches square. All gates or doors opening
through such enclosure shall be kept securely closed at all
times while unattended and shall be equipped with a selfclosing
and self-latching device designed capable of keeping
such door or gate securely closed. Latches shall be located at
least three feet above the ground, accessible deck or stairs.
(b) A fence is not required around an aboveground pool where the
pool wall is at least 3 1/2 feet above grade for the full pool
perimeter. The finished grade shall be maintained for a
minimum of four feet beyond the outside perimeter of the pool.
(c) When not completely fenced, all ladders, steps, pool pump/
filter equipment or other means of access to an aboveground
pool shall be removed and/or designed to prevent access when
the pool is unattended.
(d) Spas shall be made inaccessible by a locking safety cover or
other approved safety barrier when not in use.
(3) Swimming pool decks. All decks shall be constructed in accordance
with the Uniform Building Code. Decking shall be considered an
integral part of the swimming pool and shall comply with the
applicable setback dimensions per the local zoning code.
§ 279-17 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-17
1:214
§ 279-18. Foundation repair and damp-proofing.
(4) Drainage. In no case shall any swimming pool be drained onto
lands of property owners other than the owner of the swimming
pool. Drainage from said lot shall be in accordance with any local
zoning ordinance.
(5) Lighting. Lights shall be erected so as to eliminate direct rays and
minimize reflected rays of light onto adjoining properties and
roadways. Lighting installation shall be done in accordance with
the State of Wisconsin Electrical Code.
(6) Electrical. All wiring for pools and spas shall be done in accordance
with the Wisconsin Electrical Code and/or local code.
(7) Pools and spas shall be separated from overhead and underground
electrical wiring shall be in accordance with the State of Wisconsin
Electrical code and/or local code.
C. Application for permit. The following information is necessary:
(1) Survey or accurate drawing of the property, in duplicate, showing
all existing structures, proposed swimming pool or spa location,
fencing if required, and overhead or underground electrical wiring.
(a) Type of pool installation, aboveground or in-ground.
(b) Pool height above highest point of grade if aboveground
installations.
(c) Type and height of fence, if proposed.
(d) Type and support of decking, if proposed.
(e) Overall size and locations of the above in regard to existing
buildings and lot lines for property survey reference.
(f) Any change in finished grade near pool.
(g) County Health Department approval for properties using a
private septic system, where applicable.
(h) Site inspection letter from a local wiring utility.
(2) Two copies of brochure which shows the type, style, etc. of the pool
or spa to be installed.
A. Application for permit shall include a statement of the existing defects,
and an analysis of the cause of those existing defects to ensure that all
conditions responsible for foundation defects are corrected.
B. Plans and/or specifications must be submitted for approval prior to
issuance of a permit.
§ 279-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-18
1:215
§ 279-19. Alterations and remodeling for pre-1980 one- and twofamily
dwellings.
C. Except as otherwise permitted by the authority having jurisdiction,
foundation repairs shall be performed in accordance to the Best
Management Standards for Foundation Repair dated June 13, 2012.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide uniform minimum
construction regulations for alterations and remodeling of existing one
and two-family dwellings built prior to June 1, 1980.
B. Scope.
(1) This article shall apply to all existing one- and two-family dwellings
constructed prior to June 1, 1980, for building code regulations and
December 1, 1978, for energy code regulations.
(2) The provisions of this article are not retroactive.
(3) The Uniform Dwelling Code, SPS 320 through 325, is incorporated
by reference and shall apply to all construction except as modified
by this article.
(4) These provisions shall not apply to any building repair as defined
herein.
(5) Energy calculations are not required for new additions to one- and
two-family dwellings constructed prior to December 1, 1978. Upon
request by the Building Inspector, a recognized heating
professional shall provide a written statement that the heating
system is capable of maintaining the indoor design temperature
during outdoor design conditions per SPS 322.07.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUILDING, ADDITION — New construction performed on a dwelling,
which increases the outside dimensions of the dwelling.
BUILDING, ALTERATION/REMODEL — An enhancement, upgrade,
substantial change or modification other than an addition, a repair
or modifications to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air -
conditioning and other systems within a dwelling.
BUILDING, EXISTING — Any structure that is already constructed or
one for which a legal permit has been issued prior to the adoption of
this code.
BUILDING, NEW — Any construction that results in the creation of
a structure for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattel or movable property of any kind.
BUILDING, REPAIR — The act or process of restoring to original
soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs
§ 279-18 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-19
1:216
or maintenance, or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems or
equipment with the equivalent fixture, system or equipment.
BUILDING, STRUCTURAL REPAIR — The reconstruction or
replacement of any load bearing component that has been damaged,
deteriorated or is failing.
CEILING HEIGHT — The clear vertical distance from the finished floor
to the finished ceiling. Any part of any room where the ceiling height
is less than five feet shall not be considered in computing the total
floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the habitable
occupancy thereof.
D. Permit application.
(1) Any person desiring a building permit as required by this article
shall file with the Building Inspector an application therefor in
writing on a permit form to be furnished for that purpose.
(2) Application shall show the use or occupancy of all parts of the
building.
(3) Application for a permit shall be accompanied by three complete
sets of plans and/or specifications. The plans shall consist of the
following, where applicable:
(a) Floor plans. Showing general layout and egress path for the
remodeled area(s), the square footage, size and span of
existing attic floor joists, location of lower floor-bearing walls,
area(s) that will have the ceiling raised (dormers), wall
locations, window location including size of headers, door sizes
and locations, location of smoke and carbon monoxide
detectors, stairways, heating system or devices, and any
related architectural features.
(b) Elevations. Showing the sizes, location and configuration of
doors, windows and skylights; exterior wall covering material;
roof design and exterior material; any architectural features
relating to the dwelling's existing architectural style.
(c) Cross-section. Showing all construction details, framing,
insulation, materials, interior finishes, ceiling heights and
structural features.
(4) The application, plans and specifications filed by an applicant for a
permit shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector, and if found to
be in conformity with the requirements of this article and all other
laws or ordinances applicable thereto, the Building Inspector shall,
upon receipt of the required fees, issue a permit therefor.
(5) When the Building Inspector issues the permit, all sets of plans and
specifications shall be stamped "conditionally approved." One such
approved set of plans and specifications shall be retained by the
§ 279-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-19
1:217
Building Inspector as a public record, and one such approved set
of plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant. One
approved set shall be kept on such building or work site at all times
during which the work authorized thereby is in progress and shall
be open to inspection by public officials. Such approved plans and
specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without
permission from the Building Inspector.
(6) The contractor shall submit a copy of their valid Dwelling
Contractor Financial Responsibility credential prior to permit
issuance.
E. Fees.
(1) Before issuance of a permit, the owner or their agent shall pay to
the City Treasury a permit fee. These fees shall be as established by
the City.
(2) Double fees. Upon failure to obtain a permit before work on a
building has been started, except in emergency cases, the total fees
shall be double the fees charged.
(3) Reinspection fee. Where additional inspections are made necessary
by reason of neglect in work found faulty, defective or incomplete at
the time of inspection, or at the expiration of time permitted in an
order of noncompliance, a reinspection fee may be charged.
F. Inspections.
(1) Rough inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking
and bracing is in place and all chimneys and vents are
complete. No drywall or any insulation between the studs shall be
applied to any building until the rough inspection, electrical
inspection, plumbing and heating inspections have been made and
the work approved.
(2) Insulation inspection. To be made after all insulation has been
installed, with vapor barrier in place and before any of the walls
and ceilings are covered.
(3) Final inspection. Upon the completion of any building, structure, or
construction for which a permit was issued and before the same is
occupied or used, a final inspection shall be made by the Building
Inspector, and until such building or structure is in compliance with
all the requirements of this article and terms of the permit, no
occupancy shall be permitted.
(4) Written approval. No work shall be done on any part of the building
or structure beyond the point indicated in each successive
inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the
Building Inspector. Such written approval shall be given only after
§ 279-19 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-19
1:218
an inspection shall have been made for each successive step in the
construction as indicated by each of the inspections.
(5) Inspection notice.
(a) The applicant or authorized representative shall request
inspections from the City or the registered UDC inspection
agency enforcing this code.
(b) Except as provided under Subsection F(5)(c), construction may
not proceed beyond the point of inspection, as described under
Subsection F(6)(a) to (c) until the inspection has been
completed.
(c) Construction may proceed if the inspection has not been
completed within two business days after notification is
received or as otherwise agreed between the applicant and the
City or registered UDC inspection agency.
(6) Inspection types. The following sequence of inspections shall be
performed for the purpose of determining if the work complies with
this code:
(a) Footing and foundation inspection. The excavation shall be
inspected after the placement of forms, shoring and
reinforcement, where required, and prior to the placement of
footing materials. Where below-grade drain tiles,
waterproofing or exterior insulation is required, the foundation
shall be inspected prior to backfilling.
(b) Rough inspection. A rough inspection shall be performed for
each inspection category listed in Subsection F(6)(b)[1]
through [5] after the rough work is constructed but before it is
concealed. All categories of work for rough inspections may be
completed before the notice for inspection is provided. The
applicant may request one rough inspection or individual
rough inspections. A separate fee may be charged for each
individual inspection.
[1] General construction, including framing.
[2] Rough electrical.
[3] Rough plumbing.
[4] Rough heating, ventilating and air conditioning.
[5] Basement drain tiles.
(c) Insulation inspection. An inspection shall be made of the
insulation and vapor retarder after they are installed but
before they are concealed.
(d) Final inspection.
§ 279-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-19
1:219
G. Construction requirements.
(1) Basement conversion to habitable space.
(a) Existing stairways shall conform to the following: (Note: A new,
relocated or reconfigured stairway shall conform to the
requirements of § SPS 321.04.)
[1] Riser height shall be 8 1/4 inch maximum.
[2] Tread depth shall be 8 1/4 inch minimum.
[3] Headroom shall be 72 inches minimum.
[4] Stair width shall be 34 inches minimum.
[5] Handrails and guardrails shall be installed in accordance
with § SPS 321.04(3). Exception: Existing handrails and
guardrails do not require modifications unless the stairway
is new, relocated or reconfigured. (In such conditions, the
handrails and guardrails shall conform to the
requirements of § SPS 321.04.)
[6] Stairway landings shall have minimum dimensions of 34
inches by 34 inches.
(b) Light and ventilation. All habitable rooms shall be provided
with natural light and ventilation in accordance with § SPS
321.05. Balanced mechanical ventilation may be used in lieu of
natural ventilation.
(c) Ceiling height. All habitable rooms shall have a minimum
ceiling height of six feet eight inches for a minimum of 50% of
the floor area. Beams and ducts may not encroach more than
eight inches into ceiling area below the minimum ceiling
height.
(d) Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors. Smoke and carbon
monoxide detectors shall be installed in the remodeled areas in
accordance with § SPS 321.09 and 321.097. In addition to
being wired to house current and interconnected, each smoke
detector installed in the remodeled areas shall have a battery
backup power.
(e) Basement bedrooms shall be constructed as follows:
[1] Doors shall be a minimum of 32 inches in width unless at
least 50% of the bedroom doors in the dwelling are a
minimum of 32 inches or have a minimum net clear
opening width of 30 inches.
[2] Light and ventilation. All habitable rooms shall be
provided with natural light and ventilation in accordance
§ 279-19 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-19
1:220
with § SPS 321.05. Balanced mechanical ventilation may
be used in lieu of natural ventilation.
[3] Exits. Either an egress window within each bedroom or
two exits from the basement level common area shall be
provided. An egress window and areaway shall be
designed in accordance with § SPS 321.03(6).
[4] Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors. Smoke and carbon
monoxide detectors shall be installed in the remodeled
areas in accordance with § SPS 321.09 and 321.097. In
addition to being wired to house current and
interconnected, each smoke detector installed in the
remodeled areas shall have a battery backup power.
(2) Partially finished attic conversion to habitable space, second floor
levels.
(a) Design floor load. All new areas shall meet 40 pounds per
square foot live load plus dead load. If 50% or more of the
existing habitable space is altered or remodeled, the existing
floor shall also meet the minimum design live load of 40 pounds
per square foot.
(b) Stairways. Existing width, rise, run, landings, handrails,
guardrails and headroom do not require modifications unless
the stairway is new, relocated, or reconfigured. (Note: In such
conditions, the handrails and guardrails shall conform to the
requirements of § SPS 321.04.)
(c) Light and ventilation. All habitable rooms shall be provided
with natural light and ventilation in accordance with § SPS
321.05. If 50% or more of the existing habitable space is
altered or remodeled, the light and ventilation requirements
shall also apply to the existing space. Balanced mechanical
ventilation may be used in lieu of natural ventilation.
(d) Ceiling height. All habitable rooms shall have a minimum
ceiling height of six feet eight inches for a minimum of 50% of
the floor area. If 50% or more of the existing habitable space is
altered or remodeled, the ceiling height requirements shall
also apply to the existing space.
(e) Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors. Smoke and carbon
monoxide detectors shall be installed in the remodeled areas in
accordance with § SPS 321.09 and 321.097. In addition to
being wired to house current and interconnected, each smoke
detector installed in the remodeled areas shall have a battery
backup power.
(f) Insulation and windows shall comply with the following
requirements:
§ 279-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-19
1:221
[1] Walls shall have a minimum of R-13.
[2] Sloped ceilings shall have a minimum of R-19.
[3] Ceilings or attics shall have a minimum of R-30.
[4] Windows shall be double-glazed or better.
(g) Bedrooms shall be constructed as follows:
[1] Doors shall be a minimum of 32 inches in width unless at
least 50% of the bedroom doors in the dwelling are a
minimum of 32 inches or have a minimum net clear
opening width of 30 inches.
[2] Light and ventilation. All habitable rooms shall be
provided with natural light and ventilation in accordance
with § SPS 321.05. Balanced mechanical ventilation may
be used in lieu of natural ventilation.
[3] Exits. Either an egress window within each bedroom or
two exits from the floor level common area shall be
provided. An egress window shall be designed in
accordance with § SPS 321.03(6).
[4] Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors. Smoke and carbon
monoxide detectors shall be installed in the remodeled
areas in accordance with § SPS 321.09 and 321.097. In
addition to being wired to house current and
interconnected, each smoke detector installed in the
remodeled areas shall have a battery backup power.
(3) Unfinished attic conversion to habitable space, second floor levels.
(a) Design floor load. All new floor areas shall be designed in
accordance with § SPS 321.02 (40 pounds per square foot live
load plus dead load).
(b) Existing stairways shall conform to the following. (Note: A new,
relocated or reconfigured stairway shall conform to the
requirements of § SPS 321.04.)
[1] Riser height shall be 8 1/2 inch maximum.
[2] Tread depth shall be 8 1/2 inch minimum.
[3] Headroom shall be 72 inches minimum.
[4] Stair width shall be 34 inches minimum.
[5] Handrails and guardrails shall be installed in accordance
with § SPS 321.04(3).
[6] Stairway landings shall have minimum dimensions of 34
inches by 34 inches.
§ 279-19 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-19
1:222
(c) Light and ventilation. All habitable rooms shall be provided
with natural light and ventilation in accordance with § SPS
321.05. Balanced mechanical ventilation may be used in lieu of
natural ventilation.
(d) Ceiling height. All habitable rooms shall be provided with a
ceiling height in accordance with § SPS 321.06.
(e) Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors. Smoke and carbon
monoxide detectors shall be installed in the remodeled areas in
accordance with § SPS 321.09 and 321.097. In addition to
being wired to house current and interconnected, each smoke
detector installed in the remodeled areas shall have battery
backup power.
(f) Insulation and windows shall comply with the following
requirements:
[1] Walls shall have a minimum of R-13.
[2] Sloped ceilings shall have a minimum of R-19.
[3] Ceilings or attics shall have a minimum of R-30.
[4] Windows shall be double glazed or better.
(g) Bedrooms shall be constructed as follows:
[1] Doors shall be a minimum of 32 inches in width unless at
least 50% of the bedroom doors in the dwelling are a
minimum of 32 inches or have a minimum net clear
opening width of 30 inches.
[2] Light and ventilation. All habitable rooms shall be
provided with natural light and ventilation in accordance
with § SPS 321.05. Balanced mechanical ventilation may
be used in lieu of natural ventilation.
[3] Exits. Either an egress window within each bedroom or
two exits from the floor level common area shall be
provided. An egress window shall be designed in
accordance with § SPS 321.03(6).
[4] Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors. Smoke and carbon
monoxide detectors shall be installed in the remodeled
areas in accordance with § SPS 321.09 and 321.097. In
addition to being wired to house current and
interconnected, each smoke detector installed in the
remodeled areas shall have battery backup power.
(4) Unfinished attic conversion to habitable space, third floor levels.
§ 279-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-19
1:223
(a) Design floor load. All new floor areas shall be designed in
accordance with § SPS 321.02 (40 pounds per square foot plus
dead load).
(b) Exits. Two interior stairways, spaced apart 1/3 of the longest
diagonal dimension of the floor in plan view or 20 feet, from the
third floor level to the second floor level, are required.
(c) Lofts shall comply with § SPS 321.03(4).
(d) Existing stairways shall conform to the following: (Note: A new,
relocated or reconfigured stairways shall conform to the
requirements of § SPS 321.04.)
[1] Riser height shall be 8 1/4 inch maximum.
[2] Tread depth shall be 8 1/2 inch minimum.
[3] Headroom shall be 72 inches minimum.
[4] Stair width shall be 34 inches minimum.
[5] Handrails and guardrails shall be installed in accordance
with § SPS 321.04(3).
[6] Stairway landings shall have minimum dimensions of 34
inches by 34 inches.
(e) Light and ventilation. All habitable rooms shall be provided
with natural light and ventilation in accordance with § SPS
321.05. Balanced mechanical ventilation may be used in lieu of
natural ventilation.
(f) Ceiling height. Ceiling height in all habitable rooms shall be
provided in accordance with § SPS 321.06.
(g) Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors. Smoke and carbon
monoxide detectors shall be installed in the remodeled areas in
accordance with § SPS 321.09 and 321.097. In addition to
being wired to house current and interconnected, each smoke
detector installed in the remodeled areas shall have battery
backup power.
(h) Insulation and windows shall comply with the following
requirements:
[1] Walls shall have a minimum of R-13.
[2] Sloped ceilings shall have a minimum of R-19.
[3] Ceilings or attics shall have a minimum of R-30.
[4] Windows shall be double glazed or better.
(i) Bedrooms shall be designed as follows:
§ 279-19 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-19
1:224
§ 279-20. New materials and methods.
No provision in this article is intended to prohibit or prevent the use of any
alternate material or method of construction not specifically mentioned in
this code. Approval of alternate materials or methods of construction shall
be obtained from the City having jurisdiction. Requests for approval shall be
accompanied by evidence showing that the alternate material or method of
construction performs in a manner equal to the material or method required
by the code. The City having jurisdiction may require any claims made
regarding the equivalent performance of alternate materials or method to
be substantiated by test.
§ 279-21. Tests.
The City having jurisdiction may require that the materials, methods,
systems, components or equipment be tested to determine the suitability for
the intended use. The City having jurisdiction will accept results conducted
by a recognized independent testing agency. The cost of testing shall be
borne by the person requesting the approval.
[1] Doors shall be a minimum of 32 inches in width unless at
least 50% of the bedroom doors in the dwelling are a
minimum of 32 inches or have a minimum net clear
opening width of 30 inches.
[2] Light and ventilation. All habitable rooms shall be
provided with natural light and ventilation in accordance
with § SPS 321.05. Balanced mechanical ventilation may
be used in lieu of natural ventilation.
[3] Exits. Two exits from the third floor level are required.
[4] Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors. Smoke and carbon
monoxide detectors shall be installed in the remodeled
areas in accordance with § SPS 321.09 and 321.097. In
addition to being wired to house current and
interconnected, each smoke detector installed in the
remodeled areas shall have battery backup power.
H. Remodeled bathrooms. Newly constructed bathrooms shall be provided
with a bathroom entrance door a minimum of 32 inches wide. Note:
Only one thrirty-two-inch bathroom door per dwelling unit is required,
provided it serves a full bathroom.
I. Fuel-fired appliances. All fuel-fired equipment shall be provided with
combustion and ventilation air in accordance with § SPS 323.06, Wis.
Adm. Code.
A. The test method used to determine the performance shall be one that is
a nationally recognized standard.
§ 279-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-21
1:225
§ 279-22. Identification of products.
All materials shall be identified by the approved label, the grade mark, the
trademark or by other approved manufacturer's identification.
§ 279-23. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or provision of this code shall
be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the provisions so
adjudged and the rest of this code shall remain valid and effective.
§ 279-24. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, use, occupy or maintain any
building or structure in violation of any provisions of this code, or to cause,
permit or suffer any such violations to be committed. Any person violating
any of the provisions of this code shall be subject to the penalty provisions
as set forth in the City Code. It shall be the responsibility of the offender
to abate the violation as expeditiously as possible and each day that such
violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. If,
in any action, a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense nor
shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the Building
Inspector constitute a defense.
§ 279-25. Failure to obtain permit.
It shall be unlawful to commence work prior to obtaining a permit therefor.
Double fees shall be charged if work is commenced prior to the issuance of
a permit.
B. If no nationally recognized standard exists, past performance or
recognized engineering analysis may be used to determine suitability.
C. Ungraded or used building materials may be used or reused as long as
the material possesses the essential properties necessary to achieve the
level of performance required by the code for the intended use. The City
enforcing this code may require tests in accordance with this section.
§ 279-21 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-25
1:226
ARTICLE II
Plumbing Code
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 8, Ch. 3, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 279-26. State Plumbing Regulations adopted.
The provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, Chapters SPS 381,
SPS 382 and SPS 383, relating to plumbing and plumbers, are hereby
adopted and made a part of this article and shall apply to all plumbing,
drainage and drain laying in the City.
§ 279-27. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
PLUMBING —
§ 279-28. Plumbing Supervisor.
A. As is stated in § 145.01(10)(a), Wisconsin Statutes.
The construction, connection to or alteration of any drain, soil or waste
pipe to carry domestic sewage, stormwater or industrial waste from
a point three feet outside of the foundation walls of any building to
the sewer lateral at the curb or other disposal terminal including the
private sewage disposal or treatment plant. This definition does not
include minor repairs to faucets and the removal of stoppages in soil or
waste pipes.
B.
As defined in the State Plumbing Code and as set forth below. In the
event of any difference, the State Plumbing Code shall be controlling:
MASTER PLUMBER — Any person skilled in the planning,
supervision and installation of plumbing and related equipment
and materials, and is familiar with laws, rules and regulations
controlling same and shall have had a minimum of three years'
experience as a journeyman plumber.
(1)
JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER — Any person other than a master
plumber engaged in the installation, maintenance, and repair of
plumbing and related equipment under the supervision of a
licensed master plumber.
(2)
APPRENTICE — Any person other than a master or journeyman
plumber who is engaged in learning and assisting in the installation
of plumbing and related equipment.
(3)
C.
A. Duties of Plumbing Supervisor. The Plumbing Supervisor shall enforce
all of the provisions of this article. He shall prepare suitable forms for
applications, permits and other reports. He shall perform such duties as
§ 279-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-28
1:227
§ 279-29. Plumbing permits; fees.
§ 279-30. Inspection of plumbing work.
It shall be the duty of the plumber in charge to notify the Plumbing
Supervisor whenever any work is ready for inspection (i.e., soil, vent,
underground drain, final inspection). All plumbing work shall be left
exposed until such time as the Supervisor has completed his examination
and inspection. When in the opinion of the Supervisor a test is necessary, he
may require a water or air test on any part of the entire installation.
§ 279-31. Street openings.
A street opening permit must be applied for and received in accordance
with Chapter 573, Streets and Sidewalks, Article VIII, Excavations, of this
Code, before excavation in any street, alley or other public way to repair,
alter or install plumbing.
§ 279-32. Water and sewer mains and service pipes.11
are provided for in § 145.05(1), Wis. Stats., and shall make monthly and
annual reports to the City Manager.
B. Authority of Plumbing Supervisor, inspection of premises. The
Plumbing Supervisor may enter all buildings in the City in the
performance of his duties between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily.
A. Permit required. No plumbing shall be installed in the City without first
filing an application and receiving a permit. Each application must be
approved by the Plumbing Supervisor before a permit to install
plumbing may be issued. Licensed master plumbers only may receive
such permits, with the exception that a permit may be issued to a
property owner to install plumbing in a single-family residence which is
owned and occupied by such owner as his home.
B. Schedule of permit fees. The Common Council shall, from time to time,
by resolution, adopt a schedule of fees which shall govern issuance of
any permit issued pursuant to this article.
C. Withholding permits. The Plumbing Supervisor is authorized to
withhold approval of an application for a plumbing permit to any person
who has not complied with a lawful order of the Plumbing Supervisor.
The person refused such a permit may appeal within 10 days to the City
Council.
A. Handling water mains and service in sewer or other trenches. When
excavating machines are used in digging sewers, all water mains shall
be maintained at the expense of the contractor. Contractors must
ascertain for themselves the existence and location of all water service
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 623, Water and Sewer, Articles I, II and III, of this Code.
§ 279-28 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-32
1:228
§ 279-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to the penalty provided in § 1-19 of this Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
section shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this article.
pipes. Where water service pipes are removed, cut or damaged in the
construction of a sewer, the contractor must at his own expense cause
them to be replaced or repaired at once and must not shut off the water
service from any consumer for a period exceeding six hours.
B. Settling mains or service trenches. Trenches in street shall be refilled
with moist, damp earth or by means of water tamping. When water
tamping is used, the water shall be turned into the trench after the first
12 inches of backfill has been placed, and then the trench shall be kept
flooded until the remainder of the backfill has been put in.
C. Laying water service pipes. Plumbers shall not connect two water
services to one tap but each building must have one distinct and
separate tap and water service pipe laid not less than six feet below the
surface after the street is brought to grade. Each water service must be
provided with a stop cock and metal extension box outside of the
premises connected with the same. Supply pipes shall not be laid across
and connecting adjoining premises whether owned by the same or
different parties. Every water service pipe where it enters a cellar shall
be furnished with a stop and waste cock so situated below the action of
frost that the water can be completely shut off and drained from the
pipes when necessary to prevent freezing.
D. All water pipes laid underground shall be of type K copper tubing, type
C, cast iron water pipe or other approved materials. [Amended
6-4-2019 by Ord. No. 1205]
E. Turning on water. Water may not be turned on for a consumer except by
the Director of Public Works or a duly authorized employee of the City
Water Department. When a plumber has completed a job, he must leave
the water turned off. This provision shall not prevent the testing of
plumbing or drain-laying work.
§ 279-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-33
1:229

ARTICLE III
Electrical Code
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 8, Ch. 4, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 279-34. Adoption of Code; standards.
§ 279-35. Electrical Inspector.
A. Adoption of State Electrical Code. The provisions of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, Chs. 320 through 325, inclusive, and the newest
edition of the National Electric Code, Volume 2, Electrical Standards,
are hereby adopted and made a part of this article and shall apply to
installation of all electrical service in the City.
B. Standards for electric wiring. The Wisconsin Electrical Code, Chapter
SPS 316, Wisconsin Administrative Code, is hereby adopted in its
entirety, made a part of this article, and shall apply to all electrical
service in the City. All electrical wiring hereafter installed in the City
shall be installed so as to conform to the Wisconsin Electrical Code,
Chapter SPS 316, Wisconsin Administrative Code. [Amended
2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 1210]
A. Duties. It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to enforce the
provisions of this article and keep complete records of all permits
issued and inspections made, and file an annual report covering such
issuance of permits and inspection with the City Manager. Said annual
report shall cover the period closing December 31 of each year, and
shall be filed on or before January 15 next thereafter.
B. Access to buildings. The Electrical Inspector or his duly authorized
agent shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any
buildings in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of
making any inspections or tests of the electrical wires contained
therein.
C. Authority to discontinue electric operation. The Electrical Inspector
shall have the authority to cause the turning off of electrical current to
any equipment which is found to be in an unsafe condition and to cut or
discontinue electrical services in cases of emergency and where such
electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere
with the work of the Fire Department. No person shall reconnect any
equipment thus cut off until permission is given by the Electrical
Inspector.
D. Defective electrical construction. Any electrical wires in the City found
to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition by the Electrical Inspector
shall be reported to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which
such defective wiring is found and notice thereof given to place the
same in a safe condition.
§ 279-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-36
1:231
§ 279-36. License required. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
No person shall alter, install or repair electrical wires, equipment or devices
for any purpose in the City without first having procured a license from the
state. A homeowner, however, may do such work in a house which he owns
and occupies, without procuring a license.
§ 279-37. Electrical permits.
§ 279-38. Inspection.
§ 279-39. Interference with radio and television reception
prohibited.
A. Permit required. No electrical wiring in new construction or building
alterations shall be done in the City, or any appliances wired, without a
permit being first issued therefor by the Electrical Inspector.
B. Application. Any person desiring such a permit shall file an application
on blanks furnished by the Electrical Inspector.
A. Required inspection. Upon completion of roughed-in wiring, before
sheeting or covering any wiring from view, the person so wiring shall
notify the Electrical Inspector who shall, if satisfied upon inspecting the
wiring as to workmanship and materials so far completed and installed,
give his approval. When the wiring is completed, another inspection
shall be made and fees paid before the Electrical Inspector shall order
the current turned on. If it is convenient to the Inspector and the person
installing the wiring, extra inspections can be made as work progresses
on wiring on larger or more extensive installations. The cost of such
extra inspections shall be paid by the person requesting said extra
inspections. At all times when inspection is desired, it shall be the duty
of the person doing the installing to notify the Inspector at least 48
hours before inspection is expected to be completed.
B. Schedule of permit fees. The City Council shall, from time to time by
resolution, adopt a schedule of fees, which schedule shall be effective
upon publication of the resolution in the official newspaper of the City
and which schedule shall remain in effect until appealed or otherwise
amended by subsequent action of the City Council.
C. Requested inspections. Any owner of any premises in the City may
request electrical inspection of his premises at the same fees as new
construction.
A. No person shall operate within the City any electrical apparatus,
device, machine, or equipment which needlessly and unnecessarily
causes interference with radio or television reception, when such
interference can be reasonably prevented by means of repairs,
§ 279-36 LAKE MILLS CODE § 279-39
1:232
§ 279-40. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to
the penalty in § 1-19 of this Code. Each violation and each day a violation
continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall
not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or
remove a violation of this article.
adjustments, the installation of corrective appliances, or other
practicable alterations.
B. No person shall broadcast within the City directly or indirectly as a byproduct
of a lawful act, any radio frequency waves in such manner as to
interfere with radio or television reception in any part of the City, with
the following exceptions, which exceptions shall be operated in
accordance with Subsection A:
(1) Any licensed practicing physician operating an X-ray machine for
purposes incident to his profession.
(2) Any person operating a battery-charging device, and the owner
thereof.
(3) Any person operating an ultraviolet ray machine, and the owner
thereof.
§ 279-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-40
1:233

ARTICLE IV
Energy Conservation Code
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 8, Ch. 5, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 279-41. Standards adopted.
The State of Wisconsin Administrative Code, Chapter SPS 322, Energy
Conservation, and all amendments thereto, is adopted and incorporated in
this code by reference.
§ 279-42. Administration by Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector and his delegated representatives are hereby
authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of
the energy conservation standards.
§ 279-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-42
1:235
Chapter 286
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 279.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 650.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 660.
§ 286-1. Numbering system established.
There is hereby established a uniform system of numbering houses and
buildings fronting on all streets, avenues and public ways in the City, and all
houses and buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 286-2. Numbering system designated.
A. Street designation. Lake Street shall constitute the base line for
numbering along all streets running north and south, and Main Street
shall constitute the base line for numbering along all streets running
west and east.
(1) All buildings and lots north of Lake Street shall be known as located
at number _____ North _____ Street.
(2) All buildings and lots south of Lake Street shall be known as
located at number _____ South _____ Street.
(3) All buildings and lots east of Main Street shall be known as located
at number _____ East _____ Street.
(4) All buildings and lots west of Main Street shall be known as located
at number _____ West _____ Street.
(5) All buildings and lots on diagonal streets shall be numbered the
same as north and south streets if the diagonal runs more from the
north to the south, and the same as on east and west streets if the
diagonal runs more from the east to the west.
B. Number designation.
(1) The numbering for each street shall begin at the base line. The
numbers within the first block shall be from 100 to 199 and the
numbers in each succeeding block shall increase from the base line
in units of 100, namely the first block shall be 100 through 199, the
second block shall be 200 through 299, the third block shall be 300
through 399, etc. There shall be assigned 100 numbers to each
block, square or space that would be on block or square, if streets
each way were so extended as to intersect each other, and one
§ 279-42 LAKE MILLS CODE § 286-2
1:236
§ 286-3. Procedure for assigning.
number shall be assigned to each 25 feet of frontage. In blocks or
equivalent space longer than 750 feet which is not intersected by a
street, if extended, the total length of space divided by 25 shall be
used to determine the feet of frontage assigned to each number.
(2) Where blocks of different lengths occur on opposite sides of a
street, the numbers on both sides shall be assigned on the basis of
the shorter blocks, unless the City Manager otherwise determines.
C. Lot and building numbering.
(1) All lots and houses on the north and west sides of all streets shall
be numbered with odd numbers, each commending with the
hundred assigned to that block, and shall increase from the base
line one number for each 25 feet of frontage or fraction thereof,
except as provided in Subsection B above. Where any building has
more than one door serving a separate occupant, providing the
building is 25 feet or more in width. If the building is not 25 feet or
more in width and the entrances are not that far apart, the next
consecutive number shall be marked fractional. Buildings fronting
on two or more streets shall have a number assigned only to the
main entrance, unless other entrances serve different occupants.
(2) Where only one number can be assigned to any house or building,
the owner, occupant or agent of such house or building, who shall
desire distinctive numbers for the upper and lower portion of any
such house or building, or for any part of such house or building,
fronting on any street, shall use the suffix "A," "B," "C," etc., as may
be required.
D. All streets not extending through to the base line shall be assigned the
same relative numbers as if the said street had extended to the said
base line.
A. The City Council shall cause the necessary survey to be made and there
shall be assigned to each house and building located on any street,
avenue, alley or highway in the City, its respective number under the
uniform system provided for in this chapter. When the said survey shall
have been completed and each house and building has been assigned to
its respective number or numbers, the owner, occupant or agent shall
place or cause to be placed upon each house or building controlled by
him the number or numbers assigned under the uniform system
provided for in this chapter.
B. Such number or numbers shall be placed within 20 days after the
assigning of the proper number. Replacements of numbers shall be
procured for and by the owner. The numbers used shall be not less than
three inches in height.
§ 286-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-3
1:237
§ 286-4. Numbering required.
Whenever any house, building or structure shall be erected or located in
the City after the entire work of establishing a uniform system of house
numbering has been completed, in order to preserve the continuity and
uniformity of numbers of the houses, buildings and structures, it shall be the
duty of the owner to procure the correct number or numbers as designated
from the Building Inspector for the said property and to immediately fasten
the said number or numbers so assigned upon said building, as provided
by this chapter. No building permit shall be issued for any house, building
or structure until the owner has procured from the Building Inspector the
official number of the premises.
§ 286-5. Map maintained. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
For the purpose of facilitating a correct numbering, a map of all streets,
avenues and public highways within the City showing the proper numbers
of all lots or houses fronting upon all streets, avenues or highways shall be
kept on file in the office of the Clerk or Engineer. This map shall be open to
inspection of all persons during the office hours of the Clerk.
§ 286-6. Enforcement.
C. The numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at
the side of the proper door of each building so that the number can be
seen plainly from the street. Whenever any building is situated more
than 50 feet from the street line, the number of such building shall be
conspicuously displayed at the street line, near the walk, driveway or
common entrance to such building and upon the gate post, fence, tree,
post or other appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the
sidewalk.
D. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inform any party
applying therefor of the number or numbers belonging or embraced
within the limits of said lot or property as provided in this chapter. In
case of doubt as to the proper number as to be assigned to any lot or
building, the Building Inspector shall determine the number of such lot
or building.
A. It shall be the duty of all police officers of the City to report violations of
this chapter.
B. If the owner or occupant of any building required to be numbered by
this chapter shall neglect for the period of 20 days to duly attach and
maintain the proper number on such building, the Chief of Police shall
serve upon him a notice requiring such owner or occupant to properly
number the same, and if he neglects to do so for 10 days after the
service of such notice, he shall be deemed to have violated this chapter.
§ 286-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 286-7
1:238
§ 286-7. Violations and penalties. [Added at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-19 of this Code.
Chapter 292
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 279. Zoning regulations — See Ch. 660.
§ 292-1. Designation, procedures of repair or razing.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the designation and repair
or razing of those buildings or structures which are so dilapidated, unsafe,
dangerous, unhygienic, inadequately maintained or lacking in basic
equipment, facilities, light, ventilation and heating so as to constitute a
menace to the occupants or public.
§ 292-2. Placarding as unfit, conditions.
§ 292-3. Placard defacing or removal prohibited.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any building or structure
or part thereof which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation
and placarded as such.
A. Any building or structure which shall be found to have any of the
following defects may be designated as unfit for human habitation and
in need of repairs or razing and so placarded by the Building Inspector.
Legal notice shall be served upon the owner and on the operator of any
building:
(1) Which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, dangerous, unsanitary,
unsafe, or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the
health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
(2) Which lacks illumination, ventilation, heating, basic equipment or
sanitary facilities adequate to protect the health, safety or general
welfare of the occupants or of the public.
B. Any building or structure or part thereof designated and placarded by
the Inspector as unit for human habitation and in need of repairs or
razing shall be vacated within a reasonable time ordered by the
Inspector.
§ 286-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-4
1:239
§ 292-4. Use for human habitation prohibited.
No building or structure or part thereof which has been designated and
placarded as unfit for human habitation and in need of repairs or razing
shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured
from, and such placard is removed by, the Inspector. The Inspector shall
remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
designation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
§ 292-5. Razing or removing.
Any building or structure or part thereof designated as unfit for human
habitation and in need of repairs or razing by the Inspector, which in the
opinion of the Inspector, would be unreasonable to repair shall be razed
or removed upon legal written service of the order of the Inspector. If the
owner shall fail or refuse to comply with the order, the Inspector shall cause
such building to be razed or removed under the procedures provided in
§ 66.0413, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 311
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal utilities — See Ch. 211.
§ 311-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited as the "City of Lake Mills
Cable Franchise Ordinance."
§ 311-2. Purpose and intent.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the granting of a
franchise to construct, maintain and operate a CATV system in the City
and to set forth the obligations and rights of the City and grantee
accompanying said grant.
B. It is the intent of the City Council in adopting these provisions that a
cable communications system be provided for the residents of the City
as well as for the residents of the surrounding townships. It is for this
purpose that provision is made herein for the creating of a Joint
Regulatory Board. It is the intent of the City Council that the City work
in cooperation with the surrounding townships in obtaining a cable
communications system which will serve all residents, irrespective of
municipal boundaries. It is also the intention of the City Council that
revenues generated by the granting of this franchise be used for the
purpose of enhancement of the cable communication system and the
§ 292-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-2
1:240
§ 311-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
APPLICANT — Any individual, partnership, corporation or association
which shall have filed a written application for a franchise under this
chapter as provided herein.
BASIC SERVICE — The simultaneous delivery by the grantee to television
receivers of those broadcast and nonbroadcast television channels which
are required to be provided by this chapter.
CABLE COMMUNICATION SYSTEM — Any system whose function is to
receive and amplify the broadcast signals of one or more television and
radio stations or to provide signals for additional closed circuit
programming and to redistribute such signals to members of the public
who subscribe to such service or to whom redistribution of such signals is
required by this chapter by means of wires, cables, conduit, microwaves,
satellites or other means.
CHANNELS — A group of frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum
capable of carrying an audio-data or an audio-visual television signal. Each
channel is a block of frequencies containing 6 MHz bandwidth.
CITY — The City of Lake Mills, Jefferson County, Wisconsin.
CITY COUNCIL — The present or future governing body of the City.
CONVERTER — An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference with the television receiver of a subscriber,
and by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view all
signals delivered at designated dial locations.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or that part of a structure which is used or
intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place of one person or
by two or more persons maintaining a common household, to the exclusion
of all others. Where the term "dwelling unit" is used in this chapter incident
to the computation of any formula, a dwelling unit which is occupied for less
than six months each year shall be considered as 1/2 dwelling unit, and a
dwelling unit which is occupied for six months or more shall be considered
as a whole dwelling unit.
EDUCATION ACCESS CHANNEL — That channel which the grantee is
required to provide by this chapter.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
purchase of facilities and equipment to that end. The City Council does
not intend that the revenues generated by this franchise be used to
defray general operating expenses of the City.
§ 311-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-3
1:241
GRANTEE — Any applicant receiving the grant of any franchise hereunder
and shall include any lawful successor to the interest of the grantee, when
consent to such succession has been granted by the Board.
GROSS REVENUES — Any and all compensation, in whatever form,
exchange or otherwise, derived from the provision of all cable
communication system services in the City. ("Gross revenues" shall mean
all revenues derived by the grantee, its affiliates or subsidiaries from and
in connection with the operation of the cable television system in the City,
as that term is defined by the FCC or a court of competent jurisdiction,
and shall include revenues from all sources including without limitation
revenues from advertising, channel leasing, data transmission and perprogram
charges, in addition to the subscribers' regular monthly payments;
provided, however, that installation and construction fees charged
subscribers for services directly related to initial installation of the
receiving equipment shall not be deemed a gross revenue as that term is
used in this chapter.)
LAKE MILLS CATV REGULATORY BOARD or BOARD — Shall also have
reference to the Lake Mills Joint CATV Regulatory Board.
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL — The channel which the grantee is required
to provide by the terms of this chapter.
MULTIPLE ACCESS CHANNEL or GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL —
The channel which the grantee is required to provide by the terms of this
chapter.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — The channel or channels which the grantee
is required to provide pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
REASONABLE NOTICE — The provision of notice of contemplated action
delivered at least 48 hours prior to such action.
STREETS — Includes all streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes,
alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way
or other public ways in the City which have been or may hereafter be
dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so
designated by law.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person or entity receiving for any purpose the cable
service of the grantee.
TOWN — Any township, or a portion thereof, located in the Lake Mills
Power and Light District, provided that such township has adopted an
ordinance in substantially the same form as this chapter.
UTILITY — The Lake Mills Light and Water Utility, or where appropriate any
utility providing electrical, water, sewer or gas services to the residents of
the Lake Mills Light and Water Utility District.
§ 311-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-4
1:242
§ 311-4. Franchise requirement.
No person shall install, maintain or operate a cable communication system,
or solicit subscriptions for the same, without first having applied for and
obtained a franchise from the City in accordance with this section, and any
failure to secure such a franchise prior to the commencement of operations
or the soliciting of any subscription from any subscriber for such service
shall be deemed a violation of this section and shall subject the violator to
the penalties prescribed herein.
§ 311-5. Prohibited use of streets.
No person shall use the streets for or in connection with a cable
communication system except as may be specifically permitted by the
Council or its designee. No cable or other equipment or device installed in,
over or under the streets under a franchise granted under this chapter shall
be used for any purpose except for a cable communication system as herein
defined.
§ 311-6. Application for franchise.
The application for a franchise shall be submitted to the Council in writing,
and shall contain the following:
A. Name and address.
(1) For individuals. The applicant's name, address, occupation and
principal place of business.
(2) For partnerships. The applicant partnerships name, business and
principal place of business; along with the names, addresses,
occupations and principal place of business of each of the partners.
(3) For corporations (or associations). The applicant corporation's
name, principal business and principal place of business; the state
of incorporation; the names and addresses of the officers and
directors; the names and addresses of its registered agents; the
number of shareholders, including the names and residences of
shareholders holding, controlling or having a beneficial interest in
more than 10% of the outstanding shares, identifying their
interests, along with a statement indicating any intention of change
of said interests during the term of the franchise. If the corporation
is a foreign corporation, a certificate of security to transact
business in this state shall accompany the application.
B. A statement as to any other cable administration systems owned or
operated by or in which the applicant has any interest. Such statement
shall list by name and address each and every municipality in the
United States in which the applicant operates a cable communication
system or has been granted a franchise so to do.
§ 311-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-6
1:243
§ 311-7. Grant of franchise.
C. A detailed explanation of the nature, extent and scope of operation of
the proposed system (including any present legal, financial, technical or
other qualifying matter which may relate to the inability of the
applicant to perform the proposed system).
D. A complete, sworn financial statement of the applicant.
E. The estimated cost of installing the system.
F. The method of financing the system.
G. A listing of channels which the applicant will provide and the type of
program or service to be provided on each channel.
H. A schedule of the applicant's rates for installation, monthly service
charges and any other charges to subscribers, together with a proposed
rental or service agreement with subscribers which details the rights
and obligations of subscribers to the system. The schedule of proposed
rates shall also indicate whether or not a charge will be made to a
subscriber for the removal of service.
I. A list of equipment to be used in the total system together with
specifications therefor. The applicant will agree that the City may
require review of adequacy of equipment by a third party qualified as a
consultant whose fee shall be paid by the applicant within 30 days from
the date of billing by the City Council.
J. The estimated construction schedule.
K. A statement that the applicant will abide by and conform to all of the
provisions of this section and amendments thereto, and that the
applicant will pay at the time required any franchise fees herein
prescribed.
L. An application fee of $1,000 shall accompany the application. Said
application fee shall be nonrefundable.
M. Such additional detailed information which the City Council may
require.
A. The Council may grant a nonexclusive franchise to an applicant, herein
referred to as "grantee," for a period of 15 years from the date the
franchise is awarded for the right and privilege to install, operate and
maintain a system in the City under the restrictions and conditions of
this section. No property right in this franchise shall vest in the grantee,
and such franchise shall not be construed to create any right beyond
that set forth in this section.
B. For the purpose of deferring the cost incurred by the City incident to
the granting of the cable TV franchise, an application approval fee of
§ 311-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-7
1:244
§ 311-8. Territorial limits of grant.
The franchise awarded pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall require
the grantee to provide CATV service to the entire City during the term
of the franchise. The following shall constitute minimum residential and
commercial CATV service requirements to be provided under the terms of
this chapter:
$7,500 shall be paid by the grantee to the City within 10 days after the
granting of the franchise to the grantee.
C. No transfer of control of the cable communication system shall take
place, whether by force or voluntary sale, lease, assignment or any
other form of disposition, without prior notice to and approval by the
Council after submission of an application by the transferee.
D. None of the rights and privileges or the delegations, duties or liabilities
created by this franchise shall be transferred or assigned, either
voluntarily or involuntarily, by grantee without prior approval by the
Council after submission of an application by the proposed transferee
or assignee.
E. The grantee shall not assign, mortgage, pledge, hypothecate or
otherwise encumber the franchise or all or any portion of the cable,
wires or other equipment located within the City, nor permit the same
to occur, nor permit a prior assignment, mortgage, pledge,
hypothecation or encumbrance to continue, without prior notice to and
approval by the Council.
F. Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of
the system, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a
substantial part of the system, the grantee shall immediately notify the
Council of such fact, and such notification shall be treated as a
notification that a change in control of the grantee has taken place, and
the provisions of this subsection governing the consent of the Council to
such change shall apply.
G. The grantee shall, at all times during the operation of this franchise, be
subject to all lawful exercise of the police power as may be hereafter
provided by the City.
H. Cable communication system service shall be made available to the City
in accordance with the construction schedule set forth in this chapter.
I. The right to use and occupy any streets for the purpose herein set forth
shall not be exclusive and the City reserves the right to grant a similar
use of said streets to any person at any time during the period of this
franchise.
A. The grantee shall, at its own expense, extend CATV service to all the
annexed areas of the City within six months of annexation.
§ 311-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-8
1:245
§ 311-9. Regulatory Board.
B. The grantee shall, at its own expense, extend CATV service to new
housing units developed within the City within six months of occupancy.
A. A Cable Television System Regulatory Board consisting of seven
members which shall be appointed by the City Council is hereby
created. The Regulatory Board shall be known as the "Lake Mills CATV
Regulatory Board." Upon creation of the Board, two Board members
shall be appointed for one-year terms; two Board members shall be
appointed for two-year terms; and three Board members shall be
appointed for three-year terms. Thereafter, all members shall be
appointed for three-year terms. In the event a Joint Regulatory Board is
created as provided in Subsection B of this section, the members of that
Board shall be appointed annually by the City Council.
B. In the event any town whose boundaries are located entirely or partially
within the Lake Mills Power and Light District shall adopt an ordinance
in substantially the same form as this chapter, which ordinance shall
also provide for a regulatory board, and in the further event that said
town or towns provide for the creation of a joint regulatory board, then
in that event the Regulatory Board created hereunder shall be known as
the Lake Mills Joint CATV Regulatory Board. Each municipality
participating in the Lake Mills Joint CATV Regulatory Board shall make
appointments to the Board in accordance with the following formula:
The number of Board members to which each municipality shall be
entitled shall be determined by multiplying the total number of Board
members by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the number of
dwelling units located in a given municipality which units have
subscribed to the CATV service, and the denominator of which shall be
the total number of dwelling units in the municipalities who are
appointing members to the Lake Mills Joint CATV Regulatory Board,
which dwelling units have subscribed to the CATV service. If the
product resulting from application of the foregoing formula is not a
whole number, then the product shall be rounded off to the nearest
whole number. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the
contrary, each municipality appointing members to the Lake Mills Joint
CATV Regulatory Board shall be entitled to at least one representative
on said Board.
C. Annually, the City Council shall approve the budget of the Lake Mills
CATV Regulatory Board of the Lake Mills Joint CATV Regulatory Board,
as the case may be. The Board shall operate on a fiscal year beginning
on January 1 and concluding on the following December 31. In the event
of the creation of a Lake Mills Joint CATV Regulatory Board, the budget
for such Board shall be approved by all participating municipalities, and
each participating municipality shall contribute proportionately to the
annual budget. The proportionate share of the annual budget which
shall be contributed by each municipality shall be determined by
multiplying the total proposed budget by a fraction, the numerator of
§ 311-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-9
1:246
which shall be the number of dwelling units located in a given
municipality which units have subscribed to the CATV service, and the
denominator of which shall be the total number of dwelling units in
the municipalities who are contributing to the budget which dwelling
units have subscribed to the CATV service. At the conclusion of each
fiscal year or at the termination of the Lake Mills Joint CATV Regulatory
Board should that occur during a fiscal year, any budgeted but unspent
funds shall be returned to the participating municipalities on a prorated
basis.
D. The functions and duties of the Lake Mills CATV Regulatory Board or
Lake Mills Joint CATV Regulatory Board, as the case may be, shall be as
follows:
(1) To resolve disputes or disagreements between subscribers and the
grantee after investigation should the subscriber and grantee not
first be able to resolve their dispute or disagreement.
(2) To receive and audit reports submitted to the City as required by
this chapter, as well as such other correspondence as may be
submitted to the City concerning the operation of the CATV service
so as to insure that the necessary reports are completed and filed
pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
(3) To review rules and regulations adopted by the grantee incident to
providing service to subscribers.
(4) To assure that all tariffs, rates and rules pertinent to the operation
of the CATV service in the City are made available for inspection by
the public at reasonable hours and upon reasonable request.
(5) To review rates and recommend any change to the City Council as
provided herein.
(6) To plan and develop production and programming on any dedicated
access channels.
(7) To solicit, review and provide recommendations to the City Council
to insure compliance with this chapter.
(8) To insure that the grantee makes public access channels available
to all residents of the City on a nondiscriminatory basis and to
advise the grantee on procedural rules for this purpose.
(9) To assure that the operation of the public access channels are free
of program censorship.
(10) To perform such other duties as the City Council may assign, or as
may be otherwise provided herein.
(11) To annually prepare and submit an operating budget to the
approving municipalities.
§ 311-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-9
1:247
§ 311-10. Removal of equipment.
§ 311-11. Joint use by City and utilities.
(12) To adopt rules of operation, including rules relating to financial
matters such as place of depository for board finances, method of
authorization of expenditures, and so on.
E. The Lake Mills CATV Regulatory Board shall be authorized to expend
such funds as had been approved in its operation budget for the
maintenance and improvement of the system. No funds may be
expended except as had been approved by the participating
municipalities as evidenced by the annual operating budget.
F. Any assets held by the Lake Mills CATV Joint Regulatory Board at the
termination of that Board's existence shall be sold or otherwise
disposed of at the highest possible price, and the net proceeds received
from the sale or disposition of such assets shall be returned to the
participating municipalities in proportion to each participating
municipality's contribution to the Board's annual budget as averaged
over the three-year period next preceding termination of the Board.
A. Following the grantee's commencement of service through Andover of
its CATV system, the grantee, upon request of the City Council, shall
promptly remove from the public streets or City properties where they
are located all or any part of the facilities so located when one or more
of the following enumerated conditions occur:
(1) The grantee ceases to provide a substantial continuous amount of
the services required in this chapter for a period of three months.
(2) The grantee fails to construct said system as provided herein.
(3) The franchise expires, or is revoked pursuant to notice as provided
herein.
B. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the City
shall provide grantee with written notice delivered to the local office of
the grantee setting forth one or more of the occurrences herein
enumerated, and scheduling a public hearing to be held by the Lake
Mills CATV Regulatory Board. No action shall be taken by the City
Council until after receipt and consideration of the recommendation of
the Lake Mills CATV Regulatory Board.
C. Any order issued by the City Council providing for the removal of
property owned by the grantee shall specify a date for removal, which
date shall be at least seven days next following service of the order
upon the grantee. If the grantee fails to comply with the order, the City
shall be entitled to remove the personal property of the grantee, and
shall be entitled to reimbursement for all costs so incurred.
§ 311-9 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-11
1:248
§ 311-12. Franchise renewal.
A. The grantee may be required by the City to permit joint use of its
property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, or other
public ways of the City by other utilities insofar as such joint use may be
reasonable, practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental
therefor; provided, that in the absence of agreement regarding such
joint use, the City Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and
conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor,
which award shall be final. This City shall, in accordance with the
authority granted by Chapter 196, Wisconsin Statutes, provide
reasonable access to utility poles and utility easement areas in order to
facilitate the installation of the CATV system by the grantee.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the grantee shall be required to
negotiate and pay to the utility a reasonable rental for use of the utility
poles and utility easements.
B. The City shall have the right, during the term of this franchise, to install
and maintain free of charge upon the property of the grantee its own
equipment, including, but not limited to, a police alarm system, on the
condition that such equipment does not unreasonable interfere with the
CATV operations of the grantee.
A. This franchise may be renewed by the Council upon application of the
grantee pursuant to the procedure established in this section and in
accordance with the then-applicable law.
B. At least 13 months prior to the expiration of the franchise, the grantee
shall inform the Council in writing of its intent to seek renewal of the
franchise.
C. Upon being advised of the grantee's intent to seek renewal of the
franchise, the City Council shall direct the Lake Mills CATV Regulatory
Board to hold a public hearing on the application for renewal. The
public hearing shall be conducted, and a finding and recommendation
of the Lake Mills CATV Regulatory Board shall be forwarded to the City
Council within 60 days thereof. After receipt of the findings and
recommendations of the Lake Mills CATV Regulatory Board, the City
Council shall proceed to determine whether the grantee has
satisfactorily performed its obligations under the franchise. To
determine satisfactory performance, the Council shall consider
technical developments and performance of the system, programming,
other services offered, cost of services and any other matters relevant
to the operation and performance of the grantee. The Council shall
consider the grantee's annual reports made to the City and the FCC and
industry performance on a national basis.
D. The City Council shall determine whether the grantee's application for
renewal shall be granted within 120 days after receipt of the
application for renewal; provided, however, that a failure to act within
that period of time shall not constitute an automatic renewal of the
§ 311-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-12
1:249
§ 311-13. Initial system installation schedule.
franchise. If the Council finds the grantee's performance satisfactory,
a new franchise will be granted pursuant to this section, as may be
amended from time to time, for a period not to exceed 10 years.
E. In the event the grantee is determined by the Council to have
performed unsatisfactorily, new applicants shall be sought and
evaluated and a franchise award shall be made by the Council
according to the franchising procedures adopted by the Council.
A. The grantee shall make application to the Federal Communications
Commission for all licenses and permits required by the Federal
Communications Commission, including but not limited to licenses or
permits necessary for the utilization of any microwave facilities to
import permissible signals. The grantee shall prosecute such
applications diligently and faithfully in order that the necessary
approvals can be obtained in the shortest possible time, and in
accordance with the construction schedule as set forth in the grant of
franchise.
B. The grantee shall, within 20 days after franchise is granted by the City,
begin negotiations with utility companies for facility lease agreements.
C. Prior to the commencement of construction and prior to receipt of final
approvals from the Federal Communications Commission for
establishment of the system, the grantee shall conduct the necessary
engineering studies so that the construction can be commenced
immediately upon final approval by the Federal Communications
Commission.
D. The grantee shall, within 20 days after franchise is granted by the City,
begin preliminary engineering of the pole line route and electronic
layouts, begin negotiations for common carrier microwave contracts
and initiate engineering surveys for the receiving site and building
locations of grantee's CATV system.
E. The grantee shall commence construction of the cable television system
within 30 days after the Lake Mills Light and Water Utility has given the
grantee written permission to attach the cable system to the utility
poles. The grantee shall notify the City in writing as soon as all pole
attachment agreements have been consummated, and as soon as final
approval from the Federal Communications Commission to establish a
cable television system as provided in this section has been obtained.
F. The grantee shall submit to the City Council an installation plan for the
entire City indicating the date on which the grantee expects the
installation of the CATV system to be completed and available for
service to subscribers in the various areas of the City. The proposed
construction schedule submitted by the grantee to the City Council
§ 311-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-13
1:250
shall be incorporated into the grant of franchise and shall constitute a
material part thereof.
G. The grantee shall furnish the City Council with construction progress
reports every 30 days indicating in detail the area of construction of the
CATV system.
H. The requirements established in Subsections A through G above are
maximums, and the grantee may at any time proceed at a rate speedier
than required by said Subsections A through G above. The City Council
shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work
performed pursuant to the provisions of this section.
I. The City may in its discretion extend the time for grantee acting in good
faith to perform any act required hereunder. The time for performance
shall be extended or excused, as the case may be, for any period during
which grantee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City Council that
grantee is being subjected to delay or interruption due to any of the
following circumstances if reasonable beyond its control:
(1) Necessary utility rearrangements, pole change-outs or obtainment
of easement rights;
(2) Government or regulatory restrictions;
(3) Labor strikes;
(4) Lockouts;
(5) War;
(6) National emergencies;
(7) Fire; or
(8) Acts of God.
J. The grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, relocate in the same street, or remove from
any street, any property owned or used by the grantee when required
by the City Council by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street
vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of
street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines
and tracks or any other type of structure or improvement when
required by the City Council. Any property or equipment owned or used
by the grantee no longer needed in connection with the system shall be
removed by the grantee at its own expense.
K. All installations by the grantee of cables and incidental equipment shall
comply in all respects with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of
the Federal Communications Commission, the State of Wisconsin, or
any agency or department thereof, and the City or any agency or
department thereof, now or hereafter in effect.
§ 311-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-13
1:251
L. The grantee shall provide and maintain its equipment in such condition
and of such quality so that none of its service will adversely affect radio
and television reception.
M. Installation and maintenance of equipment shall be such that standard
color signals shall be transmitted with reasonable fidelity to any
subscriber.
N. The grantee shall not either directly or indirectly engage in the
servicing or repair of television receivers in the City, nor directly or
indirectly require of any subscriber the patronage of any designated
person or company engaged in such service or repair business. The
foregoing shall not apply to the repair or adjustment of equipment
which is part of the system of the grantee.
O. The grantee shall submit to inspections by duly authorized personnel of
the City and shall make available to such inspectors or duly authorized
personnel its facilities and equipment. The City reserves the right to
enact reasonable regulations regarding the installation and
maintenance of the facilities of the grantee.
P. The grantee shall make available at grantee's cost and to all subscribers
who so request such switching devices as are necessary to permit a
subscriber to use the subscriber's own antenna. Such devices shall
provide the best possible signal quality consistent with the technical
state of the art and with no interference to signals received by the
subscriber off the air.
Q. The City, in its use and maintenance of such wires and fixtures of the
grantee, shall at all times comply with the rules and regulations of the
grantee so that there may be a minimum danger of contact or conflict
between the wires and fixtures of the grantee and the wires and fixtures
used by the City.
R. In removing its plant, structures and equipment either at the
termination of its franchise or upon termination of the franchise by the
City, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that
shall have been made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in
as good condition as the prevailing prior to the grantee's removal of its
equipment and appliances, without affecting the electric or telephone
cables, wires or attachments. The City shall inspect and approve the
condition of the public ways and public places and cables, wires,
attachments and poles after removal. Liability insurance and indemnity
provided in § 311-21B and the performance bond provided for in
§ 311-21D shall continue in full force and effect during the period of
removal, and approval thereof by the City.
S. In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any work required
by Subsection R above or any work required by the City laws or
ordinances within the time established and to the satisfaction of the
City, the City may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall
reimburse the City the costs and expenses thereof within 30 days after
§ 311-13 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-13
1:252
§ 311-14. Liquidated damages.
In the event the grantee shall fail to complete the construction and
installation of the cable television system as herein provided, and as
provided in the grant of franchise, the grantee shall pay to the City the sum
of $500 for each and every day the time consumed in such installation and
construction exceeds the time specified.
§ 311-15. Purchase of cable TV system by City.
receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or the City may recover such
costs as provided in § 311-14 of this chapter. The grantee shall provide
a performance bond in an amount to be set by the Council to insure
payment for such removal.
T. It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services
insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are
honored. In the event that the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild,
modify, or sell the system, or the Council gives notice of intent to
terminate or failure to review this franchise, the grantee shall act so as
to insure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service
regardless of the circumstances.
U. The grantee may be required to interconnect its system with any other
broadband communications facility. Such interconnection shall be made
within the time limit established by the Council. The interconnection
shall, at the Council's discretion, be accomplished according to the
method and technical standards determined by the Council, in a
manner consistent with applicable FCC standards.
A. When the franchise is revoked pursuant to this chapter, or expires and
is not renewed, the City shall have the right to acquire the grantee's
cable system. Should the City decide to purchase the cable system, it
shall do so at a price not to exceed its then fair value. In determining
the fair value of the system, the original cost of all tangible and
intangible property, as well as the salvage value, the book value, the
replacement cost, the cash flow, and other factors may be considered.
Under no circumstances shall any valuation be made for "good will" or
for any right or privilege granted by these franchise regulations.
Payment for the cable system shall be rendered to the grantee within
120 days after the City has exercised its rights in this area.
B. In the event the determination of fair value cannot be negotiated or
determined, said value shall be determined by an impartial arbitration
procedure pursuant to Chapter 788, Wis. Stats., wherein the grantee
and the City shall each choose an arbitrator and the arbitrators chosen
shall choose the third and the valuation determined by said arbitrators
shall be considered the fair value at which the system will be offered to
the City. The determination of the value of the system shall be
decreased by the amount of any damages sustained by the City in
connection with revocation or expiration, including without limitation,
§ 311-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-15
1:253
§ 311-16. Rates.
payment made by the City to another person or entity to operate
the system for a temporary period after revocation. The cost of the
arbitration procedure shall be shared equally between the City and the
grantee.
C. The City shall have 90 days to exercise the right of first refusal to
purchase the system, said ninety-day period commencing on the day the
fair market value of the system is determined either through
negotiation or the arbitration procedure. If the City does not exercise
its option to purchase and the system is not sold to another operator
who has obtained a franchise from the City in a reasonable period of
time, the grantee, upon request by the City, shall promptly remove all
its plant, structures and equipment; provided, however, that in the
event the City determines not to exercise its right of first refusal it shall
not unreasonably refuse to renew or grant a cable television franchise
during a reasonable interim period. While transfer of the system and
franchise is being negotiated, arranged or ordered, the grantee may be
required to continue service to the public unless for reasons beyond the
control of the grantee said operation will be economically unfeasible to
the grantee.
A. Rate schedule.
(1) The rates charged to subscribers shall be fair and reasonable so as
to allow the grantee a reasonable return on its investment, but in
all events, said rates shall be determined and approved by the City
Council.
(2) The initial rate schedule shall be approved by the City at the time of
the granting of the franchise. Thereafter, the rate schedule
approved by the City at the granting of the franchise shall remain in
effect for the first two years of operation of the system. For the
purpose of determining the two-year time period under this
subsection, the operation shall be deemed to have commenced one
year after the date of award of the franchise, or at such time as
construction necessary to make cable television service available to
50% of the homes in the City has been completed, whichever shall
first occur. Completion of construction shall include not only the
required installation of equipment, but shall be interpreted to
require the satisfactory receipt of all signals by subscribers.
(3) _____
(a) No increase in rates shall be allowed unless a written notice
shall first be given by the grantee to the City at least 90 days
prior to the proposed effective date for the increase. Upon
receipt of a request for increase of rates, the City shall refer
the matter to the Lake Mills CATV Regulatory Board for review
and recommendation. The City Council shall determine
§ 311-15 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-16
1:254
whether or not a public hearing shall be held to consider
such proposed rate increase; provided, however, that the City
Council may direct the Lake Mills CATV Regulatory Board
to hold said public hearing if it deems such a hearing to be
appropriate. Any request for a rate increase by the grantee
shall include the following current financial reports, which
shall reflect the operations of the City cable television system:
[1] Balance sheet.
[2] Income statement.
[3] Cash flow statement.
[4] Statement of sources and application of funds.
[5] Detailed supporting schedules of expenses, income, assets
and other items as may be required.
[6] Statement of current and projected subscribers and
penetration.
(b) The grantee's accounting records applicable to the City system
shall be available for inspection by the City at all times. The
City shall have access to records of financial transactions for
the purpose of verifying burden rates or other indirect costs
prorated to the City operation. The documents listed above
shall include sufficient detail and/or footnotes as may be
necessary to provide the City with the information needed to
make accurate determinations as to the financial condition of
the system. All financial statements shall be certified as
accurate by an officer of the grantee.
(4) After consideration of the information supplied and after public
hearing, the City Council, in its sole discretion, may approve the
rate increase, deny the rate increase, or, if more than one type of
rate is requested to be increased, approve the increase in part and
deny the increase in part. The criteria for the City Council's
decision in such matters shall be the establishment of rates which
are "fair and reasonable" to both the grantee and its subscribers
and shall be generally defined as the minimum rate necessary to
meet all applicable costs of service, including fair return on all
invested capital, assuming efficient and economical management.
B. Miscellaneous provisions.
(1) Advance charges.
(a) The grantee may require subscribers to pay for each month of
basic service and FM service in advance at the beginning of
each month. No other advance payment or deposit of any kind
shall be required by the grantee for basic subscriber service.
No deposit or advance payment of any kind shall be charged
§ 311-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-16
1:255
for the provision of any converter without prior approval of
the City Council. Additional advance payments may be made
available, as an option, by the grantee to subscribers. Nothing
in this provision shall be construed to prohibit charges for
initial installation and reconnection.
(b) The grantee may make available or require advance charges or
deposits for various additional services, provided that the City
Council has authorized such charges or deposits, pursuant to
§ 311-16A of this chapter.
(2) Termination of service:
(a) If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber
fee, or any other properly due fee or charge, the grantee may
disconnect the subscriber's service outlet. Such disconnection
shall not be effected until 10 days after adequate written notice
of the intent to disconnect has been delivered to the subscriber
in question. After disconnection, upon payment of the
delinquent fee or charge and the payment of a reconnection
charge, the grantee shall promptly reinstate the subscriber's
cable service.
(b) Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the grantee
shall promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from
the premises of such subscriber upon his written request. The
service will be disconnected at the poles if aboveground or at
the connection box if underground so that such disconnection
shall be outside rather than inside the home. For multiplefamily
dwellings, such disconnection shall be made in the
basement or other appropriate service area outside the living
area itself. Any such removal shall be at no cost to the
subscriber.
(3) Refunds to subscribers and programmers.
(a) If the grantee fails to provide any material service requested
by a subscriber or programmer, the grantee shall, after
adequate notification and being afforded the opportunity to
provide the service promptly, refund all deposits or advance
charges paid for service in question by said subscriber or
programmer.
(b) If any subscriber terminates any monthly service during the
first 12 months of said service because of the failure of the
grantee to render the service in accordance with the standards
set forth in this franchise, the grantee shall refund to such
subscriber an amount equal to the monthly service charge
multiplied by the fraction of the twelve-month period for which
the subscriber will not be receiving service.
§ 311-16 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-17
1:256
§ 311-17. Service of municipal and public buildings.
The grantee shall provide, without charge, one outlet to the City office
building, the public library and all public and parochial schools in the City
that are passed by its cable. If more than one outlet is required at any of said
locations, the grantee shall install same at the cost of time and materials
only and in no event will there be a monthly service charge at such location.
§ 311-18. Franchise payments.
A. For use of the streets and other facilities of the City for the operation of
the cable communication system and for supervision thereof by the City,
the grantee shall pay to the City an amount equal to 3% of the grantee's
gross revenues from the operations of the cable communications
system in the City during the calendar year. Such annual sum shall be
payable 1/2 thereof at the end of each semiannual period. The
semiannual anniversary shall be the last day of June and the last day of
December of each year, and each semiannual payment shall be paid
within 60 days thereafter.
B. The grantee shall also file within 120 days following the conclusion of
each fiscal year of the grantee an annual report prepared and audited
by an independent certified public accountant showing the annual total
gross revenues and payments to the City and any further relevant
financial information in regard to the grantee as may be required by the
City.
C. The City shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income records
and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be
payable under this section; provided, however, that such audit shall
take place within 12 months following the close of each of the grantee's
fiscal years. Any additional amount due to the City as a result of the
audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the
grantee by the City which notice shall include a copy of the audit report.
D. In the event that any franchise payment, recomputed amount or other
payment is not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore
specified, interest shall be charged from such date at the prevailing
prime interest rate as that rate is set by the First Wisconsin Bank of
Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
E. Payments of compensation made by the grantee to the City pursuant to
the provisions of this section shall not be considered in the nature of a
tax but shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or
hereafter required to be paid by any law of the United States, the State
of Wisconsin, the City of Lake Mills or Jefferson County.
F. In the event this franchise shall be terminated or forfeited prior to the
end of the basic fifteen-year term, the grantee shall, within 30 days,
submit to the City Council a financial statement prepared as above
required showing the gross receipts of the grantee for the time elapsed
§ 311-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-18
1:257
§ 311-19. Complaint procedure.
since the last period for which the grantee has paid to the City the
required percentage of gross annual receipts, and the grantee shall
pay to the City not later than 30 days following the termination of the
franchise a like percentage of such gross receipts.
A. Grantee shall maintain a business office and telephone listing in the
Lake Mills area for the purpose of receiving inquiries and complaints
from its customers and the general public. Grantee shall investigate all
complaints within 48 hours of their receipt and shall in good faith
attempt to resolve them within 48 hours after notice. Grantee shall
maintain a record of each complaint and shall grant the City access to
such records and shall include a statement regarding the resolution or
nonresolution of the complaint supported by reasons for the action
taken.
B. Grantee shall provide a customer service office which shall be located
in the Lake Mills area, so that service response can be on a twenty-fourhour
basis at no charge.
C. In the event of the failure by the grantee to resolve complaints, the
CATV Regulatory Board and City Council may review complaints, other
than those relating to program content. Failure of the grantee to
resolve complaints may also be cause for revocation of the franchise.
D. In all brochures and other written material, the grantee shall state the
fact that a complaint procedure has been established and shall state the
mailing address and telephone number of the office handling inquiries
and complaints, as well as the municipal officer to whom such inquiries
and complaints shall be directed.
E. When there have been similar complaints made or where there exists
other evidence which, in the judgment of the City Council, casts doubt
on the reliability or quality of cable service, the City Council shall have
the right and authority to compel the grantee to test, analyze and report
on the performance of the system at the expense of the grantee. Such
test or tests shall be made and the reports of such test or tests shall be
delivered to the City no later than 14 days after the City Council
formally notifies the grantee. Such report shall include the following
information: the nature of the complaints which precipitated the special
test; what system component was tested; the equipment used and
procedures employed in said testing; the results of such tests; and the
method in which such complaints were resolved. Any other information
pertinent to the special test shall be recorded.
(1) Said tests and analyses shall be supervised by a professional
engineer, not on the permanent staff of the grantee. The aforesaid
engineer should sign all records of special tests and forward to the
City such records with a report interpreting the result of the tests
and recommending actions to be taken by the City.
§ 311-18 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-19
1:258
§ 311-20. Construction of system.
§ 311-21. Liability of grantee; insurance and indemnity.
(2) The City's right under this provision shall be limited to requiring
the tests, analyses, and reports covering specific subjects and
characteristics based on said complaints or other evidence when
and under such circumstances as the City has reasonable grounds
to believe that the complaints or other evidence require that tests
be performed to protect the public against substandard cable
service.
F. The City Council may establish rules and regulations which provide for
fines to be levied against the grantee when, in the judgment of the City
Council, the grantee has failed to satisfactorily perform according to
the terms of this section.
A. The grantee shall, within 60 days of the date of the award of the
franchise, perform and submit all required registrations and application
with the appropriate governmental agencies regulating able systems.
B. The grantee shall, within 90 days of the date of the award of the
franchise, furnish to the City complete plans and specifications for the
construction of its plant and distribution system for approval by the
City.
C. Failure to comply with any of the time limits by the grantee as set forth
in this section, unless such time limits are extended by the City Council,
shall be grounds for revocation of the franchise.
D. The grantee shall make provisions in the installation of its system to
provide for connection with other systems where such service is
available.
E. The grantee shall make no material change in the operation of the
system from that approved by the City Council in granting the franchise
except upon prior written approval of the City Council. At least two
weeks prior to making a request for a material change in operations,
the grantee shall cause to be published in the official City newspaper
prominent notice of the request, including a description of the nature of
the changes and a concise statement for the reasons therefore.
A. The grantee shall indemnify and save the City, its agents and employees
harmless from and against all loss, liability, damage and expenses,
including attorneys' fees, sustained by the City on account of any suit,
judgment, execution, claim or demand arising out of the installation,
operation or maintenance of the cable communication system
authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is
authorized, allowed or prohibited by this section and any franchise
granted hereunder; including, but not limiting said indemnity to, claims
for personal injuries, death or property damages, expense of
§ 311-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-21
1:259
investigation and litigation or claims and suits arising hereunder, and
claims based on copyright violation or infringements or violation of
proprietary rights.
B. The grantee shall carry and at all times maintain on file with the City
Clerk and at all times keep in force a public liability policy of insurance,
insuring such grantee and the City against any and all liability arising
from such installation and/or operation, with limits of liability of not less
than $500,000 for property damage and $1,000,000 for any one person
for personal injury, death, or other damages attributable to the
installation and/or operation of the cable communication system. Such
policies of insurance or certificates thereof by a company licensed to do
business in the State of Wisconsin shall be filed with the City Clerk prior
to the commencement of installation. Such policy or certificate shall
provide that the City shall be notified 30 days in advance of the
cancellation or termination of the policy. The City Council reserves the
right to approve the policy and increase minimum limits of liability
based upon inflationary factors and other causes to be determined by
the City Council.
C. The grantee, upon receipt of due notice in writing from the City, shall
defend at its own expense any action or proceeding against the City in
which it is claimed that injury or damages arose from the grantee's
activities or failure to act in the installation, maintenance or operation
of its cable communication system.
D. Surety bond.
(1) The grantee shall maintain and, by its acceptance of this franchise,
specifically agree, that it will maintain throughout the term of this
franchise a faithful performance bond running to the City with a
good and sufficient surety approved by the City Attorney in the sum
of $100,000 conditioned that the grantee shall well and truly
observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of this
franchise and of the grantee's proposal and that in case of any
breach, the City shall be entitled to recover from the principal and
sureties thereof the amount of all damages including all costs and
attorney's fees incurred by the City proximately resulting from the
failure of the grantee to well and faithfully observe and perform any
and all of the provisions of this franchise. After the grantee has
provided service to all residents of the City requesting such
service, and the system is approved by the City Council, the
grantee may make application to the City Council for reduction of
its bond and if the City Council approves the installation of the
system and is satisfied that all residents of the City requesting
service have been provided such service by the grantee, the City
Council may reduce the amount of such bond but is not required to
do so.
(2) No recovery by the City of any sum by reason of the bond required
herein shall be any limitation upon the liability of the grantee to the
§ 311-21 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-21
1:260
§ 311-22. Additional requirements.
The grantee shall comply with all conditions imposed by the Federal
Communications Commission and by the State of Wisconsin. Failure to
obtain any required licenses or to comply with all such conditions shall
be grounds to revoke the franchise without liability assigned to the City.
Copies of all documents filed with other government bodies, including but
not limited to the FCC and the State of Wisconsin, shall be furnished to the
City concurrently.
§ 311-23. Revocation of franchise.
City, except that the sum received by the City be reason of the bond
required herein shall be deducted from any recovery which the City
might have against the grantee.
A. In addition to all the rights and powers reserved by the City, the City
expressly reserves the right to revoke, terminate and cancel the
franchise and all rights and privileges to the grantee hereunder in the
event that:
(1) The grantee violates any material provision of this chapter, any
material provision of the grantee's proposal, the grant of franchise,
or any rule, order or determination of the City made pursuant to
this chapter, except where such violation is without fault or through
excusable neglect;
(2) The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt;
(3) A receiver or trustee has, at least 120 days beforehand, been
appointed to take over and conduct the business of the grantee,
whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other
action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall
have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or
unless:
(a) Within 120 days after his election or appointment, such
receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the
provisions of this chapter and remedied all defaults
thereunder; and
(b) Such receiver or trustee, within 120 days, shall have executed
an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction
in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and
agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this chapter;
or
(4) There has been a change in the control of the grantee without first
obtaining written consent of the City Council, or where such
consent has been sought and denied or not given;
§ 311-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-23
1:261
(5) The grantee attempts to evade any of the material provisions of this
chapter or practices any fraud or deceit upon the City; or
(6) The grantee fails to have service available to all of the residential
structures in all areas of the City.
B. Such revocation, termination and cancellation shall occur only after
public hearing has been conducted by the City Council. The City
Council may, but is not required, to refer such matters to the CATV
Regulatory Board for review and recommendation. If as a result of said
public hearing, the City Council approves and recommends revocation,
termination and cancellation, the City Council shall provide written
notice of its decision to the grantee. The written notice shall include a
statement specifying the steps, procedures of acts which the grantee
must undertake to perform in order to avoid revocation, termination or
cancellation. In the event the grantee strictly complies with each step,
procedure or action required by the City Council, the revocation,
termination and cancellation shall not take effect. In the event the
grantee fails to strictly comply with each step, procedure or act
required of the City Council, the revocation, termination and
cancellation shall take effect at the expiration of 30 days after receipt of
the written notice without further notice of the grantee. Such
revocation, termination and cancellation shall in no way affect any of
the City's rights under this chapter or any provision of law. In the event
that such revocation, termination and cancellation depends upon a
finding of fact, such finding of fact, as made by the City Council, shall be
conclusive; provided, however, that before the franchise may be
revoked, terminated and cancelled under this section, the grantee must
be provided with an opportunity to be heard before the City Council.
C. In the event that the City revokes, terminates and cancels this
franchise, pursuant to the appropriate provision of this chapter, the City
shall have the right to purchase the grantee's cable system in
accordance with the provisions of § 311-15 of this chapter. After
purchasing the grantee's cable system, the City shall have the right to
sell said system to another operator if the City so chooses.
D. Whenever this franchise shall set forth any time for any act to be
performed by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of
the essence and any failure of the grantee to perform within time
allotted shall be sufficient grounds for the City to revoke this franchise.
E. If grounds for the revocation of this franchise exist, the City Council
may pass a resolution imposing any penalty or sanction, not amounting
to revocation, upon the grantee; provided, that said penalty or sanction
not amounting to revocation is agreed upon by both the grantee and the
City Council. If no agreement is reached between the grantee and the
City Council, the City Council shall decide whether or not to revoke the
grantee's franchise.
§ 311-23 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-24
1:262
§ 311-24. Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited.
The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, programmers, or general citizens on the basis of race,
color, religion, national origin, creed, or sex. Nothing in this provision shall
be construed to prohibit the reduction or waiving of charges in conjunction
with promotional campaigns for the purpose of attracting subscribers, nor
shall this provision be interpreted to prohibit the establishment of a
graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any
subscriber or programmer included within a particular classification shall
be entitled.
§ 311-25. Right of privacy.
The grantee shall not reveal to any third party any information or data
concerning any specific subscriber. Any information or date revealed to
third parties shall be limited to gross data relating to all subscribers,
without identification as to individual subscribers.
§ 311-26. Evaluation sessions.
A. Scheduled sessions. The Lake Mills CATV Regulatory Board and the
grantee shall hold scheduled evaluation sessions within 30 days of the
fifth and 10th anniversary dates of the granting of this franchise. All
such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in
the official City newspaper at least five days before each session. The
CATV Regulatory Board shall file a report detailing all complaints,
comments and suggestions for improvement which are received in any
evaluation session, and shall include in its report any recommendations
the Board has with respect to the continued operation of the system.
B. Special sessions. Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time
during the term of the franchise, provided that both the Lake Mills
CATV Regulatory Board and the grantee shall mutually agree on the
time, the place and the topics to be evaluated. All such evaluation
sessions shall be open to the public and announced in the official City
newspaper at least five days before each session. The CATV Regulatory
Board shall file a report detailing all complaints, comments and
suggestions for improvement which are received in any evaluation
session, and shall include in its report any recommendations the Board
has with respect to the continued operation of the system.
C. Topics to be evaluated.
(1) The following topics shall be discussed at every scheduled
evaluation session:
(a) Service rate structures.
(b) Free or discounted services.
(c) Application of new technologies.
§ 311-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-26
1:263
§ 311-27. Local origination.
§ 311-28. Service standards.
(d) System performances.
(e) Services provided.
(f) Programming offered.
(g) Customer complaints.
(h) Privacy and human rights.
(i) Amendments to this chapter.
(j) Judicial and FCC rulings.
(2) Topics in addition to those listed may be added for discussion at
such evaluation sessions. Members of the general public may add
topics either by working through the negotiating parties or by
presenting a petition. If such a petition bears the valid signatures of
50 or more qualified electors of the City, the proposed topic or
topics shall be added to the list of topics to be discussed at the
evaluation session.
A. The grantee shall provide free installation and cablevision service to
schools in the City, the City office building and the public library. One
channel shall be reserved for use by the City for emergency purposes.
The educational channels may be used between the school buildings
and classrooms to transmit educational programs or to broadcast
school activities into the homes of subscribers. A set of television
production equipment will be available in the City for use by schools in
the City, the City Council of the City and the general public. This will
include a color TV camera, video recorder and lighting equipment.
B. The grantee shall devote at least one channel to locally originated
programming. The grantee shall also submit a plan, subject to the
approval of the City Council, stating the proposed number of channels
which will be provided for additional services, including channels to be
devoted to locally originated programs. Said plan shall contain an
estimate of the total number of broadcast hours per week per channel
which the grantee proposed to devote to local programming, the types
of local programs it proposes to originate and a provision that the
grantee shall submit to the City Council each year a proposed
programming schedule for locally originated channels. The City
reserves the right to require reservation of one channel in addition to
the channel reserved for locally originated programs for the City
government and the dissemination of public information through the
City government.
§ 311-26 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-28
1:264
§ 311-29. Rights of residents.
A. Upgrading of facilities, equipment and services. The grantee shall
upgrade its facilities, equipment and services as subscribers' demands
dictate so that its system is as advanced as the current state of
technology with field-proven equipment will allow.
B. The cable system shall be engineered and installed with the capacity for
two-way communications in accordance with the regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission now in effect or which may be
promulgated.
C. The grantee shall utilize microwave distribution systems where
necessary to fulfill all of the representations made to the City in the
grantee's proposal.
D. At the option of any individual subscriber, the grantee shall install a
switching device upon said subscriber's television receiver whereby
said subscriber may disconnect his television receiver from the
grantee's cable system in order to receive over-the-air television
signals. The price of this device to said subscriber shall be the cost of
said device to the grantee, or less at the option of the grantee, and the
grantee shall not charge the subscriber any fee for the installation of
said device. The grantee shall make all reasonable efforts to obtain said
devices at the lowest possible cost to it.
E. At the option of any individual subscriber, the grantee shall provide a
device which allows said individual subscriber to utilize a key to
disconnect those channels providing additional services to the
subscriber, such as pay TV channels. The price of such device shall be
the cost of such device to the grantee, or less at the option of the
grantee, and the grantee shall not charge the subscriber any fee for the
installation of said device. The grantee shall make all reasonable efforts
to obtain said devices at the lowest possible cost to it.
F. The grantee shall provide for the standardization of cable television
system facilities for the exchange of transmission of both live and
recorded programs with other cable television facilities operating in
adjacent territory to the City. The grantee shall run appropriate trunk
lines to the borders of the franchise area or provide other suitable
methods to accomplish said purpose. Interconnections shall be made
within 60 days of a request made by the City.
A. An owner or operator of an apartment building, condominium, nursing
home, or any other rental facility may not interfere with or charge a fee
for the installation of cable facilities for the use of a lessee of said
property or premises, except that such owner or operator may require.
(1) Installation to conform to reasonable conditions necessary to
protect the safety, appearance and functioning of the premises;
§ 311-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-29
1:265
§ 311-30. Rights reserved to City.
§ 311-31. Protections afforded grantee.
(2) The grantee, occupant or tenant to pay for the installation,
operation or removal of such facilities; or
(3) The grantee, occupant or tenant to agree to indemnify the owner or
operator for any damages caused by the installation, operation or
removal of such facilities.
B. It shall be unlawful for the grantee to reimburse or offer to reimburse
any person, or for any person to demand or receive reimbursement
from the grantee, for the placement upon the premises of such person
of grantee's facilities necessary to connect such person's premises to
the distribution lines of the grantee to provide CATV service to said
premises.
C. A landlord may not discriminate in the amount of rent charged to
tenants or occupants who receive cable services and to those who do
not.
D. The grantee may not take actions which would diminish or interfere
with the privileges of any tenant or which would disclose the names and
addresses of its subscribers, or any list which identifies, by name,
subscriber viewing habits, to any person, agency or entity, for any
purpose whatsoever.
A. The right is hereby reserved to the City to adopt, in addition to the
provisions contained herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such
additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the
police powers; provided, that such regulations, by ordinance or
otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the rights herein
granted.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of the City to acquire the
cable system of the grantee through the exercise of eminent domain,
condemnation or proceedings or otherwise.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit or in any
way impair the powers and authorities of the City, except as expressly
stated in this chapter.
A. Tampering with cable equipment. A person who willfully or maliciously
damages, or causes to be damaged, any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus
or equipment of the grantee, or who commits any act with intent to
cause damage to any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment of
the grantee, or who taps, tampers with, or connects any wire or device
to a wire, cable, conduit or equipment of the grantee with intent to
obtain a signal or impulse therefrom without authorization of the
grantee, shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $200 as
determined by the court and shall be liable in a civil action for the
§ 311-29 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-31
1:266
§ 311-32. Supervision of grantee.
actual amount of damages sustained thereby, but this section shall
not prevent a public utility from removing, disconnecting or otherwise
rendering inoperable any of the grantee's apparatus or equipment
attached or in any way connected to such public utility's facilities, if
done for reasonable cause.
B. Liability of the grantee in libel action. The grantee or its agents shall
not, in an action for slander or for publishing a libel, be held liable in
damages for or on account of any defamatory matter uttered, telecast,
cablecast or published over the facilities of the grantee by any person
whose utterance, telecast, cablecast, or publication is not, under the
provisions of any law of the United States or any regulation, ruling or
order of the Federal Communications Commission, subject to
censorship or control by the grantee.
A. Books and records of the grantee.
(1) The grantee shall file with the City Clerk accurate copies of maps
and/or plats of the location and character of all existing and
proposed installation over, upon, or under the street. These maps
and plats shall conform to the requirements of the City Engineer,
and shall be kept continuously up-do-date.
(2) The grantee shall continually keep on file with the City Council a
current list of its shareholders, holding 5% or more of the
outstanding stock, and officers, with their current addresses. These
lists must also be included in the annual report of the grantee
required in § 311-18B of this chapter.
(3) All books and records of the grantee concerning its operations
within the City, including but not limited to all income tax returns
and financial records of the grantee, shall be made available for
inspection and audit by the City Council or its designate within 30
days after any such inspection or audit shall be made.
(4) The grantee shall keep and maintain all records required by the
FCC. Copies of said records and all other rules and regulations,
terms and conditions established by the grantee for the conduct of
his business shall be filed with the City Council and at the local
office of the grantee.
(5) Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted
by the grantee to the federal Communications Commission,
Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state
regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to
any matter affecting cable operation shall also be submitted
simultaneously to the City by filing the same with the City Clerk.
(6) The grantee shall maintain records of those subscriber complaints
and requests for service which it has received, the time of such
§ 311-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-32
1:267
reception, and the time at which it responded to said subscriber
complaints and requests for service. Every two months, copies of
said records shall be submitted to the City Council. The grantee
shall also keep a copy of said records at its local office.
(7) The grantee shall keep and maintain a complete record of all
persons or groups requesting time on its access channels. Said
record shall be made available for public inspection and a copy of
said record shall be submitted to the Cable Review Committee.
(8) All records required by this section shall be kept on file by the
grantee for the duration of this franchise.
B. Restrictions against assignment.
(1) This franchise shall not be assigned or transferred either in whole
or in part or leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall
title thereto either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or
property therein, pass to or vest in any person either by the fact of
the grantee or by operation of law without the express consent of
the City Council. The granting, giving or waiving of any one or
more of such consents shall not render unnecessary any
subsequent consent or consents.
(2) The grantee shall promptly notify the City Council of any actual or
proposed change in or transfer of, or acquisition by, any other party
of control of the grantee. Within 60 days after receiving said notice,
the City Council shall hold a public hearing on this matter. For the
purpose of determining whether it will consent to such change,
transfer, or acquisition of control, the City Council may inquire into
the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the
grantee shall assist the City Council in any such inquiry.
(3) Every change, transfer or acquisition of control of the grantee with
respect to which the consent of the City Council is required,
pursuant to Subsection B(1) above, shall make this franchise
subject to revocation unless and until the City Council shall have
consented thereto. In the every that the City Council denies
consent, and such change, transfer, or acquisition of control has
been effected, the City may revoke this permit unless control of the
grantee is restored to its status prior to the change, or to a status
acceptable to the City Council.
(4) Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial
part of the grantee's cable system, or upon the termination of any
lease covering all or a substantial part of said system, the grantee
shall notify the City Council of such fact, and such notification shall
be treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee
has taken place, and the provisions of Subsection B(1), (2) and (3)
above, shall apply.
§ 311-32 LAKE MILLS CODE § 311-32
1:268
§ 311-33. Intended scope.
(5) The consent or approval of the City Council to any assignment,
lease, transfer, sublease, or mortgage of this franchise shall not
constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the City in and to the
streets.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or
pledge of the cable system equipment or any part thereof or a
leasing of the grantee from another person of said cable system
equipment or part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise. Any
such mortgage, pledge, or lease shall be subject and subordinate to
the rights of the City under this contract or applicable law.
A. Compliance with local, state and federal law.
(1) The grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the CATV system
subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the City who
have jurisdiction in such matters and in strict compliance with all
laws, ordinances and department rules and regulations.
(2) If at any time the powers of the City Council or any agency or
official of the City are transferred by law to any other council,
authority, agency or official, this council, authority, agency or
official shall have the power, rights and duties previously vested
under this chapter or by law in the City Council or any agency or
official of the City.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this franchise, the grantee
shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the state
and federal government or any administrative agency thereof;
provided, however, if any such state or federal law or regulation
shall require the grantee to perform any service or shall permit the
grantee to perform any service in conflict with the terms of this
chapter or of any law or regulation of the City, then as soon as
possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the
City Council of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or
law and the laws or regulations of the City or this chapter. If the
City Council determines that a material provision of this chapter is
affected by such subsequent action, the City Council shall have the
right to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable
extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose
of this chapter.
B. Failure of City to enforce franchise or waiver of terms thereof. The
grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and
conditions of this franchise by any failure of the City upon any one or
more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such
terms and conditions.
§ 311-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-33
1:269
§ 311-34. Limitations of grantee's recourse.
Chapter 318
CEMETERY
§ 318-1. Establishment.
The Rock Lake Cemetery, owned and operated by the City of Lake Mills, is
established by the City Council, and the maintenance of all grave spaces
located therein is to be performed by the City in perpetuity.
§ 318-2. Superintendent of Cemetery.
C. Captions. The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended
solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions
of this chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or
interpretation of this chapter.
D. Severability. If any provision of this chapter or the application of such
provision to any circumstances is held invalid for any reason
whatsoever, the remainder of this chapter or the application of the
provisions to other circumstances shall not be affected hereby.
A. Except as expressly provided in this franchise, the grantee herein shall
have no recourse whatsoever against the City for any loss, cost or
expense of damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of this
chapter or because of the enforcement thereof by the City.
B. The grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting this
franchise, it did so relying upon its own investigation and
understanding of the power and authority of the City to grant this
franchise. By the acceptance of this franchise, the grantee agrees that
it will not at any time set up against the City in any claim or proceeding
any condition or term of this franchise as is unreasonable, arbitrary or
void or that the City had no power or authority to make such terms or
conditions of this franchise in their entirety.
C. The grantee by acceptance of this franchise acknowledges that it has
not been induced to enter into this franchise by any understanding or
promise or other statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of
the City or by any other third person concerning any term or condition
of this franchise not expressed herein.
D. The grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of this franchise that
it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof and is willing to
and does accept all reasonable risks of the meaning of such terms and
conditions and agrees that in the event of any ambiguity therein or in
the event of any other dispute over the meaning thereof, the same shall
be construed strictly against the grantee and in favor of the City.
§ 311-33 LAKE MILLS CODE § 318-2
1:270
§ 318-3. Records.
The Cemetery Superintendent shall be the record custodian for the
cemetery and shall keep records consisting of a lot book, an index of lot
owners, an interment register, and a burial record, described as follows:
A. Appointment; salary. The Superintendent of the Rock Lake Cemetery
shall be appointed as provided in § 10-3B of this Code. He/she shall
receive such salary as the City Council may from time to time
determine. The Superintendent of the cemetery may also be referred to
as the "Cemetery Sexton."
B. Powers and duties. Subject to the direction of the City Manager, the
Superintendent of the Cemetery shall:
(1) Have general supervision and control of the cemetery grounds,
including all private lots and grave spaces.
(2) Have charge and care of the cemetery equipment, the sale of all
lots and grave spaces, secure employment of necessary help
through the City Manager, keep records of interments and orders
for work on private lots and grave spaces, and have charge of all
funerals entering the cemetery. As far as possible, the
Superintendent shall utilize the services of existing City officials
and employees. The Superintendent may designate the Parks and
Forestry Director to act as the Superintendent's agent in
performing the Superintendent's duties in the absence of the
Superintendent.
(3) Perform such duties and exercise such powers as are assigned to
him by the laws of the State of Wisconsin, the ordinances of the City
and the rules and regulations of the cemetery.
A. Lot book. The lot book shall contain a diagram of each lot sold in the
cemetery and shall identify it by number of block, number of lot, date
sold, and name and address of the owner. It shall also show by diagram
the location and number of each grave space, the name, burial number
and grave space number within the lot of each person buried in the lot.
B. Index of lot owners. An index shall be maintained consisting of each lot
owner or joint owner, arranged by surname, showing the full name of
the owner and the lot and block number of the lot owned.
C. Interment register. The interment register shall be kept in book form
and shall contain a cumulative record of burials, showing in separate
columns the date of interment, consecutive number of the burial, the
full name, place of death, name and address of the funeral director, lot
and block, grave space number, size of grave space, and interment fee
for each burial.
D. Burial record. Burial permits shall be completed and delivered to the
Cemetery Superintendent at the time of burial. The permits shall be
§ 318-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-3
1:271
§ 318-4. Grave space sales.
§ 318-5. Fees.
The City Council shall, from time to time by resolution, adopt a schedule of
fees with respect to the use and operation of Rock Lake Cemetery, which
schedule shall include, but not be limited to, the price of grave spaces,
grave openings and closings, and fees for perpetual care.
§ 318-6. Maintenance.
arranged in book form, by year, in alphabetical order by surname.
Each permit shall record the full name of the person buried, sex,
race, age, City, county, the date of burial, name and address of person
pronouncing death, and signed by the funeral director.
E. Location of records. All records required by this Code shall be kept on
file at the office of the Cemetery Superintendent.
A. All applications for the purchase of grave spaces in the cemetery shall
be made to the Cemetery Superintendent.
B. Grave spaces shall be conveyed upon full payment of the purchase price
and perpetual care fee. In no case shall a deed be executed for any lot
or grave space until the purchase price and perpetual care fee have
been fully paid. Title, when transferred by deed from the City of Lake
Mills, vests in the grantee, and his or her heir, as specified in the
statutes, the right to use the grave space for burial purposes only.
C. Owners of grave spaces who wish to sell their unoccupied grave spaces
shall execute a quitclaim deed to the City, and shall receive 90% of the
original purchase price and a full refund of the perpetual care fee.
D. Any transfer or sale of grave spaces not approved by the Cemetery
Superintendent shall be void.
A. Requirements.
(1) The term "perpetual care" shall mean the cutting of grass at
reasonable intervals, the raking, cleaning, grading and seeding of
grave spaces, and such work as may be necessary to keep the lots
or grave spaces in good and neat appearance. The repair or
replacing of any foundation, marker or monument, or the cleaning
of monuments or stones are not included in the term "care." An
estimate of cost for such additional work may be given by the
Cemetery Superintendent and a special endowment may be
created by the owner in the Perpetual Fund for such purposes.
(2) Lots and grave spaces placed under perpetual care shall be exempt
from annual care charges. The earnings from the Perpetual Care
Trust Fund shall be used to pay the annual care charges.
§ 318-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 318-6
1:272
§ 318-7. Owner rights and duties.
B. Fees for perpetual care. Lots or parts of lots in the Rock Lake Cemetery
shall be sold and charged with perpetual care fees at the time of sale.
C. Trust fund.
(1) The Treasurer is authorized and directed to receive all perpetual
care fees and any donations for particular purposes and shall give a
receipt therefor, which shall be recorded in a book to be kept for
that purpose. Said book shall state the name of the donor or giver,
the amount received, the date when received and the specific
purpose to which the use thereof is appropriated. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
(2) The money in the Trust Fund shall be invested according to the
provisions of Ch. 881 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
A. The owner(s) of lots or grave spaces wishing to make improvements to
the same shall receive approval from the Cemetery Superintendent
before making any such improvement.
B. The cemetery reserves to itself the entire control of every tree, shrub,
vine or plant growing within its boundaries, whether planted by the
owner or otherwise, including the right of removal and the right of
determining whether such removal is advisable.
C. Spring decorations may be placed on grave spaces beginning April 16
and are subject to removal on October 15. Winter decorations may be
placed on grave spaces beginning November 1 and are subject to
removal on April 1. If any decorations are to be kept for future use, they
should be removed by the owners before the cemetery's removal dates.
D. Glass receptacles for cut or artificial flowers shall not be used on any
grave, nor shall fragile receptacles be used as a container for flowers or
otherwise.
E. In no event shall the cemetery or its agents be responsible for
decorations or articles placed in the cemetery.
F. Urns or vases which are to be filled with earth and growing plants shall
be constructed of durable material such as cement or cast iron. They
shall be kept in good repair, and iron vases shall be properly painted.
Broken or unpainted urns or vases and vases that have not received
care for two consecutive years may be removed at the discretion of the
Cemetery Superintendent, and neither the cemetery nor its agents
assumes any responsibility for their care or return.
G. The placing of boxes, shelves, ornaments, chairs, settees, glass, wood
or iron cases and similar articles upon a lot or grave space shall not be
permitted, and if so placed, the Superintendent is authorized to remove
the same.
§ 318-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-7
1:273
§ 318-8. Interment and disinterment.
H. The planting of any perennial, tree, shrub, flower, flower bed or plant
and the placement of any urn, marker, or monument may be made on
the grave space if approved by the Superintendent. If any person sets
out or plants these items on a lot or grave space in an unsightly manner
or fails to properly care for them, the Superintendent may cause them
to be removed.
I. The placing of shepherd hooks is restricted. No person may place or
install a shepherd hook on any grave space without first obtaining
permission from the Superintendent. The maximum height of the
shepherd hook shall not exceed 30 inches between the top of the
marker or monument and the top of the shepherd hook. No shepherd
hook shall be used for any purpose other than to support hanging
flowers or wreaths.
J. The Cemetery Superintendent is authorized to remove anything which
is in violation of this section or which is detrimental to the general
welfare of the cemetery. If the same is not removed after a ten-day
written notice mailed to the last known address of the registered owner,
the Superintendent shall remove such objectionable object and the
expense incurred in removing the same shall be charged against the lot
or grave space owner. The notice provisions are not applicable to the
routine spring and fall clean-up in Subsection C above.
K. Wooden fences, railings, hedges, shrubbery or other enclosures are
prohibited.
L. No mounds shall be allowed in the cemetery. All grave spaces shall be
filled so they will be flush with the ground, and the Superintendent or
his agent shall bear this responsibility.
M. Weeds, dead flowers, branches and other rubbish shall be deposited in
receptacles provided at the cemetery.
A. Interment of bodies.
(1) No burials shall be permitted in any grave space unless all laws
regarding burials in the City and the state have been complied
with.
(2) No interment shall take place without a burial permit.
(3) All payments for costs of grave spaces, the opening/closing of the
grave, and any charges due for work or maintenance on the grave
space shall be satisfied before any interment shall be permitted.
(4) The Superintendent shall not be held responsible for any mistake
accruing from want of precise and proper instructions for burial.
§ 318-7 LAKE MILLS CODE § 318-8
1:274
§ 318-9. Rules for public use.
(5) Orders for burial given by the funeral director having charge of the
burial shall be construed by the Superintendent as orders from the
grave space owner.
(6) No person shall inter any body in the cemetery without first
notifying the Superintendent and furnishing him with the
necessary information to enable him to complete his records.
(7) No burials shall be allowed except in a steel or cement vault, except
in the case of a cremains burial.
(8) The Superintendent or his agent shall be present at all interments.
(9) Interment of two bodies in one grave space shall be prohibited,
except with approval of the Superintendent.
(10) Funeral designs and floral pieces shall be removed or soon as they
become unsightly, and if same are not so removed by the owner, the
Superintendent has authority to remove them.
B. Cremated remains, interment of. Two cremated remains shall be
permitted on one grave space. The remains of a cremated body may be
buried in any grave space whether occupied or not, except that it shall
be at a depth approved by the Superintendent, and such remains shall
be enclosed in a suitable container.
C. Disinterment.
(1) Graves shall not be reopened for inspection, except upon a lawful
order, and upon the approval of the Superintendent.
(2) A deposit of the amount estimated by the Superintendent to pay for
the costs of disinterment, removal, and restoration shall be made
prior to approval by the Superintendent.
(3) The cemetery shall not be responsible for any damage which may
occur during disinterment.
A. The consumption of alcohol in the cemetery is prohibited.
B. No person may lawfully be present on the cemetery grounds after dark.
C. No vehicle shall be operated or driven within the cemetery in excess of
15 miles per hour.
D. Pets shall not be permitted in the cemetery, unless in an enclosed
vehicle, except for pets that are trained to assist and that are assisting
persons with disabilities.
E. No person may throw rubbish on the walks or any part of the cemetery
grounds.
§ 318-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-9
1:275
§ 318-10. Markers and monuments.
All grave spaces shall have a marker of either marble, granite or bronze,
which shall be placed on the grave space no later than one year from the
burial date.
F. No person may pluck flowers, either wild or cultivated; or break any
tree, shrub or plant; or write upon, deface or injure any marker,
monument or structure in or belonging to the cemetery.
G. No person may destroy bird nests, shoot or throw stones at birds, or
catch or kill any wild animals on the cemetery grounds.
H. Persons with firearms, except military companies or civic organizations
attending funerals or other memorial services, may not discharge
weapons in the cemetery. Any discharge of firearms not prohibited
under this section shall be done with due care for the safety of all
persons and property in and around the cemetery premises. In addition
to all other requirements of due care which may be present in the
discharge of firearms in the cemetery, any such discharge may not be
accomplished through the use of ball, non-blank, or projectile
ammunition.
I. Picnics are prohibited in the cemetery.
J. No person shall disturb the quiet and good order of the cemetery by
noise or other disorderly conduct.
K. Selling, or offering for sale, any commodities on the cemetery grounds
is prohibited.
L. The erection of any advertising signs is prohibited.
A. A marker-headstone is a small structure erected upon a grave space to
mark a burial site. Only one marker shall be permitted per grave space.
B. The length of markers may not exceed 80% of the width of the grave
space, unless a single marker is placed on two or three adjacent grave
spaces. If the latter circumstance is applicable, then the length of such
single marker on multiple grave spaces may not exceed 80% of the
width of the total grave spaces being marked by a single marker. All
measurements for the purpose of determining the maximum allowable
width shall be made at the base of the marker, rather than at the base of
the foundation.
C. A monument is a large structure which shall be permitted only on a
minimum of four adjacent grave spaces. When a monument is placed or
will be placed on four or more grave spaces, any other marker(s) used
on those grave spaces shall be set flush to the ground, or shall not
exceed three inches in height, except when duplicating existing
markers on adjacent grave spaces.
§ 318-9 LAKE MILLS CODE § 318-10
1:276
D. Infant markers, if the grave space is specifically designed for infant
burials, shall not exceed 80% of the grave space width and shall be
placed on a four-inch-thick concrete base.
E. All markers or monuments shall be placed and centered at the head end
of the grave space. The placement of markers and monuments shall be
subject to the supervision and control of the Superintendent.
F. The City of Lake Mills and the Rock Lake Cemetery shall not be
responsible for any marker, monument or any type of memorial
whatsoever. The owner and supplier take all risks when placing such
items in the cemetery.
G. No marker or monument shall be placed on any grave space or lot
unless full payment, including perpetual care fees, has been received by
the City.
H. No marker or monument shall be placed without a setting permit
granted by the Superintendent. Plans and specifications as to the size
and material of the monument and footings shall be necessary to obtain
approval.
I. The specifications for marker or monument foundations are as follows:
(1) Marker foundations shall be of concrete and shall be no less than
four inches thick and shall be constructed by a continuous pour in
place, leveled, and shall have beveled corners and provide a
minimum five-inch wash around the marker base.
(2) The foundation for a monument shall require a foundation footing
extending below frost depth, a minimum of four feet.
(3) Foundations shall not project above the existing ground line except
when necessitated due to the slope and with approval of the
Superintendent. In such case, fill dirt shall be added to provide the
proper slope away from the foundation. All excess topsoil shall be
hauled to the cemetery topsoil disposal area.
(4) After the foundation forms have been stripped, topsoil shall be
placed and compacted in the void left by the forms.
(5) Granite foundations may be used in lieu of the concrete base
required for marker foundations if approved by the Cemetery
Superintendent. The granite foundation shall be no less than four
inches thick and shall provide a minimum five-inch wash around
the marker base. The granite foundation shall also be placed on a
sand base that is level and that is at least two inches deep, and it
shall be in full compliance with Subsections I(3), J, K and L of this
section. [Amended 6-21-2005 by Ord. No. 955]
J. All foundation work shall be done by the monument dealer or
designated agents. Advance notice shall be given and an appointment
made with the Superintendent or his agent. The Superintendent or his
§ 318-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-10
1:277
Chapter 346
ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC
§ 346-1. Circuses, shows; permit. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
No person shall exhibit or show within the City any circus, carnival,
exhibition, show, or amusement without obtaining a permit from the Clerk.
A fee as set from time to time by City Council will be charged for permits.
Chapter 354
FIREARMS; HUNTING AND TRAPPING
§ 354-1. Firearms. [Amended 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1129A]
No person, other than a law enforcement officer acting within the scope of
his or her authority, may fire or discharge any firearm within the City, except
firearms may be discharged for hunting purposes during lawful hunting
seasons, provided:
agent shall be in attendance to supervise placement of the foundation
and the time shall be charged for a minimum of one hour and billed to
the dealer.
K. No foundation may be installed on Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, or
between November 1 and March 31, except for urgent need approved
by the Superintendent.
L. Dealers or their designated agents shall, within five working days of
written notice, repair any damage to the cemetery caused by their
work. If such repair is not made within the time specified, the
Superintendent shall cause the work to be performed and send an
invoice for the cost to the dealer. No dealer or their designated agents
shall be permitted to perform any work in the cemetery until all
outstanding invoices are paid in full.
M. All monuments or markers placed in the cemetery prior to the effective
date of this chapter are deemed to be lawfully placed and are exempt
from standards as set forth in this chapter.
A. Such hunting and discharge is in accordance with all provisions of the
Wisconsin State Statutes and the rules of the Department of Natural
Resources;
B. Such hunting is upon lands owned by the hunter, or is conducted with
the written permission of the landowner, or is upon lands that are
clearly designated as public hunting grounds;
§ 318-10 LAKE MILLS CODE § 354-1
1:278
§ 354-2. Leg-hold traps.
No person, except a sheriff, police officer or their deputies, shall set or
cause to be set any steel or metal leg-hold trap designed for the purpose
of trapping fur-bearing animals; provided, however, that this section is not
preventing or prohibiting the use of possible traps designed to trap furbearing
animals in a manner so as not to cause injury to the animal.
Chapter 362
FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 246.
Building construction — See Ch. 279.
Solid waste — See Ch. 556.
C. No discharge of firearms occurs within 100 yards of a structure, or
within a distance of 50 feet of the center line of any street or roadway,
or occurs by shooting across a street or roadway; or
D. No discharge of firearms may occur on lands owned by the City or
within any public park.
§ 354-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-2
1:279

ARTICLE I
Emergency Scene Control
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Secs. 9-1-8 through
9-1-12 of the 2009 Code of Ordinances]
§ 362-1. General authority of fire officials at fires and related
emergencies.
§ 362-2. Interference with firefighting or emergency actions
prohibited.
§ 362-3. Assistance from bystanders.
Any officer of the Fire Department or any police officer may require the
aid of any citizen or inhabitant of the City for the purpose of removal or
guarding of property during a fire.
§ 362-4. Police officers duties.
The Chief of Police shall designate police officers to respond, on an alarm
of fire, to the place where the fire may be and remain there for the
preservation of order and guard the members of said Fire Department
A. Control at scene. The Fire Chief or Department official conducting
operations in connection with the extinguishment and control of any
fire, explosion or other emergency shall have full authority to direct all
operations of fire extinguishment or control and to take the necessary
precautions to save life, protect property and prevent further injury or
damage as provided in Wis. Stats. § 213.095. In the pursuit of such
operations, including the investigation of the cause of such emergency,
the Chief or department official may control or prohibit the approach to
the scene of such emergency by any person.
B. Access barriers at scene of emergency. The Chief or official in charge of
an emergency scene shall have the authority to establish fire line
barriers to control access in the vicinity of such emergency, and to
secure any street, alley or fire lane.
A. Obstruction of operations prohibited. No person shall obstruct the
operations of the Department in connection with extinguishing any fire
or responding to other emergencies.
B. Disobedience of fire officials. No person shall disobey any lawful
command of a fire official in charge of the emergency, or any lawful
order of a police officer assisting the Fire Department at any fire or
other emergency.
C. Crossing or removing fire line barriers. No unauthorized person shall
cross a fire line barrier or remove, unlock, destroy or tamper with any
barricade or sign which has been lawfully installed by the Fire
Department or by its order or which is under its control.
§ 362-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-4
1:281
from interference from bystanders and shall remove all persons not actively
engaged in extinguishing the fire to a reasonable and safe distance.
§ 362-5. Offenses, obstructions to Fire Department and equipment.
A. Resistance to firefighters; injury to apparatus. No person shall willfully
hinder a firefighter in the discharge of his/her duty, nor shall any person
willfully injure in any manner any hose or apparatus belonging to the
Fire Department and in use at a fire.
B. Molesting fire equipment. No person shall take, borrow or remove from
the fire engine house of the City, any of the fire apparatus or equipment
of the Fire Department, nor shall any person in any manner molest,
disturb or misplace any of such equipment or apparatus while stored in
said engine house of the Fire Department without first receiving written
permission from the Chief of the Fire Department or the City Manager.
C. Right-of-way. All fire apparatus shall have the right-of-way upon any
street, avenue or highway when going to an alarm of fire. No person
shall obstruct the right-of-way of the fire apparatus of the City while
going to a fire.
§ 362-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 362-5
1:282
ARTICLE II
Fire Prevention Standards
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Secs. 9-2-1 through 9-2-3
and 9-2-5 through 9-2-13 of the 2009 Code of Ordinances]
§ 362-6. Purpose.
The provisions of this article are intended to provide for the City of Lake
Mills rules and regulations to improve public safety by promoting the
control of fire hazards; regulating the installation, use and maintenance
of equipment; regulating the use of structures, premises and open areas;
providing for the abatement of fire hazards; establishing the responsibilities
and procedures for code enforcement and setting forth the standards for
compliance with and achievement of objectives.
§ 362-7. Applicability.
Except as specifically otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this Fire
Prevention Code shall apply equally on public and private property and to
all locations.
§ 362-8. General standards.
A. National and State Fire Safety Codes adopted.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B, there are hereby adopted as
part of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Lake Mills and
incorporated herein as if fully set forth the following codes and
standards:
(a) NFPA 1, 1987 edition, "Fire Prevention Code," of the National
Fire Protection Association, including its incorporated
Standards, Annexes, Codes and Appendixes, as published in
the National Fire Codes of the National Fire Protection
Association.
(b) Chapter SPS 310, Flammable and Combustible Liquids.
(c) Chapter SPS 340, Gas Systems.
(d) Chapter SPS 314, Fire Prevention.
(e) Chapters SPS 361 to 365, Commercial Building Code.
B. Exceptions. The following sections of Annex A of the 1987 edition of the
NFPA "Fire Prevention Code" are excluded from the Lake Mills Fire
Prevention Code:
3-9.1 Matches
3-9.2 Type Permitted
3-9.2.2 Packaging and Labeling
§ 362-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-8
1:283
§ 362-9. Repair/removal of buildings damaged by fire.
If the Fire Chief finds that any building or its contents or both are damaged
by fire to a point where the structure and its contents or both present
a health or life safety hazard to the public, the Chief may issue orders
to the owner of the property on which the building is located to abate
such hazard through repair or removal of the building and/or its contents.
Such orders shall be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, on the owner and each lienholder of record in the office of
the Jefferson County Register of Deeds whose address is known or can be
ascertained with reasonable diligence and include a time period to complete
abatement of such hazard to extend no more than 60 days. After 60 days,
the Fire Chief may order the building and contents removed. The owner of
the property will be held responsible for any expenses incurred, and any
expenses incurred by the City not paid within 30 days of billing shall be
levied against the premises on which the building was located pursuant
to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627 as a special charge for current services. Written
request for extension of the time permitted to complete ordered repairs or
removal shall be submitted to the Fire Chief within 45 days after the service
of the notice. The written request must contain the following information:
(1) the reason compliance cannot be completed within the sixty-day limit;
(2) the projected date the repairs are to start; (3) the type of repairs to be
conducted; and (4) the projected date repairs are to be completed.
§ 362-10. Fire alarms.
Fire alarm systems are regulated under Chapter 246, Alarm Systems, of the
Code of the City of Lake Mills.
§ 362-11. Emergency lighting.
3-9.2.3 Storage Requirements
3-9.2.3.1 Vertical Openings
3-9.2.3.2 Sources of Ignition
3-9.2.3.3 Storage at Wholesale Outlets
3-9.2.3.4 Match Storage with other Commodities
C. Copies of incorporated codes to be filed. At least one copy each of all
codes and standards incorporated in this Fire Prevention Code as set
forth in Subsection A above shall be kept on file and open for public
inspection during all business hours in the office of the Deputy Chief-
Fire Inspector.
A. Scope. Emergency illumination shall include all required exit lights and
emergency lighting as required by this section.
B. Emergency lighting in public areas. Emergency lighting shall be
installed in the following occupancies:
§ 362-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 362-11
1:284
§ 362-12. Fire hydrants.
(1) Factories. Within any factory over two interior stories or 10,000
square feet in gross interior area.
(2) Offices. Within any office over two interior stories or 10,000 square
feet gross interior area.
(3) Mercantile buildings. Within any mercantile building over two
interior stories or 4,000 square feet in gross interior area.
(4) Places of public assembly. Within any place of public assembly
(buildings with an occupancy load of 100 people or more),
regardless of size.
(5) Residential occupancies. Residential buildings with common areas
and containing 10 or more bedrooms (efficiency units shall be
considered as bedrooms).
(6) Taverns. Within any tavern regardless of size.
(7) Schools and places of instruction (including day-care centers).
Within any school or place of instruction housing more than 20
students.
(8) Health care facility. Within any health care facility regardless of
size.
(9) Place of detention. Within any place of detention regardless of size.
C. Battery backup for exit lights.
(1) All illuminated exit signs required under Wisconsin Administrative
Code Chs. SPS 361 to 365 shall be equipped with emergency power
to maintain illumination during power failures.
(2) Any illuminated exit signs installed prior to the activation of this
code shall be upgraded at the time of remodeling.
D. Standards. Emergency illumination shall be installed in accordance
with National Electrical Code 700-16.
E. Emergency lighting locations. Emergency lighting shall be located in
hallways, stairwells, open meeting areas 1,000 square feet or larger
and basements for all areas of occupancy as identified in § 362-11B.
A. When required. Where the municipal water system is available, and any
portion of a commercial, residential or industrial building is set back
more than 300 feet from the municipal fire hydrants, the owner shall
install approved water hydrants at its expense, as approved by the City
of Lake Mills Board of Public Works. The setback distance shall be
determined by measuring the travel distance from a municipal hydrant
along the center line of a municipal street or private road suitable for
travel by fire apparatus.
§ 362-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-12
1:285
§ 362-13. Access for fire apparatus required.
B. Location.
(1) Hydrants determined to be necessary in accordance with
Subsection A shall be freestanding and shall be installed not more
than 50 feet nor less than 25 feet from the building. One hydrant
shall be located at the main entryway to such building or complex.
Additional hydrants shall be provided around the perimeter of the
building or complex so no hydrant is more than 400 feet from any
other approved hydrant as described in Subsection A. All hydrants
shall be accessible to Fire Department vehicles with adequate
paved surfaces no more than five feet from the hydrant location.
(2) All water mains, hydrants and their location shall be approved by
the Lake Mills Board of Public Works and the Lake Mills Water
Utility. The hydrants shall be installed in such a manner and
location so as to be accessible at all times to the Fire Department.
Special fees associated with the installation of hydrants on private
property shall be paid by the property owner in accordance with
Public Service Commission rules, regulations, and rates.
C. Installed prior to construction. For new construction, hydrants required
by this section shall be installed and made operable prior to permitting
construction to progress beyond the footing and foundation stages.
D. Specifications. All water mains and hydrants shall be installed in
compliance with the standards of the City of Lake Mills Board of Public
Works. Unrestricted access to all fire hydrants and connecting mains
shall be granted to the Lake Mills Water Utility and permanent
easements shall be granted by the property owner for all hydrants and
connecting mains.
E. Blocking of fire hydrants prohibited. No person shall park any motor
vehicle within 10 feet of any fire hydrant or otherwise interfere with the
accessibility of any fire hydrant by piling, dumping or placing any other
obstructive material or object within 10 feet of a fire hydrant without
first obtaining written permission from the Fire Department. Every day
during which such interference continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
F. Marking of fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be marked with the curb
painted yellow. The curb shall be painted to produce a twenty-foot
stripe extending 10 feet to each side of the hydrant. Areas without
curbs shall have a four-inch-wide yellow stripe placed on the pavement
which extends 10 feet to each side of the hydrant in a line parallel to the
building.
A. General requirements.
(1) Where required. All premises public or private which the Fire
Department may be called upon to protect in case of fire and which
§ 362-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 362-13
1:286
are not readily accessible from public roads, shall be provided, at
the property owner's(s') expense, with suitable access roads and
fire lanes so that all buildings on the premises are accessible to fire
apparatus.
(2) Fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be provided, at the property owner's(s')
expense, on public or private property devoted to public use for all
buildings used for human habitation or occupancy which are set
back more than 100 feet from any roadway access or which exceed
30 feet in height and are set back more than 50 feet from a
roadway. Fire lanes may also be designated on those private
roadways where it is found by the Fire Chief that such access is
necessary for fire apparatus.
(3) Width. Fire lanes shall be at least 20 feet in width with the closest
edge of the lane at least 10 feet and no more than 30 feet from the
building.
(4) Dead-end roads. Any dead-end road more than 300 feet long shall
be provided a turnaround at the closed end of the roadway.
Turnarounds can be T-type or hammerhead, cul-de-sac or curved
driveway.
(5) Turning radius. Curves and turnarounds shall be designed for a
forty-eight-foot turning radius.
(6) Designation, marking and maintenance of fire lanes. The
designation, marking and maintenance of fire lanes shall be
accomplished as specified by the Fire Chief. The current Wisconsin
Department of Transportation standards for highway marking shall
be used as guidelines in designating and marking fire lanes.
(a) Designated fire lanes shall be marked with signs within five
feet of the beginning and within five feet of the end of fire lane,
with spacing between signs not to exceed 75 feet. Each sign
shall face in the direction of oncoming traffic. The curb shall be
painted yellow, if there is no curb, a four inch wide stripe shall
be painted the full length of the fire lane. Fire lane sign shall be
affixed to a stationary pole or object. Signs shall be plainly
visible.
(b) Roadways identified exclusively as fire lanes shall be identified
with approved fire lane signs on each side facing forward and
the pavement area between the signs shall be striped with
four-inch-wide yellow stripes.
(c) Before the requirements may be enforced, the fire lane must be
approved by the Fire Department. A sticker is placed on each
sign indicating approval and authorizing enforcement of the
provisions of this article.
§ 362-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-13
1:287
(7) Emergency access. A written document, agreeable to the Fire Chief
and for the benefit of the City, shall be required for emergency
access over all fire lanes. The document shall define the area
designated as a fire lane and shall specify those methods used to
label or post the area as a fire lane. A copy of the document shall be
kept on file at the Fire Department.
B. Unlawful designation of fire lanes. No person, firm or corporation shall
post, damage or remove a fire lane sign without the approval of the Fire
Department.
C. Obstruction of fire lane regulated.
(1) Removal of unlawfully parked vehicles. Any vehicle that is parked
within a lawfully designated and marked fire lane may be removed
at the vehicle owner's expense. Vehicles shall be towed away under
the following circumstances:
(a) When a vehicle is repeatedly in violation of this section by
being habitually parked in a fire lane.
(b) When a vehicle blocks the ingress/egress of a business, theater,
nightclub, apartment complex, gymnasium or a place of public
assembly.
(c) When the vehicle's presence threatens the life or safety of the
public by impeding the ability of fire apparatus and/or
emergency medical equipment to respond to an emergency.
(d) Removal of a vehicle under such circumstances may be
authorized by the person in lawful possession of the property
or by the Fire Chief, or his/her representative. The Police
Department may order the towing of a vehicle at any time that
the above conditions exist.
(2) In addition to any other remedy authorized by this section, owners
of vehicles parked in fire lanes may be cited with a notice of
violation on a standard "Wisconsin Uniform Citation" form issued
by a member of the Police Department who has been granted
citation authorization.
(3) Temporary loading or unloading permitted. Vehicles may stop in a
fire lane while actively loading or unloading, provided the driver is
present at all times. When this requirement is met, a reasonable
amount of time may be allowed for the completion of the
transaction.
(4) Obstructions other than vehicles. Whenever an obstruction is found
in a designated fire lane, an inspection report with warning notice
shall be issued to the property owner, occupant or responsible
party requiring that if the obstruction is not removed within the
specified time period, the Department may cause the removal of
§ 362-13 LAKE MILLS CODE § 362-13
1:288
§ 362-14. Access to construction areas.
§ 362-15. Fire Department access to buildings.
the obstruction with the cost of removal billed to the person(s)
responsible for the obstruction.
(5) When it becomes necessary to obstruct a fire lane, i.e.,
construction, remodeling or repair, a site approval shall be
required and permission obtained from the Fire Department. A
copy of the authorization shall be posted at the site.
(6) Unapproved fire lanes. Fire lane signs posted without the approval
of the Fire Department shall be removed unless the fire lane is
formally established and posted as required by this section.
A. Required. Every building construction site shall be accessible to Fire
Department apparatus by way of an access roadway. An access roadway
shall be in place and accessible to fire equipment prior to the delivery of
any combustible construction materials.
B. Design.
(1) Access roadways shall be extended to within 30 feet of the closest
edge of the property line.
(2) Access roadways shall have not less than 20 feet of unobstructed
width and a minimum of 13 feet six inches of vertical clearance.
(3) A driving surface of at least road base quality gravel shall be
maintained at all times in order that all-weather integrity is
assured. The road base shall be capable of supporting the imposed
loads of fire apparatus.
C. Maintenance. During winter months, the roadways shall be maintained
by the developer or property owner to include proper and timely snow
removal.
D. Penalty for noncompliance. Failure to comply with these requirements
shall result in revocation of building permits and/or refusal to issue
permits.
A. Key box required. When access to or within a structure or an area is
unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate
access is necessary for lifesaving or firefighting purposes, the Fire
Chief may require that a key box be installed in an accessible location.
The key box shall be a type approved by the Fire Department and shall
contain those keys found to be necessary to provide emergency access.
B. Property owner responsible. The property owner is responsible to
assure keys maintained within a key box are those of the current type.
When a change of locks within the building is necessary, the Fire
Department shall be notified with new keys placed in the key box.
§ 362-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-15
1:289
§ 362-16. Automatic fire sprinkler systems.
C. Removal of key prohibited. Removal of any key by other than Fire
Department personnel shall be a violation of this chapter.
A. Scope. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be tested, installed, and
maintained in operable condition in all new occupancies and locations
hereafter set forth.
B. Installation. Except for one- and two-family dwellings, the installation of
any automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be completed in accordance
with NFPA 13, "Installation of Sprinkler Systems," or NFPA 13R,
"Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to
Four Stories in Height." In one- and two-family dwellings, automatic fire
sprinkler systems shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 13D,
"Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in one and two
Family Dwellings and Mobile Homes."
C. Monitoring requirements. New automatic sprinkler systems installed
under this chapter shall be monitored by an approved central station
monitoring service, except in the following occupancies:
(1) One- and two-family dwellings and mobile homes.
(2) Apartments, townhouses, and condominiums with less than 50
dwelling units.
D. Maintenance: annual inspection. All automatic sprinkler systems shall
be properly maintained for efficient service as specified in NFPA 25,
1995, "Standard for the Care and Maintenance of Sprinkler Systems."
Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the building owner.
E. Where required. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and
maintained in operable condition in the following new occupancies and
locations:
(1) Within all new factories, workshops, office buildings, mercantile
establishments, warehouses, passenger terminal, exhibition
buildings, and places of public assembly with less than a onehundred-
person occupant load:
(a) Where the building is of Class 1 or Class 2 fire-resistive
construction and is 10,000 square feet or more in total area;
(b) Where the building is of Classes 3 through 8 non-fire-resistive
construction and is 7,000 square feet or more in total area; or
(c) Buildings of three interior stories or more in height, regardless
of area.
(2) Within new repair garages, motor vehicle storage garages and
body shops:
§ 362-15 LAKE MILLS CODE § 362-16
1:290
(a) Where the building is of Class 1 or Class 2 fire-resistive
construction, and is 10,000 square feet or more in total area;
(b) Where the building is of Classes 3 through 8 non-fire-resistive
construction, and is 7,000 square feet or more in total area;
(c) Where the building has three interior stories or more in height,
regardless of area; or
(d) In any basement or subbasement if a vehicle can be parked
therein.
(3) Within the following residential occupancies:
(a) Multiple-family dwellings, apartment buildings, townhouses,
condominiums, hotels, motels, dormitories, fraternities,
sorority houses and other places of abode, except one- and twofamily
dwellings, under the following requirements:
[1] New residential buildings having three interior stories or
less in height or having no more than four living units shall
have sprinklers installed in the basement, crawl spaces,
stairways and corridors.
[2] New residential buildings with more than three interior
stories in height or containing more than a total of four
living units shall be protected by an automatic sprinkler
system installed throughout the building regardless of size
or type of construction.
[3] New residential buildings with no common interior area
shall provide direct access to the sprinkler system riser on
the outside of the building for use by Fire Department
personnel.
(b) Automatic sprinkler systems are not required in one- and twofamily
dwellings, but when installed, shall meet the following
requirements:
[1] Any installation of an automatic sprinkler system within a
one- or two-family dwelling shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA 13D, "Standards for the Installation
of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings
and Mobile Homes."
[2] Automatic sprinkler systems installed within one- and twofamily
dwellings shall have two copies of the plans
submitted to the Fire Department for review and
conditional approval.
[3] Residential quick-response sprinkler heads are to be used.
§ 362-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-16
1:291
[4] The installation of the sprinkler system shall be inspected
by the Fire Department prior to enclosing of wall and
ceiling spaces.
[5] A hydrostatic test shall be conducted on the system in the
presence of a Fire Department inspector.
[6] A final inspection by the Fire Department shall be
conducted prior to placing system in service.
(4) New theaters and buildings of public assembly over one-hundredperson
occupancy. Automatic sprinklers shall be installed
throughout such buildings regardless of size or type of
construction.
(5) New health care facilities, including hospitals, nursing homes,
convalescent and group care centers. Automatic sprinklers shall be
installed throughout such buildings regardless of size or type of
construction.
(6) New detention and correctional facilities. Automatic sprinklers
shall be installed throughout the building, regardless of size or
construction.
(7) New schools, colleges and universities:
(a) Where the building is of Class 1 or Class 2 fire-resistive
construction, and is 10,000 square feet or more in total area,
automatic sprinklers shall be installed throughout the building.
(b) Where the building is of Classes 3 through 8 non-fire-resistive
construction, automatic sprinklers shall be installed
throughout the building.
(8) High-hazard occupancy. Throughout any new building which by
reason of its construction or combustible occupancy is deemed a
severe life or property hazard by the Fire Chief. This includes but
shall not be limited to:
(a) Aircraft/helicopter hangers, aircraft/helicopter servicing.
(b) Dry-cleaning establishments using or storing volatile or
flammable liquids.
(c) Enameling or Japanning operations.
(d) Mills.
(e) Paint and varnish: manufacturing, storage, handling, spraying
or other related operations.
(f) Pyroxylin products.
(g) Smoke houses.
§ 362-16 LAKE MILLS CODE § 362-16
1:292
(h) Storage of combustible and flammable gases such as
acetylene, hydrogen, liquid propane, etc., in excess of 1,000
cubic feet.
(i) Storage of combustible and flammable liquids such as
kerosene, oil gasoline, etc., in excess of 500 gallons.
(j) Woodworking establishments.
(k) Chemical works.
(l) Warehouses with materials piled 15 feet or more in height.
(m) Explosive and pyrotechnic manufacturing and storage.
(n) Basements over 2,500 square feet and containing combustible
materials or storage therein.
F. Exceptions. Automatic fire sprinkler systems are not required in the
following:
(1) Rooms or buildings used for the manufacture or storage of
aluminum powder, calcium carbide, calcium phosphide, metallic
sodium or potassium, quick lime, magnesium powder, sodium
peroxide or like materials where the application of water may
cause or increase combustion.
(2) Any location where the Fire Chief determines that the use of water
as a fire-extinguishing agent would increase the hazard. However,
an automatic fire suppression system using an extinguishing agent
other than water, or an automatic smoke detection system, shall be
installed.
(3) One- and two-family dwellings.
(4) In new factories, workshops, office buildings, mercantile
establishments, warehouses, passenger terminals, exhibition
buildings, places of public assembly with less than one-hundredperson
occupant load, and new repair garages, motor vehicle
storage garages and body shops, if:
(a) The building is of Class 1 or 2 fire-resistant construction and is
less than 10,000 square feet in total area.
(b) The building is of Class 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 non-fire-resistant
construction and is less than 7,000 square feet in total area.
G. Buildings in areas without municipal water supply. Any building of a
size or use that falls within the requirements of Subsection E, erected
within an area not served by the municipal water system shall be
constructed to structurally support a sprinkler system. Once municipal
water is available, the building owner shall have 90 days to install an
automatic sprinkler system which conforms to this chapter.
§ 362-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-16
1:293
H. Large buildings in areas with inadequate municipal water supply. Any
building having a total area of 25,000 square feet or more erected for
any of the uses described in Subsection E shall install an automatic
sprinkler system at the time of construction. Water for the system shall
be supplied by a pressure tank or other approved water source capable
of delivering the required water flow for a period of 30 minutes if
monitored by a central station monitoring service or 60 minutes if
unmonitored.
I. Plan review: installation, inspection.
(1) Approval of plans required. No automatic sprinkler equipment shall
be installed or altered in any building until plans have been
submitted to and reviewed by the Fire Department. Three copies of
the plans and specifications shall be submitted for review.
Conditionally approved plans shall be stamped with the date of
review. One copy shall be returned to owner, two retained by the
Department for field use and property file reference.
(a) Plans. Plans for sprinkler systems (including drawings,
diagrams as needed) shall be submitted to the Fire Department
for review and conditional approval. Plans shall be
conditionally approved prior to any installation or
construction.
(b) Calculations. Calculations shall be submitted with all plans. In
the event a pipe schedule is used, a written report with verified
pressure information shall be submitted. The engineer
completing such calculations shall stamp and sign the report.
(2) Installation and inspection services required.
(a) The installation of underground piping shall be inspected by
the Fire Department prior to being covered.
(b) The installer shall provide advance notice to the Fire
Department for any required installation inspection.
(3) System requirements. All required building automatic sprinkler
systems shall comply with the following, provided existing systems
not in compliance on the effective date of this article shall have
until January 1, 1997, to come into compliance.
(a) System drain. The building automatic sprinkler system shall
have a drain piped to the outside of the building or to a drain
suitable to handle the required flows.
(b) Inspector's test valve. The system shall have an inspector's test
valve piped so as to discharge to the outside of the building.
(c) Alarm bells or horns. Alarm bells or horns shall be installed on
all systems. One bell or horn shall be installed on the inside of
the building and a second bell or horn installed on the outside
§ 362-16 LAKE MILLS CODE § 362-16
1:294
§ 362-17. Standpipe and hose system.
of the building. The sprinkler alarm shall be tied into the
building alarm system in buildings equipped with a local alarm
system.
(4) Acceptance test. The sprinkler system shall have a hydrostatic test
performed by the installer in the presence of a Fire Department
inspector. The sprinkler system shall be tested by flows of the main
drain and inspector's test. The installer shall notify the Fire
Department prior to any test being conducted.
J. Annual testing. A qualified sprinkler technician shall inspect the
automatic sprinkler system at least annually. The provisions of NFPA
25, 1995, Chapters 1 through 7, shall be used as the inspection criteria.
K. Lock box required. Buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler
system shall be provided with a standard lock box of a type approved by
the Department. The lock box shall be located in a place approved by
the Fire Department. Properly identified keys to gain access to the
building and the building automatic sprinkler system shall be
maintained in the lock box. Removal of any key by persons other than
Fire Department personnel shall be considered a violation of this
article.
L. Retroactive provisions. The provisions of (9)(C)1, System Drains, and
(10), Annual Testing, shall apply to all sprinkler systems installed within
the City of Lake Mills. Systems not in compliance with the provisions of
(9)(C)1 shall have until January 1, 1997, to come into compliance.
A. Scope. Standpipe and hose systems shall be installed and maintained in
operable condition in the following occupancies and locations in the
City:
(1) In any new building over three interior stories.
(2) Within any building 100,000 square feet or more in total gross
area.
(3) Within any building having a horizontal dimension of 300 or more
feet.
B. Installation standards. Standpipe and hose systems shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA 14, 1993, "Standards for Installation of
Standpipe and Hose Systems." Standpipe and hose systems required in
Subsection A(1), (2) and (3) shall be of Class I or III types, as specified
in NFPA 14, 1993. Wet standpipe systems may be an integral part of an
approved automatic sprinkler system, provided calculations for
required fire flows have been submitted with sprinkler system plans.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 362-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-17
1:295
C. Maintenance. Standpipe and hose systems shall be maintained in
accordance with NFPA 14, "Standards for Installation of Standpipe and
Hose Systems."
D. Areas without municipal water supply. Any building erected which falls
within the criteria described in this chapter in an area which does not
have a municipal water supply shall construct a dry type standpipe and
hose system which the Fire Department can connect to in the event of
an emergency.
E. Areas with an inadequate municipal water supply. Any building erected
for any of the uses described in Subsection A of this section in an area
in which the municipal water supply cannot, for any reason, provide the
water pressure or volume necessary to operate a standpipe and hose
system shall have an approved fire pump or secondary water supply
installed to provide the required water flow for that occupancy.
F. Conditional approval required prior to installation of standpipe and
hose systems. No standpipe and hose system shall be installed or
altered in any building until three copies each of the following plans and
calculations have been submitted to, reviewed and conditionally
approved by the Lake Mills Fire Department. Conditionally approved
plans shall be stamped with the date of review. One copy shall be
returned to the owner, one copy kept on file in the Fire Department
office, and one copy to the Lake Mills Water Utility.
(1) Plans and specifications. Plans (including drawings, diagrams as
needed) shall be submitted, on all standpipe and hose systems to
the Department for review and conditional approval.
(2) Calculations. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted with all
plans. The engineer producing the calculations shall stamp and
sign the calculations.
G. Installation of standpipe and hose systems; inspection required.
(1) Underground piping. The installation of underground piping shall
be inspected by an inspector from the Fire Department prior to
being covered.
(2) Acceptance test, standpipe and hose systems:
(a) After installation, standpipe and hose systems shall have a
hydrostatic test performed by the installer in the presence of
an inspector from the Lake Mills Fire Department. The system
shall be tested by the installer in accordance with NFPA 14,
1993.
(b) The installer shall give advance notice to the Fire Department
for any test to be conducted.
(3) Installer responsible for compliance. Failure to comply with the
listed items can result in enforcement action against the installer.
§ 362-17 LAKE MILLS CODE § 362-17
1:296
H. Standpipe and hose system test requirements. Inspection of a standpipe
and hose system shall be conducted annually by a qualified sprinkler/
standpipe technician in accordance with NFPA 14, Chapter 8.
Exception: Hydrostatic testing of underground piping may be omitted
during annual testing. An inspection report shall be completed on the
system inspected, and a copy of the report shall be submitted to the
Fire Department to be kept on file.
§ 362-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-17
1:297

ARTICLE III
Open Burning
[Adopted 11-21-2007 by Ord. No. 999A (Title 5, Ch. 4, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 362-18. Purpose.
This articleis intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and
to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the City of Lake Mills due to the air pollution and fire hazards of
open burning, outdoor burning and refuse burning.
§ 362-19. Applicability.
This article applies to all outdoor burning and refuse burning within the
City, except the following.
§ 362-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BONFIRE — A large outdoor fire intended for recreation that is larger than
four feet across at any point, but does not include a fire intended for the
disposal of waste wood, yard waste or refuse.
CAMPFIRE — A small outdoor fire that is no more than four feet across at
any point. In addition, a campfire is intended for cooking or recreation, and
it is contained within a fire ring, fireplace, pit or other containment device,
but it is not a fire intended for the disposal of waste wood, yard waste or
refuse.
CLEAN WOOD — Natural wood which has not been painted, varnished
or coated with a similar material, has not been pressure treated with
preservatives and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other
composite wood products.
CONFIDENTIAL PAPERS — Printed material containing personal
identification or financial information that the owner wishes to destroy.
A. This article does not apply to grilling or cooking using charcoal, wood,
propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
B. This article does not apply to burning in a stove, furnace, fireplace or
other heating device within a building used for human or animal
habitation unless the material being burned includes refuse as defined
in § 362-20 of this article.
C. This article does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural gas,
gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction or
maintenance activities.
§ 362-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-20
1:299
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Lake Mills Fire Department, or other person
authorized by the Fire Chief.
OPEN BURNING — Kindling or maintaining a fire where the products
of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or a chimney.
OUTDOOR BURNING — Open burning or burning in an outdoor wood-fired
furnace.
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED FURNACE — A wood-fired furnace, stove or
boiler that is not located within a building intended for habitation by
humans or domestic animals.
REFUSE — Any waste material except clean wood.
§ 362-21. General prohibition on open burning, outdoor burning
and refuse burning.
Open burning, outdoor burning and refuse burning are prohibited in the
City of Lake Mills unless the burning is specifically permitted by this article.
§ 362-22. Materials not to be burned.
Unless a specific written approval has been obtained from the Department
of Natural Resources, the following materials may not be burned in an open
fire, incinerator, burn barrel, furnace, stove or any other indoor or outdoor
incineration or heating device:
A. Rubbish or garbage, including but not limited to food wastes, food
wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials,
furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition debris or
other household or business wastes.
B. Waste oil or other oily wastes except used oil burned in a heating device
for energy recovery subject to the restrictions in Chapter NR 679,
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
C. Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
D. Treated or painted wood including, but not limited to, plywood,
composite wood products or other wood products that are painted,
varnished or treated with preservatives.
E. Any plastic material including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and
plastic containers.
F. Rubber, including tires and synthetic rubberlike products.
G. Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper and
other materials that must be recycled in accordance with the recycling
regulations in Chapter 556, Solid Waste, of the Code of the City of Lake
Mills.
§ 362-20 LAKE MILLS CODE § 362-23
1:300
§ 362-23. Open burning of leaves, brush, and other vegetative
debris.
Open burning of leaves, weeds, brush, stumps, clean wood, trees and other
vegetative debris is prohibited, except the following:
§ 362-24. Burn barrels.
No person shall use or maintain a burn barrel in the City of Lake Mills.
§ 362-25. Outdoor wood-fired furnaces.
An outdoor wood-fired furnace may be installed and used in the City of Lake
Mills only in accordance with the following provisions:
A. Open burning of weeds or brush on agricultural lands is allowed if
conducted in accordance with other applicable provisions of this article
and in accordance with a permit issued by the Fire Chief under
§ 362-28.
B. Fires set for forest, prairie or wildlife habitat management are allowed
if a permit has been issued by the Fire Chief under § 362-28.
C. Outdoor campfires for cooking, ceremonies or recreation are allowed
without a permit, provided:
(1) The fire is confined by a control device or structure such as a fire
ring, fireplace, grill, or fire pit;
(2) The fire is no larger than four feet across at any one point;
(3) The fire is under the supervision of an adult at all times; and
(4) No materials listed under § 362-22 are burned.
D. Bonfires for ceremonies or recreation are allowed only if approved by a
permit issued by the Fire Chief under § 362-28, and only if the bonfire
complies with provisions of § 362-27 and any conditions established by
the permit.
E. In emergency situations such as natural disasters, burning that would
otherwise be prohibited is allowed if specifically approved by the
Department of Natural Resources.
A. The outdoor wood-fired furnace shall be installed and used only in an
area zoned for agricultural use or rural development.
B. No prohibited materials listed in § 362-22 may be burned in any outdoor
wood-fired furnace.
C. The outdoor wood-fired furnace shall be located at least 300 feet from
the nearest building which is not on the same property as the outdoor
wood-fired furnace.
§ 362-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-25
1:301
§ 362-26. Fire Department practice burns.
Except as provided in this section for Fire Department practice burns, an
existing unwanted building in the City of Lake Mills may not be burned. A
building, which is no longer standing, may not be used for a practice burn.
§ 362-27. Bonfires.
D. The outdoor wood-fired furnace shall have a chimney that extends at
least 15 feet above the ground surface. If there are any residences
within 500 feet, the chimney shall also extend at least as high above the
ground surface as the height of the roofs of all such residences. The
Fire Chief may approve a lesser height on a case-by-case basis if
necessary to comply with manufacturer's recommendations and if the
smoke from the lower chimney height does not create a nuisance for
neighbors.
E. The owner of the outdoor wood-fired furnace shall obtain an annual
permit from the Fire Chief in accordance with § 362-28 of this article if
the furnace is located within 1,000 feet of a residence that is not located
on the same property where the furnace is located.
A. An existing building may be burned only by the Lake Mills Fire
Department and only if the Fire Chief determines that the burning is
necessary for practice and instruction of firefighters or firefighting
equipment.
B. Asphalt shingles and asphalt or plastic siding shall be removed prior to
the practice burn unless the Fire Chief determines that they are
necessary for the fire practice.
C. A demolition notification shall be submitted to the Department of
Natural Resources and all asbestos removed prior to the practice burn.
D. All ash shall be disposed of in an approved landfill or at an alternative
location approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
E. The Fire Chief or designee shall notify residents within 1,000 feet of the
site of the proposed burn at least 48 hours before a planned practice
burn.
A. No bonfire, which is defined in § 362-20, may be started or maintained
in the City of Lake Mills without first obtaining a permit under § 362-28
and without complying with the requirements in this section and any
other applicable requirements in this chapter.
B. The allowable quantity of material to be burned shall be determined by
the Fire Chief and shall be based on the firesafety considerations of the
situation and the desired duration of the burn.
C. Fuel for bonfires shall consist of dry material only and shall not be
ignited with flammable or combustible liquids.
§ 362-25 LAKE MILLS CODE § 362-27
1:302
§ 362-28. Burning permits.
§ 362-29. Liability.
Any person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire, with or without a
permit, shall be responsible for all fire-suppression costs and any other
liability resulting from damage caused by the fire.
§ 362-30. Right of entry and inspection.
The Fire Chief, or any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative
of the Lake Mills Fire Department who presents credentials may inspect
D. In addition to § 362-22, the materials for bonfires may not include
combustible refuse, flammable or combustible liquids, or any material
made of or coated with rubber, plastic, leather or petroleum-based
materials.
A. No person may start or maintain any open burning without a burning
permit issued by the Fire Chief of the Lake Mills Fire Department,
unless it is excepted under § 362-23.
B. An outdoor campfire does not require a permit, provided that the fire
complies with all other applicable provisions of this article. Bonfires do
require a one-time permit.
C. Any burning permits issued by the Fire Chief may be subject to
cancellation by the Chief because of changed conditions from those
described in the permit application, or because the fire is not being
maintained in a manner that the Chief believes is in compliance with
the terms of the permit.
D. Any one-time burning permit shall require an advance notification to
the Fire Department prior to commencing the burning.
E. The owner or occupant of the property shall obtain an annual burning
permit for each outdoor wood-fired furnace before using the outdoor
wood-fired furnace. An annual permit expires on August 31 of each
year.
F. When weather conditions warrant, the Fire Chief or the Department of
Natural Resources may declare a burning moratorium on all open
burning and temporarily suspend previously issued burning permits for
open burning.
G. A burning permit issued under this section shall require compliance
with all applicable provisions of this article and any additional special
restrictions deemed necessary to protect public health and safety.
H. Any violation of the conditions of a burning permit shall be deemed a
violation of this article. Any violation of this chapter or any violations of
the burning permit shall void the permit.
§ 362-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-30
1:303
any property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions
of this article. If the owner or occupant of the premises denies access to
the property for this purpose, a special inspection warrant may be obtained
under Chapter 66 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 362-31. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. The Lake Mills Police Department is authorized to enforce the
provisions of this article.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-19 of this Code. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 362-30 LAKE MILLS CODE § 362-31
1:304
ARTICLE IV
Fire Prevention Fees, Charges, Assessments and Penalties
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 9, Ch. 4, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 362-32. Permits required.
§ 362-33. Fees.
Fees shall be paid to the City of Lake Mills for the permits, certificates,
approvals and other functions performed under this code with an
application for permit approval, certificate and any required inspection or
function at a rate as established by the City Council by resolution from time
to time.
§ 362-34. Special fire protection charges and assessments.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, all permits required under NFPA 1,
1992 edition, or Wis. Adm. Code, Chs. SPS 310, 340, 314, 361 to 365, as
adopted in § 362-8 of this chapter, shall be required under this code and
shall be obtained from the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
B. Building plan check. The owner or applicant for a building permit for a
multiple dwelling, commercial, manufacturing or public assembly unit
shall pay a plan check fee to offset actual costs incurred by the Fire
Department for inspection and review of plans and on-site inspection
during the planning and construction period of the development or
construction.
C. Exceptions. The following permits required under NFPA 1, 1987
edition, Fire Prevention Code, shall not be required under this code:
(1) Combustible Dust-Producing Operations.
(2) Compressed and Liquefied Gases.
(3) Flammable and Combustible Liquids.
(4) Flammable Finishing.
(5) Pyroxylin Plastics.
(6) Welding Cutting and Other Hot Work.
A. Impositions. The City shall impose a fee for service rendered by the Fire
Department which imposes a financial burden above the normal and
routine level of service in the following circumstances:
(1) Standby charges. The Fire Chief may charge a standby fee for costs
incurred by the City that are necessitated by a need for special fire
protection and prevention devices provided for special functions
general public safety at emergency and nonemergency situations.
§ 362-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-34
1:305
§ 362-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty, unless otherwise
specifically provided herein, as set forth under the General Penalty
provisions of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, General Penalty, of
the Code of the City of Lake Mills.
The fee will be based on the schedule as adopted pursuant to
§ 362-33.
(2) User fee. The Fire Chief may charge a fee based on actual cost
incurred by the City for any service performed by the Fire
Department where the service requires a recall of additional fire
personnel or the use of specialized equipment or resources to
terminate an emergency.
(3) State and federal mandated duties. The Fire Chief may bill the
offices or agencies of the state of Wisconsin or the United States
actual costs incurred for the performance of duties mandated by
them. This charge will be based on the schedule as adopted
pursuant to § 362-33.
(4) Fire cause determination fee. The Fire Chief may charge a fee for
all costs incurred by the Fire Department for providing service as
the result of actions that are determined to be a violation of Article
II of this chapter of the City of Lake Mills. This fee shall be based on
the schedule as adopted pursuant to § 362-33 and shall be payable
by the person, firm or corporation responsible.
B. Charges binding on successors. The above fees shall be binding upon all
persons rendered such services as well as their successors in interest,
assigns, estates and heirs. Such fees shall become due 30 days after
date of billing. If the bill is not paid within 30 days, the City Treasurer
shall cause the delinquent charges to be placed on the next tax roll,
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No.
1103]
C. Disposition of funds. All monies received under the provisions of this
section shall be placed in the General Fund of the City of Lake Mills.
§ 362-34 LAKE MILLS CODE § 362-35
1:306
Chapter 368
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 362.
§ 368-1. Regulation by City.
The City of Lake Mills hereby elects under Wis. Stats. § 167.10(5) to
regulate the sale, possession and use of fireworks.
§ 368-2. Standards adopted by reference. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
National Fire Protection Association Standards adopted: NFPA 1123,
"Public Display of Fireworks" and NFPA 1124, "Manufacture,
Transportation and Storage of Fireworks" are adopted by reference and
made part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Wherever the
provisions of state law conflict with NFPA 1123 or NFPA 1124, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
§ 368-3. Public displays, permits.
This section shall not prohibit the use of fireworks for pyrotechnic displays
sponsored by public authorities, fair associations, amusement parks, park
boards or civic organizations, provided a written request is submitted by
the sponsoring organization to the City a minimum of 90 days prior to the
event, the City Council approves the event, and a permit for such display is
issued by the Fire Chief.
A. Application for permits. A separate application for a fireworks permit
shall be made in writing to the Department at least 30 days in advance
of the date of the display. The application shall be reviewed by the Fire
Chief.
B. Sponsor. The sponsor of the event shall provide the following
information to the Fire Department in the application: name and
qualifications of operators (operators must be at least 18 years of age),
proof of insurance (minimum of $1,000,000 bodily injury/property
damage), location of event and proposed method of spectator control
and protection.
C. Display conditions. The operator shall provide the Fire Department with
details concerning the display of the fireworks. These details shall be
used to evaluate the safety precautions planned for the display. The
Department will base its evaluation upon the NFPA standards adopted
in § 368-2. The Fire Department may impose conditions on the display.
§ 362-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-3
1:307
§ 368-4. Parental responsibility.
A parent or legally appointed guardian of any minor who knowingly permits
such minor to purchase or have in his or her possession or to discharge any
fireworks forbidden by this section shall be deemed to have violated this
section. Such parent or guardian shall be personally liable for any damage
caused by such possession or discharge of fireworks.
Chapter 393
HAZARDOUS WASTE CLEANUP
§ 393-1. Hazardous substances regulated.
§ 393-2. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
DISCHARGE — The deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, placing,
pumping or pouring of any hazardous substance or waste into or on any
land or water so that this hazardous substance or any constituent thereof
may enter the environment, be emitted into the air, or enter into any waters,
including ground waters.
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief of the City of Lake Mills or his/her designated
agent.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — Any substance or combination of
substances, including any waste of a solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous
form which may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality
or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness
or which may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics. This term includes, but is not limited
Such conditions shall be submitted to the permit holder and the
operator in writing. The operator shall comply with all conditions found
to be required for the display.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to insure that responsible
parties take safe and effective hazardous substance emergency
immediate actions to protect public health, safety, and welfare.
B. Applicability. The Lake Mills City Council finds that to insure proper
emergency responses are undertaken at the scene of a hazardous
substance discharge, the Fire Department requires authority to
immediately take whatever emergency actions necessary under
§ 292.11,Wis. Stat., and that it considers appropriate under the
circumstances to halt a hazardous substance discharge and to minimize
the harmful effects of the discharge to the air, lands, or waters of the
state.
§ 368-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 393-2
1:308
to, substances which are toxic, corrosive, flammable, irritants, strong
sensitizers or explosives as determined by the Department of Natural
Resources.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited liability partnership,
corporation, trust, association, firm, joint stock company, organization,
commission, the state or federal government or other entity.
§ 393-3. Prohibited discharge.
No person shall discharge or cause to discharge, leak, leach or spill any
hazardous substance as defined in § 393-2 upon any public street, alley
or public property, or onto the ground, surface waters, subsurface waters,
aquifers, or on any private property within the City.
§ 393-4. Containment, cleanup and restoration.
Any person who possesses or controls a hazardous substance that is
discharged or who causes the discharge of a hazardous substance shall
take the actions necessary to protect public health and safety and prevent
damage to property.
§ 393-5. Fire Department response and reimbursement.
If action required under § 393-4 is not being adequately taken or the
identity of the person(s) responsible for the discharge of a hazardous
substance is unknown and the discharge threatens public health or safety
or damage to property, the Fire Department may take any emergency action
consistent with any contingency plan established by the Department of
Natural Resources and that the Fire Chief and/or other officers in charge
consider appropriate under the circumstances, and all costs for actual,
reasonable and necessary expenses incurred thereby shall be reimbursed to
the City by the person(s) responsible for the discharge.
§ 393-6. Authority.
Chapter 402
A. Access. Access to any site, public or private, where a prohibited
discharge is indicated or suspected shall be provided to the Fire Chief
for purpose of evaluating the threat to the public and monitor
containment, cleanup and restoration.
B. Public protection. Should any prohibited discharge occur that
reasonably causes a threat to the life, safety, or health of the public, the
senior fire officer on the scene may order an evacuation of the area or
take other appropriate protective steps for a period of time as deemed
necessary for the safety of the public.
C. Enforcement. The Fire Chief and any Fire Inspector shall have authority
to issue citations or complaints under this chapter.
§ 393-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 393-6
1:309
HOUSING CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 16.
Municipal fees — See Ch. 80.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 271.
Building construction — See Ch. 279.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 286.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 292.
Solid waste — See Ch. 556.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 581.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 660.
§ 393-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 393-6
1:310
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 402-1. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this article shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
§ 402-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADEQUATE — "Adequate" as determined by the Building Inspector under
the regulations of this chapter or "adequate" as determined by an authority
designated by law or this chapter. "Adequately" shall mean the same as
"adequate."
APPROVED — By the Building Inspector under the regulations of this
chapter or approved by an authority designated by law or this chapter.
ATTRACTIVE APPEARANCE — Refers to the exterior appearance of
buildings, structures, stairs, porches, and similar appurtenances and the
improvement, planting and landscaping of yards and vacant areas. The
determination of "attractive" used herein shall be as determined by the
Building Inspector under the regulations of this chapter or as determined
by an authority designated by law or this chapter. Provided further, such
determination shall be in accordance with the generally accepted
reasonable meaning prevailing in the community of the term "attractive
appearance" and shall take into consideration the appearance of the
surrounding specific locality involved and the community as a whole.
BASEMENT — A space of full story height below the first floor which is not
designed or used primarily for year around living accommodation. Space,
partly below grade, which is designed and finished as habitable space is not
included.
BOARDINGHOUSE — See "lodging house" and "lodging room."
BUILDING — Any structure designed or intended for the support,
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, or property and for the purpose
of this chapter a mobile home shall be considered a building.
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
the plural the singular.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
E. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for,"
"designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," "occupied for."
§ 402-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-2
1:311
CAPACITY IN PERSONS — The "capacity in persons" of a building is the
maximum number of persons that can occupy such building, as determined
by the required floor space per person as established by the State Building
Code.
CELLAR — The portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
and having 2/3 or more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
DWELLING UNIT —
EXTERMINATION — The control or elimination of infestation by eliminating
harboring places and removing or making inaccessible materials that may
serve as food, and by poisoning, spraying, trapping, fumigation by a
licensed fumigator or any other effective elimination procedure.
FAMILY — As defined in the Zoning Chapter, § 660-12, of the
Code.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
GARBAGE — Includes all kinds of organic refuse resulting from the
preparation of food, and all decayed or spoiled food products from any
source whatever.
GOOD WORKING CONDITION — Capable of performing the task for which
it was designed and in the manner intended by this chapter.
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room in a residential building which is either a
sleeping room or a living room as defined herein.
IMPERVIOUS TO WATER — Constructed of concrete, cement block,
terrazzo, brick, tile or other material approved by the Building Inspector,
and having tight-fitting joints, and not having more than 4.5% adsorption by
test.
INFESTATION — The sustained presence of household pest, vermin or
rodents.
LIVING ROOM — A room used for sitting, dining or cooking purposes,
but shall not include a room designed or intended to be used for laundry,
workshop, furnace, play, bathroom, water closet, or storage purposes.
LODGING HOUSE — A residential building or portion thereof, containing
lodging rooms which accommodate five or more persons who are not
A "dwelling unit" consists of one or more rooms which are arranged,
designed, or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual
bathrooms and complete single kitchen facilities, permanently
installed, shall always be included with each "dwelling unit."
A.
For the purpose of this chapter, a mobile home in a mobile home park
or on properly zoned private property, so arranged, designed, or used
shall be considered a dwelling unit.12
B.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 470, Mobile Home Parks.
§ 402-2 LAKE MILLS CODE § 402-2
1:312
members of the keeper's family. Lodging or meals, or both, or lodging and
kitchen privileges are provided for compensation.
LODGING ROOM — A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but
without cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom.
"Lodging room" includes a room or rooms so rented in a single-family
dwelling or dwelling unit.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Shall be occupancy of a building in part for
residential use and in part for other use not accessory thereto.
OCCUPANT — Any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having
possession of dwelling unit or lodging room.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge or control of a building or part
thereof in which dwelling units or lodging rooms are located or let.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly, or severally with others:
PERSONAL — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
PLUMBING — All piping and equipment for supply, use or drainage of liquid
or gaseous material.
PROPERLY — As deemed proper by the administrative officer under the
regulation of this chapter or deemed proper by an authority designated by
law or this chapter.
PROVIDED — Furnished, supplied, paid for or under control of the owner.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING —
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; provided, whenever the
dwelling or dwelling unit is subject to conditional sales contract, lease
with option to purchase, or any other form of written contract under
the terms of which any person is entitled to a conveyance of legal title
upon payment of a specified sum, the term "owner" shall mean the
person who shall have a contractural right, rather than the person who
is holding the legal title; or
A.
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit
as executor, executrix, receiving or guardian of the owner as defined
above. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be
bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent
as if he were the owner. Any person acting as the agent of the owner
shall not be construed to be the owner within the terms of this chapter,
but shall be bound to notify the owner, by means of a registered letter
or addressed to the owner at his last known address, of any order or
notice to be issued to the administrative officer relating to the property
of the owner.
B.
A building which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used
for residential occupancy by one or more families or lodgers, and which
includes, but is not limited to, the following types:
A.
§ 402-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-2
1:313
ROOMING HOUSE — See "lodging house" and "lodging room."
RUBBISH — Includes all inorganic refuse matter such as tin cans, wire or
metal of any kind, glass, china, crockery, paper, cloth, stone, earth, wood,
ashes, and things of similar nature.
SLEEPING ROOM — A room used for sleeping purposes.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
more or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something
having permanent location on the ground.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of the
owner or operator.
§ 402-3. Liability limits.
This chapter shall not be construed as assuming any liability on the part of
the City for damages to anyone injured or for any property destroyed by any
defect in any building for equipment or in any plumbing or electrical wiring
equipment.
§ 402-4. Conflict of ordinances.
In any case where a provision of this chapter conflicts with a provision
of any zoning, building, firesafety or health ordinance or code of the City,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any
case where a provision of this chapter conflicts with a provision of any
other ordinance or code of this City, which establishes a lower standard
for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people,
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other
ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that
they may be found in conflict with this chapter.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Two-family detached dwellings.
(3) Lodging houses.
For the purpose of this chapter, any building containing any of the
above uses together with other uses shall be considered a residential
building.
B.
§ 402-2 LAKE MILLS CODE § 402-4
1:314
ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 402-5. Inspections.
The Building Inspector may make inspections to determine the condition
of dwellings, dwelling units, and premises located within the City, in order
that they may perform their duty of safeguarding the health and safety of
the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of
making such inspections, the Building Inspector may enter, examine, and
survey, at proper times after due notice, all dwelling units, rooming units
and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, or
the person in charge thereof, shall give the Building Inspector access to
such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises, at proper
times after due notice, for the purpose of such inspection, examination and
survey. Every occupant of a dwelling unit or dwelling shall give the owner
thereof or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or
dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 402-6. Enforcement; orders, hearings.
A. Notice. Whenever the Building Inspector determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
such provision which affects the safety of any such occupants or the
safety of the general public, the Building Inspector shall give notice of
such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor,
and to any known agent of such person, as thereinafter provided. Such
notice shall:
(1) Be put in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case
may require; provided, that such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant,
if a copy thereof is sent by registered mail to his last known
address, or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the dwelling affected by the notice, or he is served with such
notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws
of the State of Wisconsin;
(5) Such notice must contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with this chapter.
B. Hearing. Any person affected by any such notice issued by the Building
Inspector may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
before the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided such person shall file with
§ 402-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-6
1:315
§ 402-7. Violations and penalties; reinspection fees. [Amended
4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 1061A]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any order, rule
or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to an applicable penalty as
provided in § 1-19 or Chapter 80, Article IV, of this Code. If a complaint
of a violation of the requirements in this chapter or Chapter 279, Building
Construction; Chapter 286, Buildings, Numbering of; Chapter 292,
Buildings, Unsafe; or Chapter 581, Swimming Pools, is received, it shall be
handled as follows:
the Building Inspector and the Zoning Board of Appeals, within 30 days
of the receipt of such notice, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The Zoning Board of Appeals, upon receipt of the notice of
appeal, shall arrange a time and place for the hearing and shall give the
aggrieved party written notice thereof. At such hearing, the aggrieved
party shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why
such notice should not be complied with.
C. Order. After such hearing, the Board shall sustain, modify or withdraw
the notice, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of
this chapter have been complied with. If the Board shall sustain or
modify such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served
pursuant to Subsection A shall automatically become an order if a
written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Building
Inspector within 30 days after such notice is served. After a hearing in
the case of any notice suspending any permit required by this chapter,
when such notice has been sustained by the Board, the permit shall be
deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed
in the office of the Building Inspector within 10 days after such notice is
served.
D. Record of proceedings. The proceedings at such hearings, including the
findings and decision of the Board shall be summarized, reduced to
writing and entered as a matter of public record in the offices of the
Board. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order
issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Board may seek relief therefrom in any court of
competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.
E. Emergencies. Whenever the Building Inspector finds that an emergency
exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health he
may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately, but upon
petition to the Building Inspector, he shall be afforded a hearing as soon
as possible in the manner provided in Subsection B. After such hearing,
depending upon the findings as to whether the provisions of this
chapter have been complied with, the Board shall continue such order
in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
§ 402-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 402-7
1:316
A. As an alternative to issuing a municipal citation that is subject to the
general penalty in § 1-19 of this code, the following enforcement
method may be used if, after inspection, the Building Inspector
determines that a violation exists in the Housing Code, and if it is
determined that the nature of such violation is not such as to threaten
imminent danger to the public health, safety, peace, peace, morals,
decency or welfare, but that the offense requires that correction orders
be issued as follows:
(1) Correction order. The Building Inspector, or his or her designee,
may issue a correction order reciting the existence of a building
code violation under this chapter or Chapter 279, Building
Construction; Chapter 286, Buildings, Numbering of; Chapter 292,
Buildings, Unsafe; or Chapter 581, Swimming Pools, and requiring
the owner or occupant of the premises to correct, remove or abate
the condition described in the order within the time period
specified therein.
(2) The correction order shall be served personally on the owner of the
property, as well as the occupant, if different from the property
owner, or at the option of the inspecting officer, the notice may be
mailed to the last known address with a return receipt. If the owner
or occupant cannot be served, the order may be served by posting
it on the main entrance of the premises and by publishing as a
Class 3 notice under Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The
time limit specified in the order runs from the date of completion of
service or publication.
(3) If the recipient of the correction order fails or refuses to comply
within the time period prescribed, the inspecting officer may issue
reinspection fees in accordance with this section.
B. The purpose of reinspection fees is as follows:
(1) To assist the City in paying the costs of enforcing its associated
zoning, housing, building, public nuisance, and other codes;
(2) To promote the appropriate regulation and control of buildings and
real estate in the City;
(3) To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the City;
(4) To help protect the character and the social and economic stability
of the City by eliminating public nuisances or other propertyrelated
violations;
(5) To help protect the value of land and buildings in the City;
(6) To help remedy problems associated with public nuisance and real
estate-related code violations in the City.
§ 402-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-7
1:317
C. Findings. In enacting the alternative enforcement of public nuisance,
zoning, housing and building regulation and other ordinances through
the issuance of correction orders and by charging reinspection fees, the
City Council finds that the cost of enforcement of the City codes related
to these codes is greater than the estimated revenues from reinspection
fees expected to be received under this section.
D. Reinspection fee. To compensate for inspection and administrative
costs under this section, a fee of $50 may be charged to the owner or
occupant of property for any reinspection by a City of Lake Mills
Building Inspector, or his or her designee, to determine compliance
with an order to correct conditions in violation of specified sections of
the Housing Code in this chapter or Chapter 279, Building
Construction; Chapter 286, Buildings, Numbering of; Chapter 292,
Buildings, Unsafe; or Chapter 581, Swimming Pools, of the Municipal
Code, except no fee shall be charged for the reinspection when
compliance is recorded. A fee of $100 may be charged for a second
reinspection, a fee of $200 for a third reinspection and a fee of $400 for
each subsequent reinspection for the same condition. A reinspection
fee may also be charged when the Building Inspector, or his or her
designee, finds a condition which is similar to a condition which was
subject to a correction order within one year prior to the inspection.
Reinspection fees shall be charged against the real estate upon which
the reinspections were made, shall be a lien upon the real estate and
shall be assessed and collected as a special charge. If there has been a
change of ownership or occupancy after the City issues a correction
order, the reinspection fee may be waived if it is determined that the
new owner or occupant was not aware of the prior order to correct a
violation or condition.
E. Any property owner or occupant that has received a correction order
under this section may, within 30 days of receipt of the order, appeal the
decision to issue the order under procedures set forth in Chapter 16,
Administrative Review, of the Lake Mills Municipal Code. The collection
of any reinspection fees incurred by the appellant shall be stayed while
the appeal is pending.
§ 402-7 LAKE MILLS CODE § 402-7
1:318
ARTICLE III
Housing Standards
§ 402-8. Minimum standards for basic equipment, lighting,
ventilation, heating and electrical service.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards
for basic equipment, lighting, ventilation and electrical services for all
residential buildings and parts thereof and to obtain the public and
private benefits accruing from the provision of such services. A suitable
environment for safe and healthy living is encouraged by adequate
water and sanitary facilities, proper storage and disposal of garbage
and other refuse, safe means of egress, provision of light, air, heat and
electrical service.
B. Requirement. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to
another for occupancy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living,
sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Kitchen sink and laundry tray. Every dwelling unit shall contain a
kitchen sink and laundry tray in good working condition and
properly connected to a water and sanitary sewer system approved
by the Building Inspector.
(2) Bathroom. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room within its walls,
separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy to a
person within said room and which is equipped with a flush water
closet, a lavatory basin and a bathtub or shower and the necessary
fixtures and accessories thereof in good working condition and
properly connected to hot and cold water lines and sanitary sewer
system approved by the County Health Officer and Building
Inspector. Such room shall be at least 14 square feet with a
minimum width of three feet. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) Egress (dwelling units and lodging rooms). Every dwelling unit and
lodging room shall have direct access to at least two accessible
unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open public
right-of-way at ground level as required by state and City codes.
(4) Passageways, stairways and exits (rental residential buildings).
Every residential building other than single-family or two-family
detached dwellings, and in every building which accommodates
transients, the public passageways and stairways and exit doors
shall be illuminated from sunset to sunrise. This illumination shall
include lights at all intersections of passageways, at all exits and at
the head, foot and landings of every stairway, in every building
which accommodates more than four families or 30 persons, and in
every building which accommodates transients. The lights at
emergency exit doors shall be red lights and shall be accompanied
§ 402-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-8
1:319
by a sign bearing the work "exit" or "out," in plain letters, five
inches in height.
(5) Windows.
(a) Every habitable room shall have outside windows having a
total area enclosed by the sash of at least 1/10 of the floor area
of the room, but not less than 12 square feet. The top of at least
one such window shall be not less than 50% of the required
window area and must open. Windows in each habitable room,
bathroom windows and all doors opening to the exterior of the
dwelling shall be provided with screen of not less than No. 16
wire mesh which will effectively prevent the entrance of flies
and mosquitoes. Provided, however, approved door closers
may be used in lieu of screen doors on exterior hallway doors
on apartment buildings. Every residential building having
basement windows or exterior basement doors shall have
screens of not less than No. 16 wire mesh on all doors and
windows, when open. Such required outside windows shall
open directly toward a street, alley or toward an unobstructed
approved yard or court on the same lot with the building.
(b) Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply
with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms
contained herein except interior bathrooms may be permitted
when approved as permitted by City and State codes.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(6) Electrical fixtures and receptacles. Every room shall contain such
electrical receptacles and fixtures as required by the City Code.
(7) Heating facilities. Every residential building shall have heating
facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in good
working condition and are capable of adequately heating all
habitable rooms to a temperature of 70° and all bathrooms and
water closet compartments to a temperature of 75° when outside
temperature is -25° F. All temperature readings to be taken from 42
inches to 48 inches above the floor when there are no drafts or
unusual wall conditions. All fuel-burning heaters shall be effectively
vented to assure proper draft. No unvented fuel-burning space
heaters allowed in sleeping rooms. Clearance around oil- and gasfired
room or space heaters shall be in accordance with the
clearance recommended by the National Board of Fire
Underwriters and the American Gas Institute.
(8) Water-heating facilities.
(a) Every residential building shall have supplied water heating
facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe
and good working condition and have a minimum withdrawal
§ 402-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 402-8
1:320
temperature capacity of 120° F. Every gas heating unit to be
equipped with a pilot light and automatic shutoff.
[1] Capacities.
[a] Tank storage: 100° F. rise/gallon per hour.
Number of
Units Gallons
Heating
Capacity
1 20 20
2 30 30
3 40 35
4 50 40
5 60 45
6 70 50
7 80 55
8 90 65
9 100 70
10 110 80
11 120 95
[b] Tankless type: 100° F. rise/gallon per minute.
Unit Served GPM
1 2.75
2 5.00
3 7.75
4 10.00
5 12.75
6 15.00
7 17.75
8 20.00
9 22.75
10 25.00
11 27.75
(b) No water heater in any sleeping room. No gas- or oil-fired
water heater in a bathroom, closet, under any stairway or in a
confined space with access only to above locations. All fuelburning
heaters to be connected to a vent to the exterior.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 402-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-9
1:321
§ 402-9. Quantity, location and use of space in residential buildings.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards
for the quantity, location and use of space in residential building units
so as to preserve and promote public interest. A suitable environment
for safe, healthy, and desirable living can be enhanced by providing
adequate space and privacy for occupants of all residential buildings.
B. Requirements. No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which
does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) First floor area. Every detached single-family dwelling other than
mobile homes shall be at least 500 square feet in floor area on the
first floor level.
(2) Floor area of dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain at
least 150 square feet of floor area for the first occupant thereof and
at least 100 additional square feet of floor area for every additional
occupant thereof, the floor area to be calculated on the basis of
total habitable room floor area. In every dwelling unit of two or
more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one
occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of habitable room
floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of habitable
floor area for each occupant thereof.
(3) Access to bathrooms. No dwelling unit containing two or more
sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangements that access to a
bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use by
occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had by going
through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be
such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going
through another room or a bathroom or water closet compartment.
(4) Ceiling heights. In all dwelling units, the average ceiling height
shall be not less than seven feet six inches and the minimum ceiling
height shall be not less than seven feet zero inches in the entire
floor area. The minimum ceiling height shall be seven feet six
inches for all floor areas above the first floor except under sloping
roofs, where the minimum shall be seven feet six inches for not less
than 50% of the floor area, and where that portion of the floor area
under the sloping roof having a ceiling height of less than five feet
shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the
maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
(5) Basement sleeping rooms. No sleeping room shall have its floor
level below the alley, court, yard or street grade immediately
adjoining and abutting upon said habitable rooms, except that in
single-family dwellings, it may be permitted when the following
conditions are complied with:
§ 402-9 LAKE MILLS CODE § 402-9
1:322
§ 402-10. Maintenance of property.
(a) The exterior walls shall be damp-proofed.
(b) A refrigerant air conditioner or dehumidifier shall be available
for use when needed, which is designed to handle the square
foot of the floor area on the sleeping or living lower level.
(c) Proper drainage away from exterior walls of the structure shall
be provided.
(d) Sash area of windows shall be at least 10% of the floor area of
the room. At least 50% of the required window sash area shall
open, or in lieu thereof, mechanical ventilation shall be
provided with a minimum capacity of two cubic feet per minute
per square foot of floor area.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to recognize the private and
public benefits resulting from the safe, sanitary and attractive
maintenance of residential and nonresidential buildings, structures,
yards and vacant area. Attractive and well-maintained property will
enhance the neighborhood and City and provide a suitable environment
for increasing physical and monetary values.
B. Requirements. Every owner or operator shall improve and maintain all
property under his control to comply with the following requirements:
(1) Grading. All courts, yards or other areas on the premises shall be
properly graded to divert water away from the building.
(2) Premises to be kept free of weeds. All exterior property area shall
be kept free of weeds.13
(3) Premises to be kept clean and sanitary. All exterior property areas
shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free
from debris, rubbish or garbage, physical hazards, rodent
harborage and infestation.
(4) Fences, walks, etc. Fences, other minor construction, walks,
driveways, parking areas and similar paved areas shall be properly
maintained in a safe, sanitary and substantial condition.
(5) Painting. Exterior surfaces of buildings and structures that are not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated
with a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative
which will provide adequate resistance to weathering and maintain
an attractive appearance.
(6) Landscaping, etc. Landscaping, plantings and other decorative
surface treatments shall be installed if necessary and maintained to
present an attractive appearance in all court and yard areas.
13.Editor's Note: See Chapter 271 of this City Code.
§ 402-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-10
1:323
Plantings shall be maintained so as not to present hazards to
adjoining properties or to persons or vehicles traveling on public
ways and shall be maintained so as to enhance the appearance and
value of the property on which located and thereby the appearance
and value of the neighborhood and City.
(7) Foundations, interior and floors. Every foundation, floor, wall,
ceiling and roof shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and
rodent-proof; shall be kept in proper repair and shall be capable of
affording privacy. Any sagging or bulging shall be properly repaired
to a level or plumb position. Interior walls and ceilings shall provide
a suitable base for decorative finish, a waterproof and hard surface
in spaces subject to moisture and shall not have noticeable surface
irregularities or cracking. Floor surfacing shall provide ease of
maintenance and durability appropriate for the use of the room.
(8) Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, and basement
hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and
rodentproof, and shall be kept in proper working condition and
repair.
(9) Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stair,
every porch, and every appurtenance thereto shall be so
constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load
that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept
in proper condition and repair and shall present an attractive
appearance.
(10) Plumbing and drainage. Every plumbing fixture and water and
waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good
working condition, free from defect, leaks and obstructions.
(11) Bathroom floors. Every water closet compartment floor surface and
bathroom floor surface shall be properly constructed and
maintained so as to be reasonable impervious to water and so as to
permit such floor to be easily kept in clean and sanitary condition.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(12) Equipment and utilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment,
or utility which is required by the City Code shall be so constructed
or installed that it will function properly, and shall be maintained in
proper working condition.
(13) Shutting off or removing required facilities and utilities prohibited.
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied
dwelling, dwelling unit or lodging room let or occupied while actual
repairs are in process, or during temporary emergencies when
discontinuance of service is approved by an authorized inspector.
§ 402-10 LAKE MILLS CODE § 402-11
1:324
§ 402-11. Responsibilities of owners of residential buildings.
A. Maintenance of public areas. Every owner of a residential building
containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for
maintaining in a clean, proper and sanitary condition the shared or
public areas of the residential building and premises thereof.
B. Duty to supply garbage and refuse facilities.14 The owner of every
residential building shall be responsible for supplying such building
with garbage and refuse storage facilities as follows:
(1) Rubbish storage and disposal. If stored outdoors, to be stored in
flytight, rodentproof, nonflammable, reasonably waterproof box or
container.
(a) If stored in basement or cellar or in enclosed structure, to be
stored in nonflammable containers.
(b) No loose rubbish allowed.
(2) Garbage storage and disposal. Disposed of in incinerator within
dwelling in sanitary manner; or disposed of in flytight and
watertight metal storage container (210 gallon maximum capacity);
or disposed of in garbage grinder discharging into sink drain.
(a) Outside storage container maintained and located so that no
odors permeate any dwelling units.
(b) Each container cleaned at least weekly.
(c) No loose garbage.
C. Screen, storm doors and windows. Every owner of a residential building
shall be responsible for hanging, installation and maintenance of all
screen and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same are
required under the provisions of the City Code.
D. Extermination. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the
dwelling units or lodging rooms in any residential building or in the
shared or public parts of any residential building, extermination thereof
shall be the responsibility of the owner.
E. Rented occupancy to be fit for human occupancy. The owner or operator
shall not occupy or let to another for occupancy any space in a
residential building unless it is clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy,
complies with the requirements of the City codes and the occupancy is
limited to the maximum permitted by said codes.
F. Duty to display agents for emergencies. Every owner shall neatly
display in a conspicuous, accessible place in every rented residential
building a list of not less than three alternate agents and their phone
14.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 556 of this Code for garbage and refuse.
§ 402-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-11
1:325
§ 402-12. Duties of occupants of residential buildings.
§ 402-13. Fire safety.
numbers to be called to arrange for emergency work required when the
owner or operator is not available. This list shall be maintained at all
times.
A. To keep occupied part clean and sanitary. Every occupant of a
residential building shall keep in a clean, proper and sanitary condition
that part of the residential building and premises thereof which he
occupies and controls except the operator of every lodging house shall
be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, ceilings
and every other part of the lodging house. Every occupant of a
residential building shall dispose all his refuse and garbage in the
containers required by the City Code.15
B. Plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all
plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be
responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and
operation thereof.
C. Extermination. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single
dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects,
rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises and every occupant
of a dwelling unit in a residential building shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a residential
building in a reasonable condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards
for basic fires afety for all residential buildings and parts thereof and to
obtain the public and private benefits accruing from the provisions of
this section.
B. Requirements. No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which
does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) No highly flammable or explosive material shall be stored in a
residence, and no dwelling unit allowed in a building utilizing
liquids with a flash point below 110° F.
(2) No materials shall be allowed to accumulate in locations that may
block egress from fires or interfere with firefighting operations.
(3) Every electric wire shall have adequate insulation maintained in
good condition.
15.Editor's Note: See §§ 402-11B and 556-2Bof this Code.
§ 402-11 LAKE MILLS CODE § 402-13
1:326
(4) All switch and outlet plates shall be properly fastened in position.
(5) All existing short circuits or breaks shall be immediately corrected.
(6) No temporary wiring, except proper extension cords from
appliances.
(7) Maximum fuse sizes shall be conspicuously posted on fuse box.
§ 402-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-13
1:327

ARTICLE IV
Lodging Houses and Rooms
§ 402-14. Permit required; fee.
§ 402-15. Requirements.
A. Requirement, fee.
(1) The owner or operator of every lodging house shall obtain a permit
from the Building Inspector for such premises in the name of the
owner and operator. The permit may be issued by the Building
Inspector after inspection and shall remain in force unless an
objection is filed with the Building Inspector by the Health
Department, Fire Department or Police Department. This objection
shall include a written statement concerning the specific
correctable violation of any existing City ordinance. The fee for said
permit shall be as set by City Council. The permit shall be displayed
in a conspicuous place in the public area of the building. No permit
shall be transferred from one address to another. Permits shall be
transferred to a new owner upon proper application. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
(2) The owner or operator of every lodging house shall make proper
application for a permit to the Building Inspector prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit for a new building, or within seven
days after the acquisition of an occupied building.
B. Revocation of permit. Whenever upon inspection of any such premises
the Inspector finds that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of any provision of this Code, the Inspector shall give notice in
writing to the owner or operator of such premises, that unless such
conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period, to be
determined by the Inspector but in any event not less than 15 nor more
than 30 days, the permit therefor will be suspended. At the end of such
period, the Inspector shall reinspect such premises, and if he finds that
such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall give
notice in writing to the owner or operator that the latter's permit has
been suspended. The Inspector shall, without unnecessary delay,
forward each written suspension to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a
hearing and a decision within the same time period as provided in
§ 402-6B. Permits may be revoked after an opportunity for a hearing
before the Zoning Board of Appeals. After a permit has been revoked,
each day of operation of the boarding and/or rooming house shall be
considered a separate offense.
A. Sleeping rooms. Every lodging room occupied for sleeping purposes by
one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of habitable floor area,
and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
person shall contain at least 50 square feet of habitable area for each
§ 402-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-15
1:329
occupant thereof, provided that not more than seven square feet of
closet space may be included per occupant. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Bathroom facilities. Each lodging house shall provide at least one flush
water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected
to an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition,
for each seven persons or fraction thereof residing therein, including
members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of said
facilities, except that the required number of bathtubs or showers may
be reduced by the Zoning Board of Appeals for lodging houses utilizing
gang bathrooms containing multiple bathtubs or showers. All such
facilities shall be accessible from a common hall or passageway.
Basement bathroom facilities shall not be considered as fulfilling this
requirement. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be
supplied with hot water at all times.
C. Lighting facilities. Each lodging room offered for rent shall be provided
with lamps or fixtures with bulbs having a total capacity of at least 150
watts incandescent or equivalent. Every such receptacle and fixture
shall be connected to the source of electrical power in a proper manner.
D. Linens and towels. The operator of every lodging house shall change
supplied linen and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to
the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and
sanitary condition.
E. Cooking facilities not permitted. The operator of every lodging house
shall not provide, use or permit to be used and the occupant shall not
provide, use or permit to be used, in lodging rooms occupied by
roomers or offered for rent to roomers, any equipment designed or
intended to be used for cooking or preparation of meals.
§ 402-15 LAKE MILLS CODE § 402-15
1:330
Chapter 411
IMPACT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and sewer — See Ch. 623.
§ 411-1. Introduction and purpose.
Pursuant to the authority of § 66.0617, Wisconsin Statutes, the local impact
fees enabling legislation, the purpose of this chapter is to establish the
mechanism for the imposition of impact fees upon new development to
finance the capital costs of acquiring, establishing, upgrading, expanding,
and constructing public facilities which are necessary to accommodate land
development. This chapter is intended to assure that new development
bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to
provide public facilities within the City of Lake Mills and its service areas as
they are required to serve the needs arising out of land development.
§ 411-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAPITAL COSTS — The capital costs to construct, expand or improve
public facilities, including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering
and design costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, except
that not more than 10% of capital costs may consist of legal, engineering
and design costs unless such costs which relate directly to the public
improvement for which the impact fees were imposed actually exceed 10%
of capital costs. "Capital costs" does not include other noncapital costs to
construct, expand or improve public facilities or the costs of equipment to
construct, expand or improve public facilities.
DEVELOPER — A person that constructs or creates a land development.
IMPACT FEES — Cash contributions, contributions of land or interests in
land or any other items of value that are imposed on a developer under this
chapter.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The construction or modification of
improvements to real property that creates additional residential dwelling
units within the City or its service areas or that results in nonresidential
uses that create a need for new, expanded or improved public facilities
within the City or its service areas.
PUBLIC FACILITIES — Highways, as defined in § 340.01(22), Wis. Stats.,
and other transportation facilities, traffic control devices, facilities for
collecting and treating sewage, facilities for collecting and treating storm
and surface waters, facilities for pumping, storing and distributing water,
§ 402-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-2
1:331
parks, playgrounds and land for athletic fields, other recreational facilities
(if those facilities have been substantially completed by June 14, 2006), solid
waste and recycling facilities, fire protection facilities, law enforcement
facilities, emergency medical facilities and libraries. "Public facilities" does
not include facilities owned by a school district.
SERVICE AREA — A geographic area delineated by the City Council within
which the City provides public facilities.
SERVICE STANDARD — A certain quantity or quality of public facilities
relative to a certain number of persons, parcels of land or other appropriate
measure, as specified by the City Council.
§ 411-3. Public facilities needs assessment.
New public facilities, or improvements or expansions of existing public
facilities that are required because of land development for which impact
fees will be imposed, are those which are identified in this chapter and
in facilities needs assessment reports prepared prior to the adoption of
this chapter and any amendments hereto. All facilities needs reports that
form the basis of any impact fee imposed by the City shall be kept on
file in the office of the City Clerk at least 20 days prior to any public
hearing to be held on the creation of this chapter and any amendments. A
Class I notice is required prior to any required hearing. All facilities needs
assessment reports shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk for the
entire period during which impact fees arising out of a specific report and
this chapter are collected prior to expenditure, and such report shall after
expenditure of all impact fees be maintained as a public record for such
time period as required by law.
§ 411-4. Impact fee revenue administration. [Amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 1057C]
All revenues from impact fees that have been or will be imposed or collected
under this chapter shall be collected, expended and refunded as specified in
Wis. Stats. § 66.0617 and this section.
A. Revenues from impact fees shall be placed in one or more separate
segregated, interest-bearing accounts and shall be accounted for
separately from other City general and utility funds. Impact fee
revenues and interest earned thereon may be expended only for capital
costs for which the impact fees were imposed and in accordance with
this section.
B. For impact fee revenues collected after April 10, 2006, if those fees are
collected within seven years of the effective date of the ordinance that
imposed the fee, then all such fees shall be used within 10 years after
the effective date of the ordinance that imposed the fees. If not so used
within 10 years, and if no resolution is adopted in accordance with
Subsection C of this section, then all such fees not expended within 10
years of collection shall be refunded to the current owner of the
property with respect to which the impact fees were imposed, along
§ 411-2 LAKE MILLS CODE § 411-4
1:332
with interest that has accumulated. For purposes of determining when
the ordinance that imposed each impact fee became effective, see
Subsection D.
C. The ten-year time limit for using impact fees under Subsection B may
be extended for three additional years if the City Council adopts a
resolution stating that, due to extenuating circumstances or hardship in
meeting the ten-year limit, the City needs an additional three years in
which to use the impact fees that were collected after April 10, 2006.
The resolution shall include detailed written findings that specify the
extenuating circumstances or hardship that led to the need to adopt a
resolution under this subsection.
D. The sewer impact fee imposed under this chapter was created when
Ordinance 709A became effective on June 15, 1995. The water impact
fee imposed under this chapter was created when Ordinance 709A
became effective on June 15, 1995. The park facilities impact fee
imposed under this chapter was created when Ordinance 709A became
effective on June 15, 1995. The community center impact fee imposed
under this chapter was created when Ordinance 738 became effective
on April 25, 1996.
E. The sanitary sewer impact fee that was originally imposed under this
chapter was created when Ordinance 709A became effective on June
15, 1995. The sanitary sewer impact fee was amended through the
adoption of Ordinance 1163 in May 2016, which ended the original
sanitary sewer impact fee, and which established new sanitary sewer
impact fees and impact fee zones. The water impact fee imposed under
this chapter was created when Ordinance 709A became effective on
June 15, 1995. The park facilities impact fee imposed under this chapter
was created when Ordinance 709A became effective on June 15, 1995.
The community center impact fee imposed under this chapter was
created when Ordinance 738 became effective on April 25, 1996.
[Amended 5-3-2016 by Ord. No. 1163]
F. With regard to impact fees that were collected after December 31,
2002, and before April 11, 2006, such impact fees must be used for the
purpose for which they were imposed not later than the first day of the
120th month beginning after the date on which the fees were collected.
Any such fee that is not used by that date shall be refunded to the
current owner of the property with respect to which the impact fee was
imposed, along with interest that has accumulated.
G. With regard to impact fees that were collected before January 1, 2003,
such impact fees must be used for the purpose for which they were
imposed not later than December 31, 2012. Any such fee that is not
used by that date shall be refunded to the current owner of the property
with respect to which the impact fee was imposed, along with interest
that has accumulated.
§ 411-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-5
1:333
§ 411-5. Use of impact fees.
Funds collected from impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of
paying the proportionate costs of providing public facilities that become
necessary due to land development. These costs may include the costs of
debt service on bonds or similar debt instruments when the debt has been
incurred for the purpose of proceeding with designated public facilities
projects prior to the collection of all anticipated impact fees for that project.
Impact fee revenues and interest earned on impact fee revenues may be
expended only for the particular capital costs for which the impact fee was
imposed, unless the fee is refunded, along with any accumulated interest,
under § 411-4B.
§ 411-6. Payment of impact fee. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. 1103
]
All required impact fees shall be payable in full by the developer or the
property owner to the City Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit.
A. Annexations.
(1) Any property or parcel of land annexed by the City of Lake Mills is
subject to the payment of sanitary sewer and water impact fees
under the conditions set forth in this section. Properties annexed
are benefited by the availability of sanitary sewer and the water
distribution system.
(2) Any property annexed by the City of Lake Mills which is developed
and currently connected to the sanitary sewer system is exempt
from the sanitary sewer impact fee.
(3) Undeveloped property annexed to the City of Lake Mills is subject
to the payment of sanitary sewer and water impact fees at the time
of development. Time of development is defined as the date of
application for any and all applicable building permits.
(4) Payment of impact fees for developed property requesting
annexation shall be paid prior to the final action of the City Council
on the annexation petition.
B. Existing laterals.
(1) Undeveloped land. Undeveloped land which has existing water and/
or sanitary sewer laterals shall pay impact fees at the time of
issuance of a building permit. This applies to undeveloped land in
the City of Lake Mills and to undeveloped land outside the City
which is within the sanitary sewer service area.
(2) Previously developed land. Land which has existing sanitary sewer
and/or water laterals due to previous development are exempt from
the payment of impact fees only if the lateral(s) have been unused
for less than one year as of the date of application for a building
§ 411-5 LAKE MILLS CODE § 411-6
1:334
§ 411-7. Appeals.
§ 411-8. Sanitary sewer impact fees. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 1057C; 5-3-2016 by Ord. No. 1163]
The basis for the imposition of sanitary sewer impact fees, and the
establishment of sanitary sewer impact fee zones, is the "Sanitary Sewer
Public Facilities Needs Assessment and Impact Fee Study Update" prepared
for the City of Lake Mills in December 2015, and which is on file in the office
of the City Clerk. The sanitary sewer impact fees, are shown below for each
impact fee zone, which are generally depicted in the Impact Fee Zones Map
2, which is incorporated herein by reference. The sanitary sewer impact
fees are subject to annual adjustments based on the consumer price index,
and are to be paid in accordance with § 411-6. The original, unadjusted
sanitary sewer impact fees are shown in Subsections A through E and are
permit. In the event the laterals have been unused one year or
more, impact fees for sanitary sewer and/or water shall be paid
prior to the issuance of a building permit. In the event a building
permit is not required, the impact fees shall be paid prior to the
initiation of service.
A. The developer or property owner upon whom an impact fee is imposed
may contest the amount, collection, or use of an impact fee as specified
herein. An appeal to contest either the amount or collection of any
impact fee imposed on a developer shall be commenced at any time
prior to endorsement of the approval certificate on any subdivision plat
or certified survey map by the City Clerk, but not later than 30 days
from the date of notification of final action approving such plat or
survey. An appeal to contest the amount or collection of an impact fee
may be commenced within 30 days of application for a building or
plumbing permit, if applicable to the particular impact fee. An appeal to
contest the use of an impact fee shall be commenced not later than 30
days prior to the award of any public contract for expenditure of the
collected fee revenues. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 1057C]
B. An appeal is commenced by filing a complaint with the City Clerk,
which complaint shall specify the impact fee use, amount or collection
that is the subject of the appeal and the basis for the appeal. The appeal
shall be scheduled for a hearing before the City Council at its next
regular meeting. The Council may take additional evidence and
testimony on the matter, including reports from City staff, based upon
the standards set forth in § 66.0617(6), Wis. Stats. The decision of the
City Council is final. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
C. An appeal regarding any refund due to a failure to expend the impact
fee within a specified period of time may be filed within 30 days of any
decision by the City Clerk not to refund the fee. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
§ 411-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-8
1:335
updated each July by resolution of the Council. Each dwelling unit in a
multifamily structure shall be treated as an individual one-inch connection.
A. Red Zone.
Meter Sizes
(inches) Impact Fee
5/8 $770
3/4 $770
1.0 $1,284
1.25 $1,798
1.50 $2,311
2.00 $3,467
3.00 $6,035
4.00 $9,501
Greater than 4.0 As determined by the Public
Works Board
B. Yellow Zone.
Meter Sizes
(inches) Impact Fee
5/8 $1,156
3/4 $1,156
1.0 $1,926
1.25 $2,696
1.50 $3,467
2.00 $5,200
3.00 $9,052
4.00 $14,251
Greater than 4.0 As determined by the Public
Works Board
C. Purple Zone.
Meter Sizes
(inches) Impact Fee
5/8 $1,156
3/4 $1,156
1.0 $1,926
1.25 $2,696
§ 411-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 411-8
1:336
Meter Sizes
(inches) Impact Fee
1.50 $3,467
2.00 $5,200
3.00 $9,052
4.00 $14,251
Greater than 4.0 As determined by the Public
Works Board
D. Blue Zone.
Meter Sizes
(inches) Impact Fee
5/8 $3,860
3/4 $3,860
1.0 $6,434
1.25 $9,008
1.50 $11,581
2.00 $17,372
3.00 $30,240
4.00 $47,611
Greater than 4.0 As determined by the Public
Works Board
E. All other areas.
Meter Sizes
(inches) Impact Fee
5/8 $96
3/4 $96
1.0 $159
1.25 $223
1.50 $287
2.00 $430
3.00 $749
4.00 $1,180
Greater than 4.0 As determined by the Public
Works Board
§ 411-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-8
1:337
§ 411-9. Water impact fees. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 1057C]
The basis for the imposition of water impact fees is the facilities needs
assessment report and its attachments, "Water Facilities Needs
Assessment," which is on file in the office of the City Clerk. The water
impact fees, where were originally imposed on June 15, 1995, and which are
subject to annual adjustments based on the consumer price index, are to be
paid in accordance with § 411-6.
F. These fees do not apply in cases where an existing building is being
hooked up to an existing sewer lateral or to a sewer lateral that has
been replaced or repaired, unless the size of the meter is increased. In
cases where an increase in the meter occurs, the differential between
the existing sewer service and the expanded sewer service shall be the
basis for determining the applicable impact fee, and such determination
shall be made by the Public Works Board. If such fee becomes
applicable, it shall be payable prior to the issuance of a building permit.
If no building permit is issued, then such fee shall be payable prior to
the issuance of any other required permits from the City of Lake Mills.
G. These fees shall be increased by resolution on July 1 of each year by a
percentage amount equal to the consumer price index from the
previous calendar year.
H. These impact fees shall be applicable to those properties which are
located in the unincorporated areas identified in the City of Lake Mills
sewer service area and which are required under § 623-20Ato connect
to sanitary sewer.
A. The original, unadjusted water impact fees are shown below, and are
updated each July by resolution of the Council.
Meter Sizes
(inches) Impact Fee
1.0 $1,596
1.25 $3,711
1.5 $5,826
2.0 $10,055
Greater than 2.0 As determined by the Public
Works Board
Each dwelling unit in a multifamily structure shall be treated as an
individual one-inch connection.
B. These fees do not apply in cases where an existing building is being
hooked up to an existing water lateral or to a water lateral that has
been replaced or repaired, unless the size of the meter is increased. In
cases where an increase in the meter occurs, the differential between
the existing water service and the expanded water service shall be the
§ 411-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 411-9
1:338
§ 411-10. Park facilities impact fees.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City to impose land
dedication requirements contained elsewhere in the Code on developers
as part of plat and certified survey map approvals under Ch. 236, Wis.
Stats. Notwithstanding the intent to impose land dedication requirements
on developers, separate park impact fees shall be imposed on property
owners in accordance with § 66.0617, Wis. Stats. Any dedication of land
required by the developer shall be credited to landowners who shall be
required under this chapter to pay park facilities impact fees if any such
impact fee would be used to pay for the same capital costs for which the
land dedication is required of the developer under Ch. 236.
basis for determining the applicable impact fee, and such determination
shall be made by the Public Works Board. If such fee is found to be
applicable, it shall be payable prior to the issuance of a building permit,
or if no building permit is issued or required, then prior to any other
necessary permit.
C. These fees shall be increased by resolution on July 1 of each year by a
percentage amount equal to the consumer price index from the
previous calendar year.
D. These impact fees shall be collected until all capital costs associated
with specified projects in the "Water Facilities Needs Assessment"
report have been incurred and satisfied, unless such time period for
collection or expenditure has been varied through § 411-4 and Wis.
Statutes § 66.0617. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 1057C]
E. In determining the time periods for expending water impact fees
collected for capital costs for which the impact fees have been imposed,
the City Council has considered and determined the appropriate
planning and financing periods to be as follows: [Amended 2-2-2010
by Ord. No. 1057C]
(1) For the construction of the water tower (elevated tank) and well
#6, and the water mains associated therewith, the appropriate
period of time for continued collection of water impact fees shall be
until the financing of these projects has been fully paid. The
construction of all water impact fee-related projects have been fully
completed prior to 2008.
(2) It is estimated that the bond and loans to fund these projects should
be fully satisfied by no later than April 10, 2026.
A. The basis for the imposition of a parks facilities impact fee is the
facilities needs assessment report and its attachments, "Park Facility
Needs Assessment," which is on file in the office of the City Clerk. The
parks facility impact fee was originally imposed and computed on July
15, 1995, to be $543. The park facilities impact fee is to be paid prior to
the issuance of a building permit. Each unit in a multifamily structure
§ 411-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-10
1:339
§ 411-11. Community center impact fee. [Amended 4-1-2008 by
Ord. No. 1029]
A community center is defined as a recreational facility and is therefore
subject to funding through impact fees under the provisions of Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0617. The basis for the imposition of a community center impact fee
is the Facilities Report for the City of Lake Mills, dated February 27, 1995,
and its attachments, which is on file in the office of the City Clerk. The
community center impact fee originally imposed in 1996 was $167 per
residential dwelling unit and is to be paid prior to the issuance of applicable
building permits. Each unit in a multifamily structure shall be treated as an
individual dwelling unit for the purposes of determining this impact fee.
shall be treated as an individual dwelling unit for the purposes of
determining the impact fee. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 1057C]
B. These fees shall be increased by resolution by July 1 of each year by a
percentage amount equal to the Consumer Price Index from the
previous calendar year.
C. These impact fees shall be collected until all capital costs associated
with specified projects in the "Parks Facilities Needs Assessment"
report have been incurred and satisfied, unless such time period for
collection or expenditure of individual fees has been varied by § 411-4
and Wis. Statutes § 66.0617. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
1057C]
D. In determining the length of the time periods for expending park facility
impact fees collected for capital costs for which the impact fees have
been imposed, the City Council has considered and determined the
appropriate planning and financing periods to be as follows: [Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 1057C]
(1) The construction of two soccer fields, one parking lot, two softball
fields, and the equipping of one playground at what has become
known as Wallace Park are the remaining projects to be funded by
impact fees in the Park Facilities Needs Assessment, and as of
2006, these projects had not yet been completed.
(2) It is estimated that the costs and loans to fund these projects from
park impact fees should be fully satisfied by no later than April 11,
2021.
A. These fees have been and will continue to be increased by resolution on
July 1 of each year by a percentage amount equal to the consumer price
index from the previous calendar year.
B. This impact fee shall be collected until all capital costs associated with
specified projects in the "Facilities Assessment" report have been
satisfied. The Community Center was constructed in 1998 and was
substantially complete in 1999, and the fees may be collected no later
than December 31, 2018, to pay for the financing of the portion of
§ 411-10 LAKE MILLS CODE § 411-11
1:340
Chapter 417
IN-LINE SKATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 264.
§ 417-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IN-LINE SKATES — Skates with wheels arranged singly in a tandem line
rather than in pairs.
§ 417-2. In-line skates prohibited on specified streets and
sidewalks.
§ 417-3. In-line skates permitted on certain streets and sidewalks.
In-line skating is permitted on all sidewalks within the City, except those
sidewalks enumerated in § 417-2A, and in-line skating is permitted on all
streets within the City, subject to the manner of use restrictions of § 417-4.
§ 417-4. Restrictions on manner of use.
capital costs of the construction of the community center which were
attributable to development. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
1057C]
A. In-line skating is prohibited on sidewalks adjacent to the following
streets: Main Street between Water Street and Madison Street; East
Lake Street between Ford Court and Main Street; West Lake Street
between Main Street and a point 260 feet west from the west line of
Church Street where Church Street intersects West Lake Street.
B. This section shall not preclude the crossing of any public roadway while
wearing in-line skates, provided the person so crossing the roadway
remains within an area marked as a pedestrian crosswalk.
A. Unless preparing to make a left turn, every person riding in-line skates
upon a roadway or street carrying two-way traffic shall ride as near as
practicable to the right edge of the unobstructed traveled roadway.
Every person riding in-line skates upon a roadway or street shall
exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in
the same direction, allowing a minimum of three feet between
themselves and the vehicle.
§ 411-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 417-4
1:341
§ 417-5. Parental responsibility.
Any parent or guardian of any child who authorizes or knowingly permits
such child to violate any provisions of this chapter may be issued a citation
and may be subject upon conviction to a fine of $20 plus costs for a first
offense, and a fine of $50 plus costs for subsequent offenses within one year
of the first offense.
§ 417-6. Violations and penalties.
B. Any person riding upon in-line skates upon any permitted roadway or
street in the City shall ride in a careful and prudent manner and with
due regard under the circumstances for the safety of all persons using
the roadway.
C. No person riding upon in-line skates may attach the in-line skates or
himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway or street in the City.
D. No person riding upon in-line skates may cross any roadway or street in
the City except within a crosswalk.
E. Every person riding in-line skates upon a sidewalk where permitted
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall exercise due
care when passing any other persons proceeding in the same direction.
F. Every person riding in-line skates upon a roadway or street in the City
shall during hours of darkness wear or have attached to themselves a
light or reflective material that is visible for a distance of 500 feet when
directly in front of lawful headlamps on a motor vehicle.
G. No person using in-line skates upon a roadway or street in the City shall
participate in any game, race, or speed or endurance contest with
another in-line skater, bicycle or vehicle. No person shall use their inline
skates at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under
existing conditions.
H. Persons riding in-line skates upon a roadway or street shall ride single
file.
I. Every rider of in-line skates shall, upon entering a roadway or street,
yield the right-of-way to vehicles.
J. Every person riding in-line skates upon any street in the City shall
observe all traffic signs and signals and shall stop at all "stop signs."
A. Any person 16 or older violating any provision of this chapter may be
subject to a forfeiture of not more than $20 for a first offense, and not
more than $50 for second and subsequent offenses within one year,
along with the costs of prosecution. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Any person between the ages of 12 and 16 years violating any provision
of this chapter may be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $10, plus
§ 417-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 417-6
1:342
Chapter 424
JUNK DEALERS; SALVAGE YARDS
§ 424-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK DEALER — Any person engaged in the business of collecting,
peddling, dealing in, or storing waste paper, rags, old metals, or other
materials commonly known as "junk."
MOTOR VEHICLE SALVAGE BUSINESS — Shall consist of the business of
dealing in, breaking up, or storing dismantled or salvaged motor vehicles.
§ 424-2. Licensing provisions. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No.
1103]
costs, for the first offense, and to a forfeiture of not more than $25,
plus costs of prosecution, for second and subsequent offenses within
one year.
C. Any person under 12 years of age violating any provision of this chapter
may be issued a violation warning notice along with the following
additional actions:
(1) First offense in one year: a warning letter sent to the parent or
guardian.
(2) Second offense in one year: a warning letter sent to the parent or
guardian requiring their signature and return of the warning notice
to the Police Department.
(3) Third and subsequent offenses in one year may be subject to a
citation being issued to the parent or guardian for violation of
§ 417-5.
D. Other remedies. Any person violating any provision of this chapter may
be subject to other remedies available by law, whether those remedies
are authorized by ordinance, statute, regulation, or order.
A. Requirement; fee.
(1) No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer or in the motor
vehicle salvage business without having first obtained a license
from the City Council to carry on such business. Application for
such license shall be made on forms furnished by the Clerk and
shall state the name of the applicant, the location of his place of
business and of his shop or yard and the description of any vehicles
to be licensed. In the case of a license for a junk dealer, the fee shall
§ 417-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-2
1:343
§ 424-3. Conditions of license.
All licenses granted hereunder shall be granted subject to the following
conditions and other conditions of this chapter, and subject to all other
ordinances and regulations of the City applicable thereto.
be as set from time to time by City Council. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) Upon approval by the Council and payment of the license fee, the
license shall be issued, signed by the City Manager and Clerk. Such
license shall expire on June 30 following its issue. Every such
license may be revoked for cause, and none of the licenses herein
mentioned shall be transferable.
B. Revocation. Upon complaint being made in writing by any municipal
official or resident of the City to the Clerk that any licensee has violated
any provisions of this section, the City Council shall summon such
licensee to appear before it at the time specified in the summons, which
shall be not less than three days after the date of the service thereof, to
show cause why his license shall not be revoked. The Council shall
proceed to hear the matter and if it finds the allegation of said
complaint to be true, it may revoke such license or suspend the same
for a specified time.
A. Consent to entry. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents
to the entry of the police or other duly authorized representatives of the
City at all hours for the purpose of inspection and search, and consent
to the removal from said premises of all things and articles there had in
violation of City ordinances or state laws and consents to the
introduction of such things and articles in evidence in any prosecution
that may be brought for such offenses.
B. Sanitary, safety requirements.
(1) Said premises and all structures thereon shall be so situated and
constructed that the business may be carried on in a sanitary
manner, shall contain no fire hazards, and shall be arranged so that
thorough inspection may be made at any time by the proper health,
fire, building and police authorities.
(2) All necessary steps must be taken to eliminate rodents and vermin.
C. Fence required. Every premises or enclosure, except a completely
enclosed building used in the conduct of the junk dealer's business or
the motor vehicle salvage business abutting or facing a residential
district, shall be enclosed by a tight fence or wall of uniform material
and construction, no less than six feet nor more than eight feet in
height, erected in such a manner as to obstruct the premises from
public view. In all other cases, such premises or enclosure shall have a
substantial fence not less than eight feet high along the street line.
§ 424-2 LAKE MILLS CODE § 424-3
1:344
§ 424-4. Hours of operation.
No licensee shall operate his business between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m., except in the case of an emergency, and the wrecking of motor
vehicles or farm implements shall not be conducted on Sundays or legal
holidays.
§ 424-5. Prohibited activities; purchase from minors.
No licensee shall purchase from any minor under 18 years of age any junk
or metals of any kind or description whatever without the written consent
of the parent or guardian of such minor.
Chapter 445
LICENSES AND PERMITS
Such fence or wall shall be maintained at all times in good condition by
the licensee.
D. Operation within building. The motor vehicle salvage business shall be
conducted entirely within a building, except that not more than six
parts of six motor vehicles may be permitted to remain in the open,
provided that no one vehicle shall remain in the open for more than 30
days.
E. Moving business. No licensee shall remove his place of business from
the place designated in the license until written permission has been
secured from the City Council and the same endorsed upon the license.
No licensee shall carry on the business at or from any other place than
the one designated in the license thereof. Nor shall said business be
carried on after such license has been revoked or has expired.
§ 424-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-5
1:345

ARTICLE I
Registration of Direct Sellers and Solicitors
[Adopted 6-6-1995 by Ord. No. 712A (Title 3, Ch. 2, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 445-1. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any direct seller or solicitor to engage in direct sales
or solicitation within the City of Lake Mills without being registered for the
purpose as provided herein, or for such person to engage in direct sales or
solicitation in a manner contrary to the regulations set forth herein.
§ 445-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Includes any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation,
or one purporting to be such.
CLERK — The City Clerk.
DIRECT SELLER — Any individual who, for him/herself or for a partnership,
association, or corporation, sells goods, or takes sales orders for the later
delivery of goods, at any location other than the permanent business place
or residence of said individual, partnership, association or corporation,
and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and transient
merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the direct
seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
GOODS — Includes personal property of any kind, and shall include goods
provided incidental to services offered or sold.
PERMANENT MERCHANT — A direct seller who, for at least one year
prior to the consideration of the application of this article to said merchant:
has continuously operated an established place of business in this City; or
has continuously resided in this City and now does business from his/her
residence.
SOLICITATION — The act or practice of soliciting, whether or not the
person soliciting receives any contribution. "Solicitation" includes, but is
not limited to, the sale of, or offer or attempt to sell, a membership or
any tangible item in connection with any request for financial support for a
charitable or nonprofit organization or purpose.
SOLICITOR — Any individual who, for him/herself or for a partnership,
association or corporation requests, directly or indirectly, a contribution
and states or implies that the contribution will be used for a charitable
purpose or will benefit a charitable or nonprofit organization.
§ 445-3. Exemptions.
A. The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this article:
§ 445-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-3
1:347
§ 445-4. Registration.
(1) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products, bakery
goods or similar items to regular customers on established routes;
(2) Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods;
(3) Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders
away from the established place of business for goods regularly
offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who
delivers such goods in their regular course of business;
(4) Any person who has an established place of business where the
goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in
which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically
requested a home visit by, said person.
B. The following shall be exempt from the registration requirements of
this article:
(1) Any person selling agricultural products which such person has
grown;
(2) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for or on behalf of said organization,
provided that there is submitted to the Clerk proof that such
charitable organization is registered under § 202.12, Wis. Stats., or
is exempt under § 202.12(5), Wis. Stats., from such registration.
(3) Any person issued a statewide peddler's license for ex-soldiers
under § 440.51, Wis. Stats.
A. Applicants for registration must complete and return to the Clerk a
registration form furnished by the Clerk which shall require the
following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if any;
(2) Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the direct seller or solicitor
represents or is employed by or whose merchandise is being sold;
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will
be conducted, if any;
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
goods offered, and any services offered;
(6) Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable;
§ 445-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 445-4
1:348
§ 445-5. Fees and service of process.
§ 445-6. Investigation.
(7) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by
applicant in the conduct of his/her business;
(8) Last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where applicant
conducted similar business or solicitations;
(9) Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving this City;
(10) Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime
or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchant
business or solicitations within the last five years; the nature of the
offense(s) and the place of conviction(s).
B. Applicants shall present to the Clerk for examination.
(1) A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required;
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of
weights and measures where applicant's business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities;
(3) A state health officer's certificate where applicant's business
involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under state law; such certificate to state that applicant is
apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated
not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for license is
made.
A. At the time the registration is returned, a fee of $20 shall be paid to the
Clerk to cover the cost of processing said registration.
B. The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Clerk his/her agent
to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the
applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant
in connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant, in the
event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served
personally.
C. Upon payment of said fee and the signing of said statement, the Clerk
shall register the applicant as a direct seller or solicitor and date the
entry. Said registration shall be valid for a period of one year from the
date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in § 445-6B
below.
A. Upon receipt of each application, the Clerk may refer it immediately to
the Chief of Police who may make and complete an investigation of the
statements made in such registration.
§ 445-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-6
1:349
§ 445-7. Appeal.
Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal
procedure provided under the provisions of §§ 68.07 through 68.16, Wis.
Stats.
§ 445-8. Regulation of direct sellers and solicitors.
B. The Clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined,
pursuant to the investigation above, that: the application contains any
material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a
material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities
in the last cities, villages and towns, not exceeding three, in which the
applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was convicted of a
crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five
years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to
engage in direct selling or solicitation; or the applicant failed to comply
with any applicable provision of § 445-4B above.
A. Prohibited practices.
(1) A direct seller or solicitor shall be prohibited from: calling at any
dwelling or other place between 1/2 hour after sunset and 9:00
a.m. except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place
where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No
Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of
any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises after being asked
to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority
over such premises.
(2) A direct seller or solicitor shall not misrepresent or make false,
deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality,
quantity or character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of
his/her visit, his/her identity or the identity of the organization he/
she represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall
specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being
offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which
the organization is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as a
percentage of the sale price of the goods.
(3) No direct seller or solicitor shall impede the free use of sidewalks
and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. No sales may be
conducted in the public right-of-way, including streets, tree lawns,
sidewalks, and public parking lots, unless otherwise permitted
during the public market under a license granted to the Main
Street Program, and then only if specifically authorized in the
license. [Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 1031]
(4) No direct seller or solicitor shall make any loud noises, or use any
sound-amplifying device to attract customers in any public place in
the City.
§ 445-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 445-8
1:350
§ 445-9. Records.
The Chief of Police shall report to the Clerk all convictions for violation of
this article and the Clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the
registrant convicted.
§ 445-10. Revocation of registration.
(5) No direct seller or solicitor shall allow rubbish or litter to
accumulate in or around the area in which he/she is conducting
business.
B. Disclosure requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospective customer, a direct seller or solicitor shall expressly
disclose his/her name, the name of the company or organization he/
she is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of goods or services or
memberships he/she offers to sell.
(2) If any sale of goods or memberships is made by a direct seller or
solicitor, or any sales order for the later delivery of goods is taken
by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel said
transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash
transaction of more than $25, in accordance with the procedure as
set forth in § 423.203, Wis. Stats.; the seller shall give the buyer
two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice
shall conform to the requirements of § 423.203(1)(a), (b) and (c),
(2), (3) and (3m), Wis. Stats.
(3) If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of
goods, he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the
buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the
agreement, the amount paid in advance whether full, partial or no
advance payment is made, the name, address and telephone
number of the seller, the delivery or performance date and whether
a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof.
A. Registration may be revoked by the City Council after notice and
hearing, if the registrant made any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement in the application for registration, made any
fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation
in the course of engaging in direct sales, violated any provision of this
article or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation
which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in direct
selling or soliciting.
B. Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the
registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing; such
notice shall contain the time and place of hearing and a statement of
the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
§ 445-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-11
1:351
§ 445-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this article shall forfeit
not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each violation plus costs of
prosecution. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 445-11 LAKE MILLS CODE § 445-11
1:352
ARTICLE II
Vendor's License
[Adopted 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 1031 (Title 3, Ch. 11, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 445-12. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all public property owned and
controlled by the City of Lake Mills, including but not necessarily limited to
parks and recreation areas, or other public property.
§ 445-13. Vendor's license required for sale of merchandise.
[Amended 9-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1164]
No person, corporation, group, club or association may sell or give away any
merchandise of any kind in any park or playground or on any other public
property owned or controlled by the City, including rights-of-way, sidewalks,
or parking lots, without a vendor's permit, as provided in this chapter. No
person, corporation, group, club or association may sell merchandise of any
kind at or in Bartel's Beach. This chapter shall not apply to the following
situations:
§ 445-14. Application for license. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No.
1103]
Each person, club, organization, group or corporation desiring to apply for a
vendor's license to sell or give away merchandise in any park or playground,
or on any other public property owned or controlled by the City, shall file
an application with the City Clerk on a form approved by the Parks and
Forestry Director. The application shall contain the following information:
A. The person, club, organization, group or corporation has obtained a
Temporary Retail Class "B" or "Class B" liquor license under § 249-2 , or
has obtained a sidewalk cafe license under § 548-3.
B. The person, club, organization, group or corporation has been
permitted to sell merchandise under the public market permit issued
under § 512-1.
C. The person, club, organization, group or corporation has been
authorized by the Council or Parks and Forestry Director to sell
merchandise under a special permit for events in the parks, such as the
periodic festivals or events in Commons Park, Sandy Beach Park or
Rotary Park.
D. The seller is authorized to sell merchandise under the direction of the
Rotary Club in the concession stand at Rotary Park.
E. The seller is authorized by the Council to sell merchandise in the bait
shop or at the Sand Bar Restaurant at Sandy Beach Park.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
§ 445-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-14
1:353
§ 445-15. Fees and license type and duration. [Amended 5-20-2014
by Ord. No. 1128]
§ 445-16. Conditions of vendor's license. [Amended 5-20-2014 by
Ord. No. 1128]
B. The location where the applicant proposes to sell or give away
merchandise.
C. The articles of merchandise proposed to be sold or given away.
D. A description of any equipment that the vendor plans to use, including
not only food preparation and food-serving equipment, but also any cart
or stand or display proposed to be used in the operation.
E. The time period during which the vendor proposes to sell merchandise,
including the hours of operation and the days of the week when sales
are anticipated to occur.
F. A drawing of the footprint of the area of public property, including
dimensions, where the applicant proposes the operation will occupy.
A. The annual license fee of $150 shall be paid by the applicant prior to
issuance of the vendor's license, and such license shall automatically
expire each year on December 31.
B. A weekly license may be obtained by applying for a weekly license, if
approved by the Parks and Forestry Director and if a weekly license fee
of $25 is paid prior to issuance of the license.
C. A single-use license option is available for no fee for civic groups, school
groups, fund-raisers, and annual cookie sales by such groups if
conducted on one day only, and if approved by the Parks and Forestry
Director.
D. Applications for new licenses may be made at any time after November
1.
E. Consideration in renewals will be given to existing licensees, if all other
factors remain equal.
A. Vendor's licenses, if granted by the Parks and Forestry Director, may be
subject to conditions, including but not necessarily limited to a
requirement that the licensee must move its operation to a new location
of the Parks and Forestry Director's choosing if the licensee is so
notified. Possible reasons for requiring a change in location may include
but not necessarily be limited to park maintenance, making it necessary
that the operation move to a new location, or safety concerns,
necessitating that the operation move for the safety of the public.
B. If the licensee is so notified to move the operation, a reasonable period
of time to move the operation may be granted by the Parks and Forestry
Director, with such time not to exceed 24 hours, unless for good cause
§ 445-14 LAKE MILLS CODE § 445-16
1:354
§ 445-17. Revocation of vendor's licenses.
Failure to comply with the conditions of the license shall be deemed to be
grounds to revoke the license. The Parks and Forestry Director is authorized
to revoke any license for violation of the license conditions or any other
applicable ordinance or park rule. Anyone aggrieved by the decision to
revoke the license may appeal in writing within five days for a hearing
before the City Manager on the issue of license revocation.
§ 445-18. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, group, club or association violating any provision
of this chapter may be subject to a citation issued by the Lake Mills Police
Department that has a penalty of not less than $50, plus costs, for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
shown the time period may be extended by the Parks and Forestry
Director.
C. The licensee shall also be deemed to be bound by all park rules and
applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in
writing in said license. The licensee shall also be prohibited from selling
merchandise within any public right-of-way, which shall include public
streets, tree lawns, sidewalks or parking lots.
D. To allow for park maintenance, vendors are prohibited from operating
in the parks on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays between May 1 and
November 1.
E. Vendors operating under a vendor's license in Commons Park may not
operate on Wednesdays between May 1 and November 1, but they are
encouraged to apply with the Lake Mills Main Street Program to
become authorized to vend during the Farmers' Market held on
Wednesdays.
F. Vendors are prohibited from operating in any park during previously
scheduled events in that park. Vendors are encouraged to contact the
Parks and Forestry Director to verify whether an authorized event has
been scheduled.
§ 445-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-18
1:355

ARTICLE III
Weights and Measures Licenses
[Adopted 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 992 (Title 3, Ch. 10, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 445-19. Purpose.
This article adopts the State of Wisconsin Weights and Measures
Regulations and establishes a Weights and Measures Program wherein
any person or entity subject to said regulations must obtain a license in
order for the City to comply with and recoup the costs of enforcing said
regulations. This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
98, Wis. Stats.
§ 445-20. Application of state codes.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the provisions of
Chapter 98, Wis. Stats., Weights and Measures and Chapters ATCP 90,
91 and 92 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code are hereby adopted and
by reference made a part of this article as though fully set forth herein.
Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute or code
incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this article.
Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes and codes
incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this article.
§ 445-21. State contract; appointment of inspectors; compliance
required.
A. State contract. In order to assure compliance with the requirements of
the State of Wisconsin related to the inspection and certification of
weights and measures, the City shall contract with the State of
Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection,
pursuant to § 98.04(2), Wis. Stats., in lieu of the establishment of a
department of weights and measures.
B. Appointment of inspectors. The provisions of the contract set forth in
Subsection A shall provide for the enforcement of the statutes and
regulations set forth herein, and the City hereby grants the authority
and duties of sealers and inspectors required by this article to the State
of Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer
Protection.
C. Compliance required. All persons and entities required to be licensed
hereunder shall comply with the enforcement of the statutes and
regulations set forth herein; shall comply with the orders and
inspections of the inspectors appointed herein, and shall comply with
the licensing requirements set forth herein.
§ 445-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-22
1:357
§ 445-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES — Weights and measures of every kind,
instruments and devices for weighing and measuring, and any appliances
and accessories used with any or all such instruments and devices, except
meters for the measurement of electricity, gas (natural and manufactured)
or water when the same are operated in a public utility system. Weights
and measures shall include devices used or employed in establishing the
size, quantity, extent, area or measurement of quantities, things, produce
or articles for sale, hire or award, or in computing any basic charge or
payment for services rendered on the basis of weight or measure, and
shall include, but not be limited to, commodities, liquid-measuring devices,
scales, weighing, measuring, price verification systems, timing devices and
linear measuring devices.
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES PROGRAM — The program that includes
administration and enforcement of this article, Chapter 98, Wis. Stats.,
applicable Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions, and any related
actions.
§ 445-23. Weights and measures license required.
§ 445-24. Types of licenses.
A. License requirements. Except as provided in Subsection B, no person or
entity shall use, operate or maintain any commercial weights and
measures as defined in this article unless the person or entity is
licensed by a Weights and Measures License issued pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
B. Exemptions. Sales by a person registered as a direct seller, or by a
holder of a farmers' market, vendor or special event permit are exempt
from licensing under this article, but if any person exempted herein is
required by the state to hold a State Certificate of Examination by the
Sealer of Weights and Measures, a copy of said certificate shall be
provided to the City with his or her application for said permit.
A. There shall be five classes of licenses that shall correspond to the type
of the business regulated by the weights and measures program and
the amount of time necessary for inspection of the weights and
measures of that business. The fee for the license shall be uniform for
all classes of licenses, in an amount set by the City Council, and shall
not exceed the cost of administering the weights and measures license
program.
B. The classes of licenses shall be:
(1) Class 1, which shall cover large grocers (more than two checkout
points);
§ 445-22 LAKE MILLS CODE § 445-24
1:358
§ 445-25. Application for license. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No.
1103]
An application for a weights and measures license shall be made in writing
on a form provided by the City Clerk and shall be signed by the owner of
the commercial business or by its authorized agent. Such application shall
state the type of the business, the type and number of weighing, measuring
and scanning devices used by the business, the location of the devices,
the number of checkout lanes present on the premises, the applicant's full
name, post office address and telephone, and whether such applicant is
an individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other
entity. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the names
and addresses of each partner. If the applicant is a corporation or limitedliability
company, the application shall state the names and addresses of all
officers and agents of the applicant, including the registered agent thereof.
§ 445-26. Issuance of licenses and fees. [Amended 12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 1103]
Upon compliance with this article, the City Clerk shall determine the class
of license to be issued, and shall issue a license to the applicant upon
payment of the annual license fee set by the City Council. Each store or
other business shall require a separate license.
§ 445-27. License term.
(2) Class 2, which shall cover large gas stations (more than 12 fuel
meters) and large retailers (more than two checkout points);
(3) Class 3, which shall cover businesses that operate vehicle scales,
LPG meters and vehicle tank meters, small gas stations (12 or
fewer fuel meters), and small grocers (two or fewer checkout
points);
(4) Class 4, which shall cover small retailers (two or fewer checkout
points); and
(5) Class 5, which shall cover laundromats and small businesses not
elsewhere classified.
C. If a person or entity falls into more than one category, the person or
entity shall be required to obtain the higher (lower-numbered)
classification of license.
A. A license issued under this article shall expire on June 30 of each year.
Except as provided in Subsection B., the license fee shall not be
prorated for a partial year.
B. The initial license issued to businesses existing on the effective date of
this article shall be for the balance of the year 2006, and the license fee
shall be 1/2 of the cost of a full year's license.
§ 445-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-28
1:359
§ 445-28. Enforcement for nonrenewal. [Amended 12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 1103]
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to notify appropriate City officials and
to order the immediate enforcement of the provisions of this article in cases
involving a failure to renew a Weights and Measures License. A licensee
shall be prohibited from engaging in any business involved in weights and
measures until such time as a valid license has been obtained under the
provisions of this article.
§ 445-29. Fees assessment.
A. Annual assessment. In addition to the cost of the license, the City
Council shall annually assess fees to each licensee based on the class of
license it holds. The total of the fees assessed and collected under this
subsection shall not exceed the actual costs of the weights and
measures contract between the city and the state.
B. Clerk to prepare assessment schedule. The City Clerk shall at least
annually prepare a proposed schedule of assessments for each class of
license, which shall be based upon the state contract changes, to be
submitted to the City Council. A copy of the proposed schedule together
with notice of the date and time at which the City Council will consider
the assessments shall be mailed to each licensee. If the Clerk fails to
prepare the annual schedule or notify the participant, the assessment
shall not increase over the prior year's assessment. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
C. City Council to determine assessment. At least 10 days after the mailing
set forth in Subsection B, the City Council shall consider the Clerk's
proposed schedule of assessments and determine the schedule of
assessments on a reasonable basis. The City Clerk shall mail to each
licensee an invoice for the amount of the fee assessment as determined
by City Council, and each licensee shall pay the fee assessed within 30
days after the date the notice was mailed. [Amended 12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 1103]
D. Failure to pay assessment. If the assessed fee is not paid within 30 days
of the date of the mailing of the invoice, an additional administrative
collection charge of $20 shall be added to the amount due, plus interest
shall accrue on the assessment at the rate of 1.5% per month or fraction
thereof until paid. To the extent permitted by law, if the licensee is the
owner of the real estate where the licensed business is located, any
delinquent assessment shall be extended upon the current or the next
tax bill as a special charge against the real estate premises for current
services. No license shall be issued or renewed under this article if the
licensee is delinquent in the payment of a fee assessed under this
article.
§ 445-28 LAKE MILLS CODE § 445-29
1:360
§ 445-30. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other remedy, any person who fails to comply with the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than
$100 nor more than $250. Each day a violation exists or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
E. Mailing of notices. Schedules, notices and invoices shall be considered
mailed to a licensee when mailed by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at the licensee's address as shown on the application form.
F. Change of ownership. If the ownership of a commercial business
licensed under this article is transferred during a license year, the
owner of the business as of July 1 of the license year shall be liable and
responsible for the payment of the fees assessed under this article.
§ 445-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-30
1:361
Chapter 463
MINORS
§ 445-30 LAKE MILLS CODE § 445-30
1:362
ARTICLE I
Curfew
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Sec. 5-1-8 of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 463-1. Hours; exceptions. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
No person under the age of 18 years shall be at large upon the streets and
roads or elsewhere within the City between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. of the next day on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday
and between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on Friday or Saturday, except
that such person may lawfully be so at large if he or she is:
§ 463-2. Duty of proprietors.
It shall be the duty of the proprietors of any public places or their agents to
remove any such minor from the premises of such public places who are in
violation of this article.
§ 463-3. Parental responsibilities.
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any child under the age of
18 years to allow his or her child or ward to violate this article.
A. Upon the premises appertaining to his or her home;
B. At a private residence with permission of an adult in control of the
premises and with permission granted by his or her parent or guardian;
C. In direct route to or from his or her place of employment, or in direct
route to or from a school-or church-sponsored activity or event which is
supervised by an adult; or
D. Accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian.
§ 463-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-3
1:363

ARTICLE II
Truancy
[Adopted 9-2-2003 by Ord. No. 918 (Sec. 5-1-10 of the 2009 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 463-4. Prohibiting truancy, habitual truancy and contributing to
truancy.
Pursuant to § 118.163, Wis. Stats., the City of Lake Mills hereby prohibits
truancy, habitual truancy and contributing to truancy.
§ 463-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE EXCUSE — Has the meaning given that term in §§ 118.15,
118.16(4), Wis. Stats., which are incorporated herein by reference, along
with any amendments.
HABITUAL TRUANT — A pupil subject to compulsory school attendance
laws who is absent without an acceptable excuse for part or all of five or
more days on which school is held during a school semester, as provided in
§ 118.16(1)(a), Wis. Stats., which is incorporated herein by reference, along
with any amendments.
OPERATING PRIVILEGE — Has the meaning given in § 340.01(40), Wis.
Stats.
SCHOOL ATTENDANCE OFFICER — As defined in § 118.16(1)(b), Wis.
Stats., along with any amendments, and which states that such officer is
a school district employee designated by the school board to deal with
matters relating to school attendance and truancy.
TRUANT — A pupil subject to compulsory school attendance laws who is
absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part or all of any
day on which school is held during a school semester, as provided in
§ 118.163(1)(d), Wis. Stats.
§ 463-6. Truancy.
No pupil subject to school attendance laws shall be truant.
§ 463-7. Habitual truant.
No pupil subject to school attendance laws shall be habitually truant.
§ 463-8. Contributing to truancy.
No person 17 years of age or older shall by any act or omission, knowingly
encourage or contribute to the truancy, as defined in § 118.16(1)(c), Wis.
Stats., of a person 17 years of age or under. An act or omission contributes
to the truancy of a child, whether or not the child is adjudged to be in need
§ 463-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-8
1:365
of protection or services, if the natural and probable consequences of that
act or omission would be to cause the child to be truant. This prohibition
does not apply to a person who has under his or her control a child who
has been sanctioned under § 49.26(1)(h), Wis. Stats., Learnfare under the
Wisconsin Works Program.
§ 463-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-2004 by Ord. No.
940]
A. Upon receipt of evidence from the school attendance officer that
appropriate school personnel have performed all duties required under
§ 118.16(5), Wis. Stats., an action may be commenced in Municipal
Court by any law enforcement officer, and upon a finding of guilt the
Municipal Court may issue any of the following orders:
(1) An order for the child to attend school.
(2) An order for the child to be placed in a teen court program as
described in § 938.342, Wis. Stats.
(3) An order for the child to remain at home, except during hours in
which the child is attending religious worship or a school program,
including travel time required to and from the school program or
place of worship. The order may permit the child to leave his or her
home if the child is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
(4) An order for the child to attend an educational program as
described in § 938.34(7d), Wis. Stats.
(5) An order for the department of workforce development to revoke,
under § 103.72, Wis. Stats., a permit under § 103.70, Wis. Stats.,
authorizing the employment of the child.
(6) An order for the child to participate in counseling or a supervised
work program or other community service work as described in
§ 938.34(5g), Wis. Stats. The costs of any such counseling,
supervised work program or other community service work may be
assessed against the child, or the parents or guardian of the child,
or both.
(7) Suspension of the child's operating privilege for not less than 30
days nor more than one year. The court may take possession of any
suspended license. If the court takes possession of a license, it shall
destroy the license. The court shall forward to the Department of
Transportation a notice stating the reason for and the duration of
the suspension. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(8) A forfeiture of not more than $500 plus costs, subject to § 938.37,
Wis. Stats. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed
against the child, the parents or guardian, or both.
§ 463-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 463-9
1:366
(9) An order for the child's parent, guardian or legal custodian to
participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's or legal
custodian's expense or to attend school with the child, or both.
(10) Any other reasonable conditions consistent with this article,
including curfew, restrictions on coming and going to or remaining
on specified premises and restrictions on associating with other
children or adults.
B. Upon receipt of evidence from the school attendance officer that
appropriate school personnel have performed all duties required under
§ 118.16(5), Wis. Stats., an action may be commenced in Municipal
Court by any law enforcement officer by issuance of a municipal citation
for violation of § 463-8, and upon a finding of guilt, the court may issue
any appropriate and applicable orders listed above.
C. Upon observation by any law enforcement officer of such facts or
circumstances giving rise to probable cause to believe that a child is
violating § 463-6, such officer may initiate an action in Municipal Court
by the issuance of a municipal citation, for which, if adjudged guilty, the
child shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50, plus costs, for
a first offense and a forfeiture of not less than $100, plus costs, for any
second or subsequent violation within one year of the first violation,
subject to a maximum cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than
$500 for all violations of § 463-6 committed during a school semester.
The forfeiture and costs may be assessed against the child, or the
parent or guardian, or both. In addition to assessing a forfeiture and
costs, the court may also order the child to attend school.
§ 463-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-9
1:367
Chapter 470
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 650. Zoning regulations — See Ch. 660.
§ 470-1. Purpose and authority.
To protect and promote public health, morals and welfare and to equitably
defray the cost of municipal and educational services required by persons
and families using or occupying mobile home parks for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, and to comply with state statutes, the City Council hereby
establishes licensing requirements for mobile home parks located within the
City. Under the authority of § 66.0435, Wis. Stats., all mobile home parks in
existence shall, within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter, and any
new mobile home parks shall, prior to parking or siting any mobile home in
such park, be licensed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 470-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME — A mobile home which does not have
complete bathroom facilities.
LICENSEE — Any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home
park under this chapter.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The City of Lake Mills.
MOBILE HOME — That which is, or was as originally constructed, designed
to be transported by any motor vehicle upon a public highway and designed,
equipped and used primarily for sleeping, eating and living quarters, or is
intended to be so used; and includes any additions, attachments, annexes,
foundations and appurtenances. "Mobile home" also means a unit designed
to be towed or transported and used as a residential dwelling, but does not
include a unit used primarily for camping or touring. "Mobile home" also
means manufactured home if the manufactured home is set up, sited, or
attached to a foundation within a mobile home park, if the manufactured
home is not on a separate zoning lot meeting required setbacks and if the
manufactured home is not directly connected to publicly owned sewer and
water mains through its independent private lateral.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot or plots of ground upon which two
or more units, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located,
regardless of whether there is a charge made for such accommodation.
§ 463-9 LAKE MILLS CODE § 470-2
1:368
NONDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME — A mobile home equipped with
complete bath and toilet facilities, all furniture, cooking, heating,
appliances and complete year-round facilities.
PARK — Mobile home park.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association,
corporation or limited liability company.
SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the
accommodation of one mobile home unit.
UNIT — A mobile home or manufactured home unit located in a mobile
home park.
§ 470-3. Parking mobile homes.
§ 470-4. Location of mobile home parks.
§ 470-5. License for mobile home parks.
A. Except as provided in this chapter, or as otherwise provided in the Lake
Mills Municipal Code, no person shall park any mobile home or
manufactured home on any street, alley or highway or other public
place or any tract of land owned by any person within the City.
B. No person shall park, set up, or occupy any mobile home or
manufactured home on any premises which is situated outside an
approved, licensed mobile home park, except as herein provided, or
except as otherwise permitted in Chapter 660, Zoning Regulations,of
this Code. Any such mobile home located and occupied outside a mobile
home park shall be subject to the monthly parking permit fee. Any such
manufactured home attached to a foundation on a separate zoning lot
within the City shall be subject to all zoning restrictions for singlefamily
dwellings, and shall be subject to appropriate real estate
property taxes.
A. Mobile home parks shall be allowed only as a conditional use in the
R3-12, Multifamily Residential-12 District, as shown on the Official
Map, and as regulated under Chapter 660, Zoning Regulations, of the
Lake Mills Municipal Code. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Individual manufactured homes may be located in residential zoning
districts as shown on the Official Map and as regulated under Chapter
660, Zoning Regulations, and provided individual zoning lots meet the
requirements of Chapter 660, Zoning, and provided the manufactured
home meets the provisions of § 600-75, and provided the lot or lots are
established under the requirements of Chapter 650, Subdivision
Regulations.
A. No person shall establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be
established, operated or maintained upon any property owned, leased
§ 470-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-5
1:369
or controlled by him or her, a mobile home park within the limits of
the City, without first having secured a license for such park from the
City Council. Such license shall expire on December 31 after the date
of issuance, but may be renewed for additional periods of one year.
B. The application for such license or renewal thereof shall be filed with
the Clerk and shall be accompanied by fees are established by the City
Council pursuant to § 66.0435(3)(a), Wis. Stats. License fees shall not
be prorated for part of a year. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No.
1103; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
C. Application for a license or a renewal thereof shall be made on forms
furnished by the Clerk and shall include the name and address of the
owner in fee of the tract of land, and if the fee is vested in some person
other than the applicant, a duly verified statement under oath by that
person that the applicant is authorized by him or her to construct or
maintain the mobile home park and to make the application. Such legal
description of the premises upon which the park is or will be located as
will readily identify and definitely locate the park shall be included in
the application. The application shall be accompanied by a copy of the
park plan showing the following, either existing or as proposed:
[Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
(1) The extent and area used for park purposes.
(2) Roadways and driveways.
(3) Location and number of units and other structures within the park.
(4) Location and number of sewer and water connections within the
park, including any connections to utility and laundry buildings on
the premises.
(5) Method and plan for garbage, refuse, and recyclables removal, and
such removal shall be on substantially the same basis as like
removal is handled for the City at large.
(6) If the existing or proposed park is designed to serve nondependent
units, plans shall be submitted which clearly set forth the location
of all sewer and water laterals or mains, in addition to connections.
(7) The name and precise location of premises occupied by the
attendant or manager, if any, on site at the park.
D. The Clerk may request further information upon receipt of application
to determine that the mobile home park complies with the following
requirements of the license:
(1) Every mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained area,
and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the
accumulation of storm or other waters.
§ 470-5 LAKE MILLS CODE § 470-5
1:370
§ 470-6. Parking permit fees.
(2) Every mobile home park designed to serve more than two
dependent units shall have erected thereon a suitable building or
buildings for housing toilets, lavatories, showers, slop sinks and
laundry facilities, such buildings to be known as "service
buildings." Service buildings shall be located not more than 200
feet from any dependent unit space no closer than 15 feet from any
unit space. Such building shall be of permanent construction and
adequately lighted, screened and ventilated. Mobile home parks
with dependent mobile homes, where the only case in which the
dependent mobile homes do not meet the nondependent mobile
home definition as it relates to complete year-round facilities, shall
be exempt from this requirement, provided the park is closed
during winter months, and provided the water and sewer facilities
are properly winterized.
(3) Every space designed to serve a nondependent unit shall be
provided with sewer connections which shall comply with the State
Plumbing Code.
E. The City Council may grant a license to an applicant if the Clerk has
received all required and requested materials under this section, and if
the City Council finds that the mobile home park as it exists or as it is
proposed meets all requirements of this chapter, and all other
applicable ordinances in the Lake Mills Municipal Code. Upon Council
action to grant the license, the Clerk is authorized to issue the license
upon receipt of license fee and upon compliance with general licensing
provisions in § 89-13 of the Lake Mills Municipal Code. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
F. Upon license issuance, the applicant shall clearly post the license at the
manager's premises, if any, located within the park.
G. Revocation or suspension of any license granted or issued under this
chapter shall be in accordance with revocation procedures established
in § 66.0435(2), Wis. Stats.
A. There is hereby imposed on each owner of a nonexempt mobile home in
the City a monthly parking permit fee determined in accordance with
§ 66.0435(3), Wis. Stats., which is hereby adopted by reference,
including any amendments thereof, and made part of this chapter as if
fully set forth herein. It shall be the full and complete responsibility of
the licensee to collect the proper amount from each mobile home
owner.
B. Licensees and owners of mobile homes permitted by another ordinance
to be located on land outside a mobile home park shall pay to the
Treasurer such parking permit fees on or before the 10th of the month
following the month for which such fees are due in accordance with the
§ 470-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-6
1:371
Chapter 479
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 16.
Animals — See Ch. 255.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 573, Art. VII.
§ 479-1. Public nuisance defined.
A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property
which.
terms of this section and such regulations as the Clerk may reasonably
promulgate.
C. Licensees of mobile home parks and owners of land on which are
parked any nonexempt mobile homes shall furnish information to the
Clerk and the City Assessor on such homes added to their park or land
within five days after arrival of such home, and this information shall be
provided on forms furnished by the Clerk in accordance with
§ 66.0435(3)(c)2 and (e), Wis. Stats. Failure to timely report this
information to the Clerk may result in the issuance of a municipal
citation and may result in a forfeiture of up to $25, and each such
failure to report shall be regarded as a separate offense.
D. Failure to timely pay parking permit fee under this chapter shall be
treated in all respects as a default in payment of personal property tax
and shall be subject to all procedures and penalties applicable thereto
under Chs. 70 and 74, Wis. Stats.
E. Park licensees may deduct for administrative expenses 2% of the
monthly parking fees collected.
F. The City may retain 10% of the parking fees collected in each month,
without reduction for any amounts deducted under Subsection E of this
section. This retention of a portion of the fees collected is designed to
cover the costs of administration. The City shall pay to the school
district in which the park or mobile home is located, within 20 days
after the end of each month, such proportion of the remainder of the
fees collected in the preceding month as the ratio of the most recent
property tax levy for school purposes bears to the total tax levy for all
purposes in the City. If the park is located in more than one school
district, each district shall receive a share in the proportion that its
property tax levy for school purposes bears to the total school tax levy.
A. Substantially annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public;
§ 470-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 479-1
1:372
§ 479-2. Public nuisances affecting health.
Under Chapter 251 of the Wisconsin Statutes and Jefferson County
Ordinance 98-46 and any amendments thereto, the Jefferson County Health
Department and the Jefferson County Health Officer have jurisdiction and
authority to enforce public nuisances affecting health in all those cases
in which the City Council of the City of Lake Mills has not enacted a
counterpart to the County's regulations.
§ 479-3. Public nuisances offending morals and decency.
The following acts, omissions, conditions and things are hereby specifically
declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but
such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances
offending public morals and decency coming within the provisions of
§ 479-1.
§ 479-4. Public nuisances affecting peace, safety and general
welfare.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting the public peace, safety or general
welfare, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other
nuisances affecting public peace, safety or general welfare coming within
the provisions of § 479-1.
B. In any way renders the public insecure in life or in the use of property;
C. Greatly offends the public morals or decency;
D. Unlawfully and substantially interferes with, obstructs or tends to
obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway,
navigable body of water, or other public way or the use of public
property; or
E. Openly, continuously and repeatedly violates ordinances of the City
relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare.
A. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling
houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose
of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling.
B. All gambling devices and slot machines, unless otherwise permitted by
law.
C. All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are
sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified
without a permit or license as provided for by the ordinances of the City.
D. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws
of the state or ordinances of the City.
§ 479-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-4
1:373
A. All signs, billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near
streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public so
situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety.
B. Any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device placed or maintained
upon or in view of any public street which purports to be or may be
mistaken as an official traffic control device, sign or signal, or which
because of its color, location, brilliance or manner of operation
interferes with the effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
C. All wires or cables over streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds
which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface thereof.
D. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from
obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk.
E. All limbs of trees which project over and less than 10 feet above any
public sidewalk, street or other public place.
F. All trees which are a menace to public safety or are the cause of
substantial annoyance to the general public.
G. The use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the
state and the ordinances of the City.
H. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use or
habitation.
I. All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks, and all
excavations in or under streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks, except
as permitted by the ordinances of the City, or obstructions which,
although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or
maintained for an unreasonable or unlawful length of time after the
purpose thereof has been accomplished or which do not conform to the
permit granted for such purpose.
J. All open and unguarded pits, wells, cesspools, excavations, unused
basements, open cisterns, or other dangerous opening, which are freely
accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk. Such places shall
be considered freely accessible if they are not filled, securely covered
or fenced in a manner to prevent injury to any person, and any such
cover shall be of such design, size and weight that the cover cannot be
removed by children.
K. An unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street,
alley or sidewalk, or use of a public street, alley or sidewalk which
causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use
of the streets or sidewalks.
§ 479-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 479-4
1:374
L. Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the City or laws
of the state relating to the storage of flammable liquids.
M. All snow and ice not removed or sprinkled with a material that
accelerates melting or prevents slipping as provided under Chapter
573, Article VII, of the Municipal Code.
N. All unregistered, junked, disassembled, inoperable or wrecked motor
vehicles, or parts thereof, which have been allowed to remain outside of
any building upon public or private property for a period in excess of
seven days, unless in connection with an automotive sales or repair
business located in a properly zoned area and for which all applicable
permits or licenses have been granted.
O. Any construction debris or materials, unsightly debris, trash, rubbish,
wood, brick, washing machines, refrigerators, other appliances,
furniture not designed for outdoor use, or junk such as may tend to
depreciate property values or be detrimental to the appearance,
neatness and cleanliness of the neighborhood, or which may provide
harborage for vermin, provided that nothing in this subsection shall
prohibit the reasonable storage of construction materials during the
construction of any building or structure, provided that construction
has not ceased for any unreasonable period of time, or the reasonable
storage of firewood, provided said storage is in compliance with all
applicable zoning regulations.
P. Any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, stove,
dishwasher or other container that has been left or permitted to remain
outside any dwelling or other structure or within any unoccupied or
abandoned building, dwelling or other structure, or in a place otherwise
accessible to children, and which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock
or other locking device that may be not released from the inside, unless
the door, lid, snap lock or other locking device has been removed from
the icebox, refrigerator, stove, dishwasher or other container.
Q. Any open fires that are started or maintained for the purpose of
disposing of leaves, cut brush, grass clippings or other yard waste, or
for the purpose of burning garbage, trash or scrap building materials.
Fires that are started or maintained in outdoor fireplaces, fire rings or
grills which contain fires for recreational or cooking purposes and
which are fueled by charcoal, gas or firewood, are not considered to be
public nuisances under this section. The burning of vegetative areas as
part of a maintenance program for meadows, prairies or woodlands are
not per se considered public nuisances, although such fires may be
regulated elsewhere in the Municipal Code.
R. Any keeping of live chickens within the City on lands that are not zoned
agricultural and without a valid backyard chickens license under
§ 255-6D, or in violation of the requirements or conditions of any such
license, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance affecting the public
§ 479-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-4
1:375
§ 479-5. Public nuisances prohibited.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance within the City.
§ 479-6. Abatement of public nuisances.
peace, safety or general welfare. [Amended 3-6-2012 by Ord. No.
1097A]
A. Responsibility for enforcement; inspections. It shall be the duty of the
Police Chief, Fire Inspector, Parks and Forestry Director, Director of
Public Works, Building Inspector, or their official designees, to enforce
those provisions of this chapter that come within the jurisdiction of
their respective offices. Each officer shall make or cause to be made
inspections upon complaint to ensure that such provisions are not
violated. No action shall be taken under this section to abate a public
nuisance unless the officer has inspected or caused to be inspected the
premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist, and has satisfied him or
herself that a nuisance does in fact exist. Whenever consent to enter
upon private property is not provided to the officer, unless some other
lawful authority exists to enter without such consent, the officer is
required to gain an inspection warrant before conducting his or her
inspection. The officer taking actions to abate a nuisance under this
chapter shall seek any necessary guidance from the City Attorney with
regard to procedures to follow in obtaining inspection warrants, making
inspections, issuing orders or taking other actions necessary to abate a
public nuisance.
B. Summary abatement.
(1) Order of abatement. If the inspecting officer determines that a
public nuisance exists within the City and that there is imminent
(great and immediate) danger to the public health, safety, peace,
morals, decency or welfare, he or she may, without notice or
hearing, issue an order to the owner, occupant or other person
causing or permitting the nuisance. Such order shall be posted on
the premises and, if such person may be found, personally served
on the owner, occupant or other person causing the nuisance. The
order shall recite the existence of a public nuisance constituting
imminent danger to the public and shall require, as he or she
deems necessary, immediate action to be taken to abate the
nuisance. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the
order shall be effective immediately and shall state that unless such
nuisance is so abated, the City will cause the same to be abated and
will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or other person
causing or permitting the nuisance. Any person to whom such
order is directed shall comply with the order immediately.
(2) Abatement by City. Whenever the owner or occupant shall refuse or
neglect to remove or abate the condition described in the order, the
§ 479-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 479-6
1:376
inspecting officer shall, in his or her discretion, enter upon the
premises and cause the nuisance to be removed or abated, and the
City shall recover the expenses incurred thereby from the owner
or occupant of the premises or from the person who has caused or
permitted the nuisance.
C. Non-summary abatement by City.
(1) Order to abate nuisance. If the inspecting officer shall determine
that a public nuisance exists on private premises, but the nature of
such nuisance is not such as to threaten imminent danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals, decency or welfare, he or she
shall issue an order reciting the existence of a public nuisance and
requiring the owner or occupant of the premises to remove or
abate the condition described in the order within the time period
specified therein. The order shall make specific reference to the
remedy afforded the property owner in Subsection C(3), and the
order shall be served personally on the owner of the building, as
well as the occupant if different from the owner and if applicable to
the described nuisance, or at the option of the inspecting officer,
the notice may be mailed to the last known address with a return
receipt. If the owner or occupant cannot be served, the order may
be served by posting it on the main entrance of the premises and by
publishing as a Class 3 notice under Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin
Statutes. The time limit specified in the order runs from the date of
completion of service or publication.
(2) Abatement by City. If the owner or occupant fails or refuses to
comply within the time period prescribed, the inspecting officer
shall enter upon the premises and cause the nuisance to be
removed or abated and the City shall recover the expenses incurred
thereby from the owner or occupant of the premises or from the
person who caused or permitted the nuisance.
(3) Remedy from order. Any person affected by such order shall, within
30 days of service or publication of the order, apply to the circuit
court for an order restraining the City and the inspecting officer
from entering on the premises and abating or removing the
nuisance or be forever barred. The court shall determine the
reasonableness of the order for abatement of the nuisance.
D. Authority to assess costs. The cost of the abatement or removal of a
nuisance under this chapter shall be collected from the owner, occupant
or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance and, if notice
to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such costs may be
assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
E. Abatement in accordance with state law. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the
City or its officials in accordance with the laws of the state.
§ 479-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-7
1:377
§ 479-7. Collection of costs.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abatement of a public nuisance by the City, and the cost of storage or
disposal of any personal property removed during abatement procedures,
shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance and, if notice to abate the nuisance
has been given to the owner, such cost may be assessed against the real
estate as a special charge.
§ 479-8. Alternative enforcement of public nuisances; reinspection
fees.
A. An alternative enforcement method as described in this section may be
used if the public nuisance is as described in § 479-3 or 479-4, and if it
is determined, after inspection by the Building Inspector under
§ 479-6A, that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten
imminent danger to the public health, safety, peace, peace, morals,
decency or welfare, but that the offense requires that correction orders
be issued as follows:
(1) Correction order. The Building Inspector, or his or her designee,
may issue a correction order reciting the existence of a public
nuisance under § 479-3 or 479-4 and requiring the owner or
occupant of the premises to correct, remove or abate the condition
described in the order within the time period specified therein.
(2) The correction order shall be served personally on the owner of the
property, as well as the occupant, if different from the property
owner, or at the option of the inspecting officer, the notice may be
mailed to the last known address with a return receipt. If the owner
or occupant cannot be served, the order may be served by posting
it on the main entrance of the premises and by publishing as a
Class 3 notice under Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The
time limit specified in the order runs from the date of completion of
service or publication.
(3) If the recipient of the correction order fails or refuses to comply
within the time period prescribed, the inspecting officer may issue
reinspection fees in accordance with this section.
B. The purpose of reinspection fees is as follows:
(1) To assist the City in paying the costs of enforcing its associated
zoning, housing, building, public nuisance, and other codes;
(2) To promote the appropriate regulation and control of buildings and
real estate in the City;
(3) To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the City;
§ 479-7 LAKE MILLS CODE § 479-8
1:378
(4) To help protect the character and the social and economic stability
of the City by eliminating public nuisances or other propertyrelated
violations;
(5) To help protect the value of land and buildings in the City;
(6) To help remedy problems associated with public nuisance and real
estate-related code violations in the City.
C. Findings. In enacting the alternative enforcement of public nuisance
regulations through the issuance of correction orders and by charging
reinspection fees, the City Council finds that the cost of enforcement of
the these codes is greater than the estimated revenues from
reinspection fees expected to be received under this section.
D. Reinspection fee. To compensate for inspection and administrative
costs under this section, a fee of $50 may be charged to the owner or
occupant of property for any reinspection by a City of Lake Mills
Building Inspector, or his or her designee, to determine compliance
with an order to correct conditions in violation of § 479-3 or 479-4,
except no fee shall be charged for the reinspection when compliance is
recorded. A fee of $100 may be charged for a second reinspection, a fee
of $200 for a third reinspection and a fee of $400 for each subsequent
reinspection for the same condition. A reinspection fee may also be
charged when the Building Inspector, or his or her designee, finds a
condition which is similar to a condition which was subject to a
correction order within one year prior to the inspection. Reinspection
fees shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
reinspections were made, shall be a lien upon the real estate and shall
be assessed and collected as a special charge. If there has been a
change of ownership or occupancy after the City issues a correction
order, the reinspection fee may be waived if it is determined that the
new owner or occupant was not aware of the prior order to correct a
violation or condition.
E. Any property owner or occupant that has received a correction order as
required under this section may, within 30 days or receipt of the order,
appeal the decision to issue the order under procedures set forth in
Chapter 16, Administrative Review, of the Lake Mills Municipal Code.
The collection of any reinspection fees incurred by the appellant shall
be stayed while the appeal is pending. [Amended 4-6-2010 by Ord.
No. 1061A]
F. The use of this alternative method for the enforcement of public
nuisance violations does not negate the authority to proceed under any
other lawful remedy available, if deemed necessary by the inspecting
officer.
§ 479-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-8
1:379
Chapter 491
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 573. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 615.
§ 491-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HIGHWAY — Highway as defined in § 340.01(22), Wis. Stats.
PARADE — Any organized march or procession for display.
SIDEWALK — Sidewalks as defined in § 340.01(58), Wis. Stats.
§ 491-2. Permit required; exemptions.
§ 491-3. Application.
A. No person shall form, direct, marshal, lead or participate in any parade
on any highway, sidewalk, or City property under the jurisdiction of the
City of Lake Mills unless a permit has been obtained in advance as
provided in this section.
B. Upon notification in advance to the City Manager of the City of Lake
Mills, a parade on the sidewalks and footways, in which persons move
not more than two abreast and which does not substantially hinder
normal use of the sidewalk or footway and conforms with traffic control
devices and other traffic and ordinance regulations may be conducted
without a permit.
C. A permit is not required for assembling or movement of a funeral
procession or for any parade sponsored by an agency of the federal,
state, county, or municipal government, acting in its governmental
capacity within the scope of its authority.
D. The act of picketing associated with a labor dispute is exempted from
the provisions of this chapter.
E. Any parade or assemblage that will impede traffic movement on any
state highway shall first obtain permission to do so from the State
Department of Transportation.
A. A written application for a permit for any parade on the highways or
sidewalks under the jurisdiction of the City of Lake Mills shall be made
by the authority in charge of the parade organization or their
designated agent to the City of Lake Mills on the form provided.
§ 479-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 491-3
1:380
§ 491-4. Permit denial.
B. All routine applications shall be made and received no less than 30 days
prior to the parade. The City Manager may approve routine applications
for civic, religious, or institutional organizations headquartered in the
City of Lake Mills.
C. Any application received less than 30 days prior to the date of the
proposed parade and applications from individuals or organizations not
headquartered in the City of Lake Mills shall be considered by the Lake
Mills City Council. All applications shall be filed with the Lake Mills City
Clerk.
D. The application shall set forth the following information regarding the
proposed parade:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the individual
applying for the permit.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the address and telephone number of its
headquarters and the names of the responsible officials of the
organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
responsible for conducting the parade, if different from the
applicant.
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted and its duration.
(5) The assembly area, the starting point, the route to be traveled and
the termination point.
(6) The number, size and general makeup of the units comprising the
parade.
(7) If the parade is to be conducted by or for any person other than the
applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file a communication
in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade authorizing
the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf.
E. The City Clerk shall review the filed application and may suggest
modifications in the request. The applicant may accept any such
modification by immediately notifying the Clerk in writing.
F. The City Clerk shall submit a copy of the application to the City of Lake
Mills Public Works Department and Police Department for report and
recommendation.
G. The City Council shall act upon an application at the next regularly
scheduled meeting occurring at least 10 days after the filing of such
application.
§ 491-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 491-4
1:381
§ 491-5. Financial responsibility.
Where the City Council determines that the cost of municipal services
incident to the staging of the parade will be increased because of the
parade, the applicant shall be required to make a payment into the general
fund of the municipality in the amount equal to the increased cost for
municipal services. Overpayments will be refunded to the applicant within
30 days of the parade termination.
§ 491-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in § 1-19 of this Code.
Chapter 496
A. The application may be denied:
(1) If the application is made less than 30 days in advance of the time
the parade is scheduled to commence.
(2) If the parade is to be held on a day and at times and at places
where, as a result of the proposed parade, the flow of vehicular
traffic will be delayed in excess of one hour.
(3) If sufficient parade marshals are not provided to reasonably ensure
the orderly conduct of the parade.
(4) If the parade described in the permit would occur on the same day
as another parade for which a permit has already been granted.
(5) If the application is not complete.
(6) The policing of the parade due to size will require so many persons
and vehicles as to prevent adequate service of the needs of the
municipality.
(7) The parade will substantially hinder the deployment of police, fire
and other emergency vehicles from their normal duty stations.
B. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant of the reason(s) for permit
denial within a reasonable period of time, normally within 10 working
days.
C. The City Council may revoke a permit if a major change in the
conditions forming the basis for the issuance occurs.
D. The City Manager may revoke a permit if (s)he deems that such action
is justified by actual or potential emergency due to weather, fire, other
catastrophe or by a substantial change in the conditions forming the
basis for the issuance, provided that no regular scheduled City Council
meeting shall occur prior to the scheduled parade assembly time.
§ 491-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 491-6
1:382
PARKS, RECREATION AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks Board — See Ch. 27, Art. V.
Alcohol beverages — See Ch. 249.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 615.
§ 491-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 491-6
1:383

ARTICLE I
Parks Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 5-18-2004 by Ord. No. 926B (Title 7, Ch. 7, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 496-1. Parks defined.
City of Lake Mills parks are those public facilities and public lands, bike
trails and public lake access areas that have been set aside for recreational
purposes, such as but not limited to hiking, picnicking, biking, swimming,
fishing, boat launching, team or individual sports, the use of playground
areas or skateboarding equipment, and other passive or active recreational
activities enjoyed in an outdoor setting.
§ 496-2. Park hours.
All City public parks, except Commons Park, boat-launching facilities, the
Rock Lake public access areas with street-end piers, the skateboard park,
and the Sandy Beach Mobile Home Park, shall be open between 4:00 a.m.
and 10:30 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday;
and between 4:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday nights.
Commons Park shall remain open at all times. All Rock Lake public access
areas with street-end piers shall be open only between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. All boat launch facilities are open at all times. The
skateboard park shall be open only during such hours as are officially
posted at the entrance to the skateboarding facilities. The Sandy Beach
Mobile Home Park is open to its tenants and guests, and persons on the
grounds who are not authorized to be there as a tenant or a guest of a
tenant may be asked to leave the premises and may be given a citation for
violation of this section. Any persons in other park areas in violation of the
hours during which the park is open shall be subject to citations for violation
of this section.
§ 496-3. Prohibiting certain glass or intentional glass breakage in
parks. [Amended 9-16-2008 by Ord. No. 1041]
No person may bring into any City park, or have in his or her possession
within the park, any glass beverage containers, including but not limited to
glass bottles, glasses and cups made of glass. No person may intentionally
or maliciously break any item made of glass in any City park.
§ 496-4. Fires in park areas.
A. Fires prohibited in certain areas. No fires are permitted at any time at
any boat launch sites, bike trails, the skateboard park, hiking or biking
trails, and at street-end lake access areas. Fires may be in charcoal
grills in all other park areas.
B. Disposal requirements. No hot coals or wood that may be smoldering
may be left in any location in the park, and all extinguished coals, ashes
§ 496-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-4
1:385
§ 496-5. Parking regulations. [Amended 4-17-2007 by Ord. No.
1009]
and unburned materials remaining after a fire has been ignited shall
be disposed of properly by placing in a burn barrel provided for such
disposal.
C. Supervision requirements. All fires in all park locations must be
monitored by an adult at all times.
D. Exception for Sandy Beach Mobile Home Park. In the Sandy Beach
Mobile Home Park, fires may be in either charcoal grills or in covered,
portable fireplaces. The same rules apply for proper disposal of coals,
wood, or ashes as are applicable in Subsection B.
E. Open fires prohibited. No open fires are permitted in any park area at
any time unless written permission is granted by the Parks and Forestry
Director.
A. Sandy Beach Park. Parking of vehicles and boat trailers at Sandy Beach
Park shall be permitted only in areas designated or marked for such
purpose. Overnight parking is prohibited, unless the vehicle or boat
trailer is authorized to be parked in the reserved parking area at Sandy
Beach Park.
B. Sandy Beach Mobile Home Park. Parking in the Sandy Beach Mobile
Home Park is governed by the lease and park rules of the mobile home
park, and all parking in the mobile home park permitted by said rules is
restricted to only tenants of the mobile home park and their guests, and
all other parking will be deemed to be in violation of this section.
C. No vehicles may be driven in any park, except in designated parking
areas. The only exception to this subsection is with a permit from the
Parks and Forestry Director.
D. Parking of vehicles is prohibited in all parking areas within all parks
whenever the park areas are closed. Whenever the restaurant at Sandy
Beach is open, parking is permitted in the parking lot until the
restaurant is closed.
E. For special events. Exceptions to one or more of the parking regulations
in this section may be authorized by permit from the Parks and Forestry
Director, and any such permit shall be communicated to the Police
Department prior to or during the special event.
F. Penalty. All parking violations and all unauthorized parking may be
subject to a penalty of up to $25 under § 615-22, or towing at the
owner's expense, or both. Violations of Subsection C, driving in parks,
may be subject to a municipal citation in an amount not to exceed $100
per violation.
§ 496-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 496-6
1:386
§ 496-6. Alcoholic beverages in parks.
Notwithstanding Chapter 249, Article II, of the Municipal Code, liquor on
public ways prohibited, the consumption or possession of opened containers
of alcoholic beverages is permitted at Sandy Beach Park, Rotary Park,
Tyranena Park, East Mills Estates Park, and Bartel's Beach. Glass
containers for these beverages are regulated in § 496-3above. All
possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in all other
park areas, unless the City Council, by specific action, has expressly
permitted the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages in
connection with special events or specific activities.
§ 496-7. Swimming regulations.
The following regulations apply to persons using swimming facilities at
Sandy Beach, Bartel's Beach or at any of the lake access areas with streetend
piers.
A. Swimming is only permitted within the swim areas designated by buoy
lines at Sandy Beach and Bartel's Beach parks. Patrons may not hang
onto or sit on lifelines.
B. Children under age six years must be supervised by an adult at all
times; children under age 10 years must be supervised by an adult if a
lifeguard is not on duty.
C. Swimming hours are 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. at all swimming areas at
Sandy Beach, Bartel's Beach, and the public access, street-end pier
areas.
D. No person may throw sand, rocks or other potentially dangerous items
in or near the designated swimming areas or beaches, or at or near any
other person.
E. No person may engage in rough play, including but not limited to
dunking, chicken fights, or similar activities in the water or on the
beaches or piers.
F. Fishing is not permitted in designated swimming areas at Sandy Beach
and Bartel's Beach, nor is it permitted at the street-end piers if
swimmers or other persons are in the water adjacent to the street-end
piers.
G. Running on piers or rafts is prohibited. Patrons shall also refrain from
swimming or otherwise being under any pier or raft.
H. No person may dive from any pier. Diving is only permitted from rafts,
but all flips and similar maneuvers are prohibited.
I. Eating, drinking or smoking is prohibited by persons in the water.
§ 496-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-7
1:387
§ 496-8. Boat-launching facilities regulated.
§ 496-9. Music- and sound-amplification devices.
Personal music devices and car sound systems must be kept at a normal
operating level that is not offensive or bothersome to surrounding park
patrons. No sound-amplification devices shall be allowed without the prior
written authorization by the Parks and Forestry Director.
J. No person may litter by placing or leaving any smoking debris or other
refuse in any place besides designated disposal containers specifically
designed for such disposal.
K. No person may erect or maintain any boat mooring, boat lift, hoist or
motorized boat in the navigable waters within 50 feet of the street-end
piers or in any designated swimming area.
L. No person may use the public access street-end pier areas or the
beaches or swimming areas without wearing appropriate attire at all
times.
A. No person may launch or remove watercraft at boat launching facilities
in the City of Lake Mills unless that person has paid a boat-launching
fee and received a permit. Daily launch permits shall be made available
at the boat-launching facilities and seasonal permits shall be available
at the Lake Mills City Hall during regular business hours. The fee for
said permits shall be established by resolution of the City Council from
time to time. [Amended 10-3-2006 by Ord. No. 976]
B. All persons launching or removing watercraft at boat-launching
facilities are required to prominently display a boat-launching permit
on any motor vehicle used in launching or removing the watercraft. The
permit shall be deemed properly displayed if it is placed on the dash of
the motor vehicle in a manner that allows it to be read through the
windshield of the parked vehicle.
C. Failure to pay the fee for the permit or to properly display the launching
permit at all times that the motor vehicle is parked in the designated
boat launch parking area while the watercraft is in the waters of Rock
Lake shall be deemed to be a violation of this section.
D. Any violation of this section may be subject to the issuance of a parking
ticket with a monetary penalty in the amount of $25, which may be paid
at the boat launch facility or by dropping off or mailing the envelope to
the Police Department. Failure to pay the required penalty may result in
a parking citation being issued. If it becomes necessary that a citation
be issued hereunder, its issuance shall be by a law enforcement officer
acting under the authority of Wis. Stats., § 346.55(4), which has been
incorporated under Chapter 615, Vehicles and Traffic,of this Code.
§ 496-7 LAKE MILLS CODE § 496-10
1:388
§ 496-10. Overnight camping.
Overnight camping is prohibited in all parks, unless specifically authorized
by the City Council as part of a special event, and unless a permit has also
been issued by the Parks and Forestry Director.
§ 496-11. Breach of public peace.
No person may engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting
or indecent language, or engage in any conduct or behavior tending to
breach the public peace, and no person may be so intoxicated that the
person is unable to care for his or her own safety in any park.
§ 496-12. Pets.
§ 496-13. Fireworks.
No person may throw or bring into the parks or have in his or her possession
or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any
firecrackers, torpedo, rocket, or other fireworks, explosives or sparklers,
unless a permit has been issued.
§ 496-14. Plants, herbs, shrubs and trees.
No person shall cut, pick, destroy or remove any plant, herb, shrubs, or
trees from any park, unless specific authorization has been obtained from
the Parks and Forestry Director.
A. All pets within City parks must be kept on a leash not longer than eight
feet in length and must be under the direct control of a responsible
adult at all times. All feces from pets shall be removed and properly
disposed of immediately.
B. Pets are prohibited at the following park areas:
(1) Bartel's Beach Park.
(2) Sandy Beach Park.
C. The prohibition of Subsection B does not apply to working animals,
which for purposes of this article are animals trained to assist disabled
persons, nor to police dogs, or dogs being used specifically by park
personnel or persons authorized by the Parks and Forestry Director for
the removal of geese. In the case of working dogs being used for the
removal of geese, no leash is required, but such dogs shall at all times
be under the control of the person authorized to have such dogs in the
parks for this purpose.
D. The prohibition of Subsection B also does not apply to persons walking
their dogs on leashes on public sidewalk areas adjacent to Bartel's
Beach Park.
§ 496-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-15
1:389
§ 496-15. Fish and game cleaning.
No person may clean, butcher, scale, or skin any fish, game, livestock, or
poultry in any park.
§ 496-16. Hunting and firearms prohibited.
No person may hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time within any park.
Shooting any kind of weapon into park areas from beyond park boundaries
is forbidden. The prohibitions of this section are not applicable to persons
engaged in activities authorized by the City Council for the purpose of
causing geese to remain out of the beach areas of the parks.
§ 496-17. Merchandising, advertising, and sales. [Amended
5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 1030]
§ 496-18. Traffic regulations.
Golf carts may only be driven in parks in designated areas. Entrance to
Sandy Beach by any golf cart is only permitted by a handicap pass. No
operation of snowmobiles or all-terrain vehicles is permitted in any park,
except for the purpose of entering directly onto or exiting directly off of
Rock Lake.
§ 496-19. Littering; polluting; garbage.
No refuse, cigarette butts, trash, debris, or garbage may be placed or left
any place besides in disposal containers designated for the proper disposal
of such items. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no garbage, refuse, trash,
A. No person may advertise or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall
any person station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing in the parks,
unless a vendor's license has been granted under § 445-13, or unless
the Council or Parks and Forestry Director has authorized such
activities in conjunction with the public market or any special event
officially permitted in the parks, such as the periodic festivals or events
in Commons Park, Sandy Beach Park, or Rotary Park.
B. Sales of items under the direction of the Rotary Club in the concession
stand at Rotary Park, and sales within the bait shop and Sand Bar
Restaurant at Sandy Beach, and sales that are permitted during the
public market under a license granted to the Main Street Program are
excepted from the prohibitions of this section.
C. With the exception of the permitted sales activities under Subsections A
and B, no person may advertise, announce or call to the public's
attention any article or service for sale in the parks, and no person may
paste, glue, tack or otherwise affix any sign, placard or advertisement
in any park, unless specifically authorized by the Parks and Forestry
Director.
§ 496-15 LAKE MILLS CODE § 496-19
1:390
construction waste or any similar materials may be brought into any park
for the purpose of disposing of same in any dumpster, trash receptacle, or
other container within the park.
§ 496-20. Special use permits or rentals.
Special use permits for specific areas of the parks or rentals of specific
shelters within the parks may be applied for or obtained from the Parks and
Forestry Director or his or her designee. In all such cases, applications shall
be required and certain conditions may need to be met prior to the issuance
of any such special use permit or prior to the completion of any rental of
specific shelters. The fees charged for any such permits or rentals shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
§ 496-21. Interference with permittees or renters.
No person may disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party
occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a
permit or under a rental agreement with the City.
§ 496-22. Closed areas.
Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the
Parks and Forestry Director at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular and stated intervals of time, and such closure may
be entirely or merely to certain uses as the Parks and Forestry Director shall
find reasonably necessary. Any continued usage in violation of any such
closure shall be deemed a violation of this section.
§ 496-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, except § 496-8,
shall be subject to the issuance of a citation and the penalty in § 1-19 of the
Municipal Code. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs
shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not preclude the City
from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation
of this article. Violations of § 496-8 shall be subject to the penalty stated
therein.
§ 496-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-23
1:391

ARTICLE II
Use of Waters of Rock Lake
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 7, Ch. 8, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 496-24. Intent.
The intent of this article is to provide safe and healthful conditions for the
enjoyment of aquatic recreation consistent with public rights and interest
and the capability of the water resource.
§ 496-25. Applicability and enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall apply to the waters of Rock Lake. The
provisions of this article shall be enforced by the officers of Jefferson
County, the Town of Lake Mills, and the City of Lake Mills.
§ 496-26. State boating and water safety laws adopted.
State boating laws as found in §§ 30.50 to 30.71, Wis. Stats., are adopted by
reference.
§ 496-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORBOAT — Any boat equipped with propulsion machinery, whether or
not the machinery is the principal source of propulsion.
OPERATE or USE — When used with reference to a motorboat, boat, or
vessel, means to navigate or otherwise employ.
OPERATION OF A MOTORBOAT — Controlling the speed or direction of a
motorboat, except a sailboat operating under sail alone.
SLOW - NO WAKE — That speed at which a motorboat moves as slowly as
possible while still maintaining steerage control.
WATER-SKI — A motorboat towing a person using water skis, an aquaplane,
or similar device.
§ 496-28. Speed restrictions.
A. No person shall operate a motorboat in excess of slow - no wake at any
time from sunset until sunrise.
B. No person shall operate a motorboat above slow - no wake while
operating on the following portions of Rock Lake:
(1) That portion of Rock Lake lying south of the Department of Natural
Resources Glacial Drumlin Trail.
(2) That portion of Rock Lake, west, known as "Korth Bay."
§ 496-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-28
1:393
§ 496-29. Swimming and diving regulations.
§ 496-30. Water skiing regulations on Rock Lake.
§ 496-31. Swimming rafts.
A swimming raft means a flotation platform without railings, roof, or walls
that is adequately anchored to the bed of navigable waters and is designed
for swimming. A riparian owner on Rock Lake may place and maintain a
swimming raft or platform adjacent to their land. No riparian owner shall
place or maintain any swimming raft or platform more than 150 feet from
the shore. No riparian owner shall place or maintain any raft within the onehundred-
fifty-foot line unless it is so anchored that it has at least six inches
of freeboard above the waterline, painted white, and has attached thereto
not less than 12 inches from each corner or projection a red reflector not
less than three inches in diameter. No more than one swimming raft per
riparian landowner's lot is permitted. A swimming raft may not exceed
(3) That portion of Rock Lake, north, known as "Schultz's Bay."
(4) That portion of Rock Lake, east, known as the "Mill Pond."
C. These areas of Rock Lake shall be delineated by the placement of
regulatory buoys, which shall be removed from Rock Lake by November
1 and may not be placed in Rock Lake before April 1 annually.
D. The Town of Lake Mills may authorize the placing and removal of
regulatory buoys by an association, political subdivision, individual
citizens, or a combination thereof. No regulatory buoys may be placed,
other than those authorized by the Town of Lake Mills, in compliance
with the Official Map approved by the Town of Lake Mills, the City of
Lake Mills, and the Department of Natural Resources.
A. No person shall swim from an unoccupied boat.
B. No person shall swim more than 150 feet from the shore unless he or
she is within a designated swimming area or he or she is accompanied
by a boat manned by a competent person.
C. No person shall swim more than 150 feet from the shore between
sunset and sunrise.
A. No person shall operate a motorboat towing a person or persons on
water skis, aquaplane or similar device, nor shall any person engage in
waterskiing, aquaplaning, or similar activity between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
B. No person shall engage in waterskiing, aquaplaning, or similar activity
without wearing a United States Coast Guard approved type I, II, or III
flotation device. No operator shall allow any person to water-ski,
aquaplane, or similar activity who is not wearing personal flotation gear
equipment of the aforementioned type.
§ 496-28 LAKE MILLS CODE § 496-31
1:394
100 square feet in size and shall not include any construction above the
level of the deck, except that a single diving board more or less at deck
level is permissible. A swimming raft may not interfere with the public
rights nor interfere with the rights of the adjacent riparian owner. All
flotation devices for swimming rafts shall be free of any product, residue, or
pollutant, and they may not include any container previously used to store
toxic or hazardous materials as defined in § NR 661.03, Wis. Adm. Code. A
swimming raft shall be set back at least 10 feet from the adjacent riparian
owner's extended lot line. A swimming raft shall be removed from Rock
Lake by November 1 and may not be placed before April 1 annually. The
City of Lake Mills shall be exempt from the maximum size requirement and
placement of swimming rafts.
§ 496-32. Races, regattas, sporting events and exhibitions.
§ 496-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The State of Wisconsin Revised Uniform Deposit and Bail Schedule for
Boating Violations is hereby incorporated by reference. Any person
violating any provisions of this article not covered under the Revised
Uniform Deposit and Bail Schedule for boating violations shall forfeit not
more than $50 for the first offense and shall forfeit not more than $100
upon the conviction of the same offense a second or subsequent time within
one year. In addition, said persons shall also be responsible for any costs of
prosecution.
§ 496-34. Each day a separate violation.
Each day in which a violation of any of the sections or requirements of this
article exists shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Permit required. No person shall direct or participate in any boat race,
regatta, water ski meet or other water sporting event or exhibition
unless such event has been authorized by the Lake Mills Town Board.
B. Permit. A permit issued under this section shall specify the course or
area of water to be used by participants in such event and the permittee
shall be required to place markers, flags, or buoys designating the
specified area. Permits shall be issued only if in the opinion of the Lake
Mills Town Board the proposed use of the water can be carried out
safely and without danger to or substantial obstruction of other
watercraft or persons using the lake. Permits shall be valid only for the
hours and areas specified thereon.
C. Right-of-way to participants. Boats and participants in any such
permitted event have the right-of-way on the marked area and no other
person shall obstruct such area during the race or event or interfere
therewith.
§ 496-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-35
1:395
§ 496-35. Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
All ordinances regulating water traffic, boating and water sports upon the
waters of Rock Lake and buoys in the City of Lake Mills, Jefferson County,
Wisconsin, heretofore enacted by the City Council of the City of Lake Mills
are hereby repealed.
§ 496-36. Effective date.
This article shall be in effect after passage and publication with the
exception of § 496-31Swimming rafts, which shall go into effect
commencing March 1 of the year following the passage and publication of
this article.
§ 496-35 LAKE MILLS CODE § 496-36
1:396
ARTICLE III
Use of Unimproved Public Right-of-Way Abutting Rock Lake
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Sec. 5-1-9 of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 496-37. Use of unimproved public rights-of-way.
Any public right-of-way abutting Rock Lake may be used by the general
public as a means of access to Rock Lake and any piers installed by the City
on or adjacent to the public right-of-way, subject to the following restrictions
and limitations:
A. The public right-of-way and piers may be used only during the hours
beginning at 8:00 a.m. and concluding at 9:00 p.m.
B. No minor child under the age of 10 years may use the public right-ofway
as a means of providing access to Rock Lake or any pier installed
on or adjacent to the right-of-way by the City of Lake Mills unless
accompanied by a parent or other adult.
C. No persons shall possess any glass containers for food or beverages
while using the public right-of-way as a means of access to Rock Lake,
or while using any pier erected on or adjacent to the public right-of-way
by the City of Lake Mills.
D. No minor child under the age of 10 years may use any inflatable raft,
tube or similar flotation device in the waters adjacent to the public
right-of-way unless accompanied by a parent or other adult.
E. No person shall erect or maintain any boat mooring, boat lift, hoist or
motorized boat in the navigable waters adjacent to the public right-ofway.
F. Swimming shall be prohibited in the navigable waters immediately
adjacent to the public right-of-way unless the swimmers are attired in
appropriate swimwear.
G. No person shall fish in the navigable waters immediately adjacent to the
public right-of-way when any person is using the public right-of-way
area as an access to Rock Lake for swimming purposes.
H. No watercraft shall be left unattended.
I. No dogs shall be permitted on the public right-of-way or pier erected on
or adjacent to the public right-of-way.
§ 496-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-37
1:397

ARTICLE IV
Feeding of Waterfowl
[Adopted 7-1-1997 by Ord. No. 781 (Sec. 5-2-8 of the 2009 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 496-38. Waterfowl feeding prohibited.
No person may feed anything whatsoever to any wild waterfowl in or
adjacent to Lakeside Park, Tyranena Park, or Sandy Beach Park, including
the Sandy Beach Mobile Home Park areas and sports complex. The City
Manager is hereby empowered to authorize an agent or agents to discharge
City-owned firearms in any City-owned park if such discharge is not for the
purpose of killing any wildlife and if such discharge is in accordance with
the Geese Management Program authorized by the City Council.
§ 496-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-38
1:399
Chapter 505
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 246. Nuisances — See Ch. 479.
§ 505-1. Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture.
A. The following statutes and any amendments thereto that define
offenses against the peace and good order of the state, except for those
portions of the statutes that pertain to felonies, are adopted by
reference as offenses against the peace and good order of the City, with
the penalty for commission of such offenses being limited to a forfeiture
imposed under § 1-19, General penalty, or to a forfeiture, the deposit for
which is authorized in the revised state deposit schedule.
(1) Section 101.123, Smoking Prohibited - enclosed spaces and certain
outdoor areas. [Amended 6-15-2010 by Ord. No. 1065]
(2) Section 134.66, Restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes or nicotine
or tobacco products.
(3) Section 167.25, Refrigerators and Iceboxes.
(4) Section 167.30, Use of Firearms, etc., near park, etc.
(5) Section 167.31, Safe Use and Transportation of Firearms and
Bows.
(6) Section 167.32, Safety at Sporting Events.
(7) Section 254.92, Purchase or possession of cigarettes or tobacco
products by person under 18 prohibited .
(8) Section 287.81, Littering.
(9) Section 940.19(1), Battery.
(10) Section 940.34, Duty to Aid Victim or Report Crime.
(11) Section 940.42, Intimidation of Witness, Misdemeanor.
(12) Section 940.44, Intimidation of Victims, Misdemeanor.
(13) Section 941.01, Negligent Operation of Vehicle.
(14) Section 941.10, Negligent Handling of Burning Materials.
(15) Section 941.12(2) or (3), Interfering with Fire Fighting.
(16) Section 941.13, False Alarms.
§ 496-38 LAKE MILLS CODE § 505-1
1:400
(17) Section 941.20(1), Endangering Safety by Use of Dangerous
Weapon.
(18) Section 941.23, Carrying Concealed Weapon.
(19) Section 941.235, Carrying Firearm in Public Building.
(20) Section 941.237, Carrying handgun where alcohol beverages may
be sold and consumed.
(21) Section 941.26(4), Oleoresin of capsicum (pepper spray) improper
sales, use or possession.
(22) Section 941.2965, Restrictions on Use of Facsimile Firearms.
(23) Section 941.297, Sale or Distribution of Imitation Firearms.
(24) Section 941.299, Restrictions on the Use of Laser Pointers.
(25) Section 941.35, Emergency Telephone Calls.
(26) Section 941.36, Fraudulent Tapping of Electric Wires or Gas or
Water Meters or Pipes.
(27) Section 941.37(2), Obstructing Emergency or Rescue Personnel.
(28) Section 942.01, Defamation.
(29) Section 942.03, Giving False Information for Publication.
(30) Section 942.05, Opening Letters.
(31) Section 942.08, Invasion of Privacy.
(32) Section 943.01(1), Damage to Property.
(33) Section 943.017, Graffiti.
(34) Section 943.11, Entry Into Locked Vehicle.
(35) Section 943.12, Possession of Burglary Tools.
(36) Section 943.125, Entry Into Locked Coin Box.
(37) Section 943.13, Trespass to Land.
(38) Section 943.14, Criminal Trespass to Dwelling.
(39) Section 943.145, Criminal Trespass to Medical Facility.
(40) Section 943.15, Entry onto a Construction Site or into a Locked
Building, Dwelling or Room.
(41) Section 943.20, Theft (of property when value is $2,500 or less).
§ 505-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 505-1
1:401
(42) Section 943.21, Fraud on Hotel or Restaurant Keeper, Recreational
Attraction, Taxicab Operator, or Gas Station (when value is $2,500
or less).
(43) Section 943.215, Absconding Without Payment of Rent.
(44) Section 943.23(3m), Operating Vehicle Without Owner's Consent.
(45) Section 943.23(4m), Riding in a Stolen Vehicle.
(46) Section 943.24, Issuance of Worthless Check (when value is $2,500
or less).
(47) Section 943.34(1)(a), Receiving Stolen Property.
(48) Section 943.38(3), Forgery.
(49) Section 943.392, Fraudulent Data Alteration.
(50) Section 943.41(2)(3)(a)-(d), Financial Transaction Card Crimes
(51) Section 943.41(4)(b), Financial Transaction Card Offense.
(52) Section 943.45(3)(a)-(c), Theft of Telecommunications Service.
(53) Section 943.455(4)(a)-(c), Theft of Commercial Mobile Service.
(54) Section 943.46(4)(a)-(c), Theft of video service.
(55) Section 943.47(3)(a)-(c), Theft of Satellite Cable Programming.
(56) Section 943.50, Retail Theft, theft of services.
(57) Section 943.55, Removal of Shopping Cart.
(58) Section 943.61, Theft of Library Material (when value is $2,500 or
less).
(59) Section 944.15, Public Fornication.
(60) Section 944.17, Sexual Gratification.
(61) Section 944.20, Lewd and Lascivious Behavior.
(62) Section 944.36, Solicitation of Drinks Prohibited.
(63) Section 945.02, Gambling.
(64) Section 945.03(2m), Commercial Gambling.
(65) Section 945.035, Certain Slot Machines on Licensed Premises.
(66) Section 945.04, Permitting Premises to be Used for Commercial
Gambling.
(67) Section 946.40, Refusing to Aid Officer.
§ 505-1 LAKE MILLS CODE § 505-1
1:402
(68) Section 946.41, Resisting or Obstructing Officer.
(69) Section 946.42(2), Escape.
(70) Section 946.46, Encouraging violation of probation, extended
supervision or parole.
(71) Section 946.70(1), Impersonating peace officers, fire fighters, or
other emergency personnel.
(72) Section 946.72(2), Tampering with Public Records and Notices.
(73) Section 947.01, Disorderly Conduct.
(74) Section 947.011, Disrupting a funeral or memorial service.
(75) Section 947.012, Unlawful Use of Telephone.
(76) Section 947.0125, Unlawful Use of Computerized Communication
Systems.
(77) Section 947.013, Harassment.
(78) Section 947.02, Vagrancy.
(79) Section 947.06, Unlawful assemblies and their suppression.
(80) Section 948.40, Contributing to the Delinquency of a Child -
Misdemeanor.
(81) Section 948.45, Contributing to Truancy.
(82) Section 948.60, Possession of a Dangerous Weapon by a Person
under 18.
(83) Section 948.61, Dangerous Weapons other than Firearms on
School Premises.
(84) Section 948.62, Receiving Stolen Property (valued at $500 or less)
from a child.
(85) Section 948.63, Receiving Property from a child.
(86) Section 951.01 et seq., Conduct Harmful to Animals (except
felonies).
(87) Section 95.21(10)(b), Quarantine of Dog and Cat.
(88) Section 961.573(1) or (2), Possession of Drug Paraphernalia.
(89) Section 961.574(1) or (2), Manufacture or Delivery of Drug
Paraphernalia.
(90) Section 961.575(1) or (2), Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to a
Minor.
§ 505-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 505-1
1:403
§ 505-2. Sale and discharge of fireworks restricted.
Section 167.10, Wis. Stats., regulating the sale and use of fireworks,
exclusive of any penalty imposed thereby is adopted by reference and made
a part of this section as though set forth in full.
§ 505-3. Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited.
No person shall make or cause to be made any loud, disturbing and
unnecessary sounds or noises such as may tend to annoy or disturb another
in or about any public street, alley or park or any private residence.
§ 505-4. Dynamic braking noise prohibited. [Amended 9-6-2005 by
Ord. No. 962]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause unreasonable, loud, or excessive
noise within the City of Lake Mills by operating any motor vehicle with
a dynamic braking device engaged, (including "Jake"® braking, engine
braking, or compression braking devices), except for the aversion of
imminent danger to persons or property.
§ 505-5. Public urination. [Amended 6-3-2008 by Ord. No. 1032; at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who shall urinate outside of designed sanitary facilities upon
any sidewalk, street, alley, public parking lot, park, playground, cemetery,
or other public area within the City, or upon any private property in open
view of the public, or in halls, rooms without rest room facilities, stairways
or elevators of any public or commercial buildings, may be subject to a
penalty as set forth in § 505-1 for such offense.
§ 505-6. Synthetic cannabinoids prohibited. [Amended 3-15-2011 by
Ord. No. 1077A]
B. The possession of 25 grams or less of marijuana, as that term is defined
in § 961.01(14), Wis. Stats., is prohibited.
A. As used in this section, a dynamic braking device (commonly referred to
as "Jake brakes,"® "Jacobs brakes," engine brake or compression
brake) means a device or procedure primarily on trucks for the
conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air
compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
B. Emergency vehicles shall be exempt from this chapter.
C. Signs shall be installed at the main arterial highways and truck routes
leading into the City of Lake Mills that state that such chapter is in
effect. The Director of Public Works and his/her designees are
authorized and directed to gain appropriate approval from the State of
Wisconsin to post appropriate signs consistent with the provisions of
this chapter and in accordance with State law and Administrative Code.
§ 505-1 LAKE MILLS CODE § 505-6
1:404
A. Preamble.
(1) The City Council of the City of Lake Mills has determined that
herbal preparations powdered or sprayed with a synthetic chemical
cannabinoid are available for sale in the area which are claimed to
produce intoxicating effects similar to THC or marijuana;
(2) While the substances are not yet categorized as illegal controlled
substances under Wisconsin or federal law, several countries,
states, and municipalities have already taken action to prohibit
these substances due to overdoses and other negative health
concerns;
(3) While these synthetic cannabinoid substances are often marketed
as benign and legal alternatives to marijuana, they are potentially
dangerous to users because the substances can create potency
from 3 to 100 times greater than marijuana, can produce severe
adverse health conditions, such as hallucinations, paranoia,
increased agitation, heart palpitations, seizures, and vomiting,
based on emergency room experiences in areas of the country
where use is more prevalent;
(4) The Drug Enforcement Administration has determined that K2/
Spice HU-210, CP 47, 497 and homologues, JWH-018 and JWH-073
do not have an approved medical use in the United States and are
presently listed as "drugs of concern" by the Federal Drug
Enforcement Administration; and
(5) Because the long-term health effects of the use of these substances
is not yet known, the City Council has determined to address the
growing threat of synthetic cannabinoids to the health, safety and
welfare of its citizens by enacting these prohibitions.
B. Synthetic cannabinoid prohibited.
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
DELIVER — Has the same meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 961.01(6)
with respect to a controlled substance or controlled substance
analog.
DISTRIBUTE — Has the same meaning given in Wis. Stats.
§ 961.01(9) with respect to a controlled substance or controlled
substance analog.
(2) No person may possess, purchase, publicly display for sale, sell or
attempt to sell, give, deliver, distribute, or barter any of the
following substances, whether under the common street or trade
names of "Spice," "K2," "Genie," "Yucatan Fire," "Blaze," "Red X
Dawn," "Zohal," "Spike Diamond," "Route 69," "Smoke XXXX,"
"Citron," "fake" or "new" marijuana, or by any other name, label or
description, if the substance is designed, intended, or used to
§ 505-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 505-6
1:405
§ 505-7. Disorderly conduct with motor vehicle prohibited.
[Amended 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 1144]
No person may operate a motor vehicle in the City in any of the following
manners:
mimic the physical, psychological, intoxicating, narcotic or other
effects of marijuana.
C. Acts prohibited under Subsection B shall not be unlawful if done by or
under the direction or prescription of a licensed physician, dentist, or
other medical health professional authorized to direct or prescribe such
act, provided use is permitted under state and federal laws.
D. Penalties. Persons violating this section by publicly displaying for sale,
or selling or attempting to sell, giving, delivering, distributing, or
bartering substances listed in Subsection B shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $500, together with the cost of prosecution,
and upon default of payment may be imprisoned in the Jefferson County
Jail. Persons violating this section by possessing substances listed in
Subsection B shall be subject to a forfeiture of $200, together with the
cost of prosecution, and upon default of payment, may be imprisoned in
the Jefferson County Jail.
A. Accelerate at a rate of speed that leaves tire marks on the pavement or
which causes the vehicle tires to squeal.
B. Accelerate at a rate of speed that causes the vehicle to "fish tail."
C. Accelerate at a rate of speed that causes the driver to lose control of the
vehicle.
D. Accelerate at a rate of speed that constitutes a danger to other
motorists or to pedestrians.
E. Use the vehicle horn for other than its intended purpose for warning
other motorists or pedestrians as required by law.
F. Operate a motor vehicle at a speed while turning a corner to cause the
tires to squeal.
G. Operate a motor vehicle in a manner that causes one or more wheels of
the vehicle to leave the ground.
H. Operate a motor vehicle in a manner that tends to cause a disturbance.
§ 505-6 LAKE MILLS CODE § 505-7
1:406
Chapter 512
PUBLIC MARKET
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 445. Parks, recreation and public property — See
Ch. 496.
§ 512-1. Public market establishment.
There is hereby established a public market in the downtown Commons
Park. Said public market is established for the purpose of allowing the
Lake Mills Main Street Program ("Main Street") to administer public market
events under an annual permit to be issued by the Parks and Forestry
Director, which shall incorporate by reference the conditions as set forth in
this chapter and any other written conditions of such permit as are deemed
necessary by the City Council when granting the permit.
§ 512-2. Location of public market.
The boundaries of said public market place may include that area bounded
by the sidewalks adjacent to Main, East Lake, and East Madison Streets.
§ 512-3. Times of public market.
The public market may be held at Main Street's discretion on Wednesdays
during the months of April through October between the hours of 12:00
noon and 8:00 p.m., and at other times and days as may be authorized in
the annual permit approved by the Council.
§ 512-4. Items prohibited from sale or distribution.
The following items may not be offered for sale or distribution at the public
market:
A. No items for sale or distribution may be displayed on or otherwise
encroach upon any sidewalk within or adjacent to the park.
B. No items may be displayed or sold on the Franklin Else Memorial Band
Shelter or within 50 feet of the band shelter.
C. No items may be displayed or sold from any vehicle parked in or
adjacent to the park, unless specific provision with written conditions
are made part of the conditions of any permit approved by the Council.
D. No parking stalls within the public right-of-way adjacent to the park
may be included within the boundaries of the public market, unless
specifically approved in the annual permit, and such approval shall be
explicit and detailed in writing on the permit.
§ 505-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-4
1:407
§ 512-5. No waiver of park rules permitted.
All park regulations, as set forth in Chapter 496, Article I, shall remain in
full force and effect and may not be waived by any permit issued under this
chapter.
§ 512-6. Permit application.
The following information shall be included in any application for an annual
permit, and such permit may remain in effect between April 1 until October
31 of the year in which granted.
§ 512-7. Laws and regulations applicable.
No permit issued under this chapter shall relieve Main Street or any
individual vendor participating in the public market from responsibility for
following all applicable laws and regulations, whether they be federal, state
or local.
§ 512-8. Utility use.
No use of utilities, to include water and electric, may be made by Main
Street in administering the public market or by any individual vendor
participating in the public market. Exceptions may be made to this
A. Live animals of any species.
B. Tobacco products, liquor or fermented malt beverages.
C. Any drugs or drug paraphernalia, medical supplies or equipment, or
medications.
D. Firearms, ammunition, fireworks or explosive devices.
E. Any other items specifically prohibited under a permit issued under this
chapter.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the contact person who
has the authority to manage and administer the public market under
the permit.
B. Any guidelines, rules or registration forms that are intended for
application to individual vendors participating in the public market
under the permit.
C. The hours and days of operation proposed for the public market to be
administered by Main Street.
D. Any formal requests for areas of the right-of-way to be utilized by the
public market, and reasons for those requests.
E. Any other information the applicant believes would be relevant when
the application is reviewed by the Council.
§ 512-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 512-8
1:408
requirement if expressly authorized by the Council and if made part of the
written conditions of the permit.
§ 512-9. Cleanliness and supervision.
The grounds within Commons Park shall be left in the same condition as
it was in when each public market event commenced. All litter or refuse
of any kind shall be placed in appropriate receptacles prior to Main Street
officially closing each public market event. The person authorized by Main
Street shall remain present throughout each public market event to
supervise conduct within the market and to keep order, and if assistance is
needed by authorities, to seek such assistance immediately.
§ 512-10. Nonexclusivity and no vested right to permit.
Nothing in this chapter may be construed to limit the Council from
amending or repealing this chapter or from approving permits for similar
events at other locations within the park during the public market or at
other times besides the times established for the public market. Nothing
in this chapter may preclude the Council from granting individual vendor
permits to sell or display items in the Commons Park. The Council may seek
at any time to limit the size of the public market through action to either
amend this chapter or to modify the permit issued under this chapter.
§ 512-11. Enforcement.
If noncompliance with the conditions of the permit or this chapter is found
to exist, a notice of noncompliance shall be provided to the person who is
listed under § 512-6A, and a meeting with the City Manager shall be held
within 10 days of the issuance of said notice to determine compliance. If
noncompliance is not corrected, then a notice and hearing before the City
Council shall be held to determine whether the permit shall be suspended,
revoked or non-renewed.
§ 512-12. Permit fee.
A permit fee of $100 may be charged for the annual permit or it may be
waived at the time the permit is granted.
Chapter 548
SIDEWALK CAFES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 573.
§ 512-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 548-1
1:409
§ 548-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIDEWALK CAFE — That portion of a restaurant that is immediately
adjacent to and extends onto a public sidewalk as a licensed encroachment
of that sidewalk for the purpose of providing food and beverages to patrons
of the restaurant.
§ 548-2. Requirements and prohibitions.
A. No portion of any licensed sidewalk cafe may encroach on sidewalk
adjacent to any property other than the property that is licensed under
this chapter.
B. Any public sidewalk on which such licensed encroachment for sidewalk
cafe purposes occurs shall maintain at all times an unobstructed width
of 60 inches adjacent to the street for use by the general public and for
ensuring accessibility by all persons traveling on such sidewalk.
C. No alcohol or fermented malt beverages or food may be served after
10:00 p.m.
D. No alcohol or fermented malt beverages may be served at any time if
the restaurant subject of the sidewalk cafe license does not hold an
appropriate class of liquor license that would entitle such service within
the restaurant.
E. No alcohol or fermented malt beverages may be served at any time if
the restaurant has not received Council approval for the enlargement of
its premises under its liquor license that includes the area of the public
sidewalk where the sidewalk cafe is located. Further, the liquor license
shall be automatically conditioned at the time of such enlargement of
the premises with a limitation that the enlargement of the premises to
allow for the activity of service or consumption of alcoholic beverages
within the sidewalk cafe area outside the restaurant under such liquor
license has no vested rights and may be suspended or revoked or nonrenewed
by the City Council without cause being shown.
F. The entire outdoor area utilized for service and consumption of food
and beverages shall be visible from the restaurant establishment.
G. Any public improvements necessary to accommodate the outdoor
service area shall be approved by the director of public works and the
Building Inspector, and the costs thereof shall be paid by the licensee.
H. Service of food and alcoholic beverages in all sidewalk cafes shall be
limited to persons seated at tables in the licensed sidewalk cafe area.
Food service shall be required to be available at all times when the
sidewalk cafe is open.
§ 548-1 LAKE MILLS CODE § 548-2
1:410
§ 548-3. License issuance, renewal, suspension or revocation.
I. Each license holder shall be responsible for policing the area of the
sidewalk cafe to ensure that alcoholic beverages are not removed from
the sidewalk cafe. All debris and unused food in the sidewalk cafe area
shall be removed by the license holder before the close of business each
day. All spills, food, litter, or any other item on the sidewalk that is
associated with the service or consumption of food and beverages shall
be cleaned or removed as soon as practicably possible to minimize slip
or fall hazards on the public sidewalk that is located inside the sidewalk
cafe, as well as the public sidewalk adjacent to the sidewalk cafe.
A. No food and no fermented malt or other alcoholic beverages may be
served in a sidewalk cafe without obtaining a sidewalk cafe license and
without having any applicable liquor licensed premises enlarged to
include the sidewalk cafe area. Strict compliance with this chapter shall
be required in all aspects of any sidewalk cafe at all times.
B. Application for a sidewalk cafe license shall be made to the City Clerk
on forms furnished by the City, and each application shall include a
scaled drawing of the precise location of the proposed sidewalk cafe
operations that shows the tables and seating to be provided, as well as
any proposed fencing or other barrier to separate the sidewalk cafe
from the remainder of the sidewalk that is to remain unencumbered for
pedestrian use. If alcoholic beverages are to be served under any liquor
license, such barriers shall be required. [Amended 12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 1103]
C. An application fee of $100 shall be submitted to the City Clerk prior to
publishing a Class I notice of public hearing on such application and
prior to placing such application on the Council agenda for a public
hearing. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
D. The applicant for a sidewalk cafe license shall be required to indemnify,
defend and hold the City and its employees and agents harmless against
all claims, liability, loss, damage or expense incurred by the City due to
any injury to or death of any person or any damage to property caused
by or resulting from the activities for which the license is granted. As
evidence of the applicant's ability to perform the conditions of the
license, the applicant shall be required to furnish a certificate of
comprehensive general liability insurance with the City of Lake Mills
named as an additional insured. Such certificate of insurance shall be in
the amount of $1,000,000 per claim or occurrence, and it shall be filed
with the City Clerk prior to the issuance of the annual license.
[Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
E. The licensing period for sidewalk cafe licenses shall be from July 1 to
June 30. Prior to expiration of such license, the license holder shall
make application and pay the application fee by no later than June 1 to
be considered for renewal of the license so that the notice and
§ 548-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 548-3
1:411
publishing requirements may be met prior to the hearing on the
renewal of such license.
F. Failure to comply with all of the terms and conditions of a sidewalk cafe
license and all requirements of this chapter may result in the
termination of the privilege of serving food or fermented malt or other
alcoholic beverages in a sidewalk cafe. If a sidewalk cafe license
becomes suspended or revoked or non-renewed by the City Council for
such noncompliance, or if the Council determines that such use of the
public sidewalk shall cease, even without a showing of cause, then no
sidewalk cafe operations of any kind at that location may continue on
the public sidewalk, and no tables or chairs or other encumbrances of
the sidewalk may remain. If such items are on the public sidewalk more
than 72 hours after a license is suspended, revoked, or non-renewed,
the City Manager shall order such encumbrance removed immediately,
and if such encumbrance remains more than 24 hours after issuance of
such removal order, the City Manager shall cause the encumbrance to
be removed and the cost thereof billed to the license holder. Failure to
pay such bill for costs within 30 days of billing shall result in the costs
being placed on the tax roll for the property at which the restaurant
conducting the sidewalk cafe has been located.
G. Any public improvements no longer necessary due to the revocation or
non-renewal of a license under this chapter shall be removed by the
City at the license holder's expense, and failure to pay such costs of
removal shall result in placing the costs on the tax roll for the property
at which the restaurant was conducting its business operations.
H. The Council shall cause notice to be served on the licensee at least
three days before a hearing is held before the Council on whether such
license shall be suspended or revoked or non-renewed, with or without
cause.
I. This chapter does not limit the Council's authority to refuse to license
areas of the public sidewalk for the service or consumption of food or
beverages in individual cases, even if the applicant or license holder
meets all conditions of this chapter.
J. The issuance of any license under this chapter may not be construed to
create a vested right for the benefit of liquor licensees. Whether a
sidewalk cafe license is issued or suspended or non-renewed is within
the Council's discretion, and no cause must be shown for any adverse
action with regard to any sidewalk cafe license.
K. The no-cause standard on nonissuance, non-renewal, suspension or
revocation is deemed reasonable by the Council due to the Council's
recognition that the sidewalk is primarily for the benefit of the public as
a whole for pedestrian travel within its entire width at all times, and
that the encumbrance permitted through the issuance of a sidewalk
cafe license is a special privilege that may be extended or withdrawn at
any time and for any reason. The notice and hearing requirement of this
§ 548-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 548-3
1:412
Chapter 556
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers; salvage yards — See Ch. 424. Nuisances — See Ch. 479.
§ 556-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Garbage, Refuse, and Recycling
Ordinance for the City of Lake Mills, Wisconsin."
§ 556-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the pick-up and disposal of
garbage and refuse and to promote recycling, composting, and resource
recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program, as
provided in § 287.11, Wis. Stats., and Chapter NR 544, Wis. Administrative
Code.
§ 556-3. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted as authorized under § 287.09(2) and (3)(b), Wis.
Stats.
§ 556-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to state or federal law. However,
whenever this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
chapter shall apply.
§ 556-5. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
Where any terms or requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or
conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply.
Where a provision of this chapter is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by
a standard in Chapter NR 544, Wis. Administrative Code, and where the
chapter provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the
Wisconsin Statutes and the Chapter NR 544 standards in effect on the date
chapter prior to any such adverse action against an existing license
holder may not be construed as a recognition of any right on the part of
the license holder to such special use of the public sidewalk.
§ 548-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 556-5
1:413
of the adoption of this chapter, or in effect on the date of the most recent
text amendment to this chapter.
§ 556-6. Applicability.
The requirements of this chapter apply to all persons within the City of
Lake Mills, Wisconsin, to include all single-family residences, multifamily
residences, commercial/business enterprises, institutional enterprises,
industrial enterprises, agricultural enterprises, and governmental agencies/
activities/facilities within the following conditions:
§ 556-7. Administration.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the City Council of
the City of Lake Mills, Wisconsin.
§ 556-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
BIMETAL CONTAINER — A container for carbonated or malt beverages that
is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
BUILDING MATERIALS — Building materials include earth, sod, rocks,
concrete, wood, lumber, plaster, plasterboard, nails, tile, insulation, and
A. All single-family, duplex, three- and four-unit residential units must be
enrolled in the City-provided contract garbage, refuse, and recycle
program.
B. Multifamily residential units with five or more separate residential units
may be enrolled in the City-provided contract garbage, refuse, and
recycle program.
C. Commercial, business, institutional, industrial, and agricultural
enterprises may be enrolled in the City-provided contract garbage,
refuse, and recycle program.
D. All regular City functions, facilities, and/or activities must be enrolled in
the City-provided contract garbage, refuse, and recycle program.
E. All enterprises identified in Subsections B and C above which are
enrolled in the City program on December 31, 1993, will automatically
be enrolled in the City program effective January 1, 1994. These
enterprises may dis-enroll from the program, provided each enterprise
notifies the City in writing at least 30 calendar days in advance of
requested termination date. Enterprises not enrolled may become
enrolled in the City program by notifying the City in writing at least 30
days prior to the first desired pickup.
F. Enterprises not enrolled in the City program shall comply with §§ 556-9,
556-10, 556-11, and any other applicable regulations in this chapter.
§ 556-5 LAKE MILLS CODE § 556-8
1:414
any refuse from remodeling or construction of homes, buildings, or any
structure.
CONTAINER BOARD — Corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
ENTERPRISE — Residential properties of five or more units, commercial,
retail, industrial, institutional, agricultural and governmental facilities and
properties. This term does not include multiple-family dwellings of four
units or less.
FOAM POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING — Packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
GARBAGE — All putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes,
including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but
excluding recognizable industrial by-products, and shall include all such
substances from all public and private establishments and from all
residences.
HDPE — High-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2.
LDPE — Low-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4.
MAGAZINES — Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
MAJOR APPLIANCES — A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven,
refrigerator or stove.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A property containing five or more residential units,
including those which are occupied seasonally.
NEWSPAPER — A newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This
term does not include industrial process waste.
OTHER RESINS or MULTIPLE RESINS — Plastic resins labeled by the SPI
code #7.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, local
governmental unit, as defined in § 66.0131(1)(a), Wis. Stats, state agency or
authority or federal agency.
PETE — Polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1.
A. Is designed for serving food or beverages.
Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
B.
Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
C.
§ 556-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 556-8
1:415
PLASTIC CONTAINER — An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can,
jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a
product that is the subject of a retail sale.
POST-CONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in § 291.05(2),
Wis. Stats., waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in § 289.01(17),
Wis. Stats.
PP — Polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5.
PS — Polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code #6.
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3.
RECYCLABLES — Recyclable material as defined by Wisconsin DNR, the
City of Lake Mills, or its authorized agent or contractor, to include but not
be limited to:
REFUSE or MATERIAL WASTE — Includes, but shall not be limited to the
following:
A. Brown, green, clear glass.
B. Tin, aluminum, and bimetal cans.
Plastics (bags, jugs, jars), including those made of PETE (#1), HDPE
(#2), PVC (#3), LDPE (#4), PP (#5), PS (#6), and other resins or
multiple resins (#7).
C.
D. Foam polystyrene packing materials.
E. Newspaper.
F. Magazines, phone books, paper back books, junk mail.
G. Chip board (cereal boxes, shoe boxes, etc.).
H. Office, school, computer paper, envelopes.
I. Corrugated cardboard.
J. Aseptic containers (juice boxes, waxed milk cartons).
K. Scrap metal (single item under 20 pounds).
L. Lead acid automotive batteries.
M. Waste oil and oil filters.
N. Antifreeze.
O. Major appliances, including Freon-based appliances.
P. Automobile/small truck tires.
Q. Steel containers.
§ 556-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 556-8
1:416
SOLID WASTE — As specified in § 289.01(33), Wis. Stats.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — As specified in § 289.01(35), Wis. Stats.
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process which
is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of solid waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
WASTE TIRE — A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
YARD WASTES — Yard refuse materials including grass clippings, weeds,
bushes, leaves, brush, brush clippings, branch clippings, Christmas trees
and all residue from tree removal, trimming and/or planting.
§ 556-9. Items to be separated from post-consumer waste
(garbage).
The following materials shall be separated from post-consumer waste and
shall not be disposed of in landfills:
All kitchen wastes, including household food, accumulations of animal
feed and vegetable matter attendant on the preparation, use, cooking
and serving of foods.
A.
General household trash and refuse, including ashes, wood crates,
wrapping materials, cloth materials, discarded toys, discarded clothing,
and furniture items.
B.
A. Lead-acid automotive batteries.
B. Major appliances.
C. Waste oil, oil filters, and antifreeze.
D. Waste tires.
E. Yard waste.
F. Aseptic containers (juice boxes, milk cartons).
G. Aluminum, bimetal, tin, and steel containers.
H. Glass containers.
I. Corrugated paper or other container board.
J. Newspapers, office paper, magazines, phone books, paperback books,
and junk mail.
K. Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and
other resins or multiple resins, which are plastic containers #1 through
#7, unless a variance is in effect from the DNR. Currently, only plastic
containers #1 and #2 are banned from landfills, and other plastic
containers may be placed in the garbage cart until and unless the DNR
rescinds the variance related to plastic containers #3 through #7.
§ 556-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 556-9
1:417
§ 556-10. Separation requirements exempted.
The separation requirements of § 556-9 do not apply to the following:
§ 556-11. Care of separated recyclable materials. [Amended
4-4-2006 by Ord. No. 977]
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in
accordance with § 556-9 shall be kept free of contaminants such as food or
product residue, medical waste, and agricultural chemical containers.
§ 556-12. Management of lead acid batteries, major appliances,
waste oil, and tires.
Persons enrolled in the City's refuse and recycling program shall place the
following items curbside no earlier than the second Saturday of each month
prior to the bulky pickup on the third Monday of each month. Persons not
enrolled in the City's program shall make private arrangements for the
lawful disposal or recycling of items listed in Subsections A through E,
and may dispose of items listed in Subsection F in accordance with that
subsection.
L. Foam polystyrene packaging, unless a variance is in effect from the
DNR.
M. Plastic bags unless a variance is in effect from the DNR.
A. Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties that send
their post-consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that recovers the
materials specified in § 556-9 from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible.
B. Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less
than 30% of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste
burned as supplemental fuel.
C. A recyclable material specified in § 556-9 for which a variance has been
granted by the Department of Natural Resources under § 287.11(2m),
Wis. Stats., or NR 544.14, Wis. Administrative Code.
A. Motor oil shall be placed in one gallon or larger containers with secure
lids and the containers shall be labeled "drain oil."
B. Tires, not to exceed more than two tires per bulky pickup, and not to
exceed more than eight tires annually.
C. Lead-acid batteries.
D. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, residential furnaces, boilers,
dehumidifiers, water heaters, microwave ovens, furniture and other
large household items, computers and monitors may be placed at
§ 556-9 LAKE MILLS CODE § 556-12
1:418
§ 556-13. Preparation and collection of recyclable materials.
Persons not enrolled in the City's refuse and recycling program shall not
dispose of the following items in landfills and shall make private
arrangements for the lawful recycling of the items listed in Subsections A
through G, and those persons enrolled in the City's refuse and recycling
program shall place the following items in the recycle bin provided for the
scheduled curbside pickup that occurs every other Monday:
curbside for bulky refuse removal, provided such items are being
discarded from residences and not commercial businesses.
E. Household appliances, such as refrigerators, dishwashers, stoves, and
any other large container with a snap or locking lid or cover, provided
such items are being discarded from residences and not commercial
businesses, and provided the doors or lids are removed prior to placing
at curbside for pickup.
F. Leaves, branch clippings, brush and Christmas trees shall be placed at
curbside for pickup by the Department of Public Works according to
policies as determined by resolution of the City Council from time to
time, and such items shall not be placed at the curb for pick up as part
of the City's garbage, refuse and recyclable collections.
A. Aluminum and bimetal and steel containers which have been rinsed or
cleaned.
B. Corrugated paper or other container board.
C. Newspapers and other items printed on newsprint, magazines and
other materials printed on similar paper, telephone books, paperback
books, office paper, junk mail and mixed paper.
D. Foam polystyrene packaging, unless exempt by variance of the DNR. At
the time of passage of this chapter, foam polystyrene packaging may be
landfilled under variance by the DNR. If the variance is rescinded by the
DNR, these items must be recycled and shall be placed in the recycle
bin.
E. Plastic bags and plastic containers #1 through #7, unless exempt by
variance of the DNR. At the time of passage of this chapter, plastic bags
and plastic containers #3 through #7 may be landfilled under variance
by the DNR. If the variance is rescinded by the DNR, plastic containers
#3 through #7 may be recycled and shall be placed in the recycle bin.
All plastic containers that are required to be placed in a recycle bin,
which at the present time are plastic containers #1 and #2, shall be
rinsed, caps removed, and the containers and their caps shall be placed
in the recycle bin.
F. Glass containers shall be rinsed, caps removed, and both the containers
and the caps shall be placed in the recycle bin.
§ 556-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 556-13
1:419
§ 556-14. Management of yard waste, construction materials,
concrete, rocks, earth, and similar materials.
§ 556-15. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
enterprises.
Owners or designated agents of enterprises not enrolled in the City
contracted service shall do all of the following to recycle the materials
specified in § 556-9 :
G. Aseptic containers (juice boxes, milk cartons) shall be rinsed and placed
in the recycle bin.
A. Leaves, branches, brush, and other yard waste, as well as Christmas
trees may not be disposed of in landfills and may not be placed curbside
for pickup by the City contractor. Such items may be disposed of in the
City's yard waste collection facility on Stony Road.
B. As an alternative to transporting leaves, branches and brush to the yard
waste facility, residents of the City of Lake Mills, regardless of
enrollment in the City's contract refuse and recycling removal, may
participate in leaf removal and brush pickup by the Public Works
Department in accordance with policies established by the City Council.
C. No concrete, stones, construction materials or dirt may be landfilled or
placed curbside for pickup, and private arrangements for the lawful
disposal of such items shall be made, whether the person disposing of
same is enrolled in the City program or not.
A. Provide adequate separate containers for the recyclable materials.
B. Notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants and occupants
of the properties about the established recycling program.
C. Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants, and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
D. Notify users, tenants, and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle
solid waste, which materials are collected, how to prepare the materials
in order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or
sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or
company, including a name, address and telephone number.
E. The requirements specified in Subsections A through D above do not
apply to the owners or designated agents of enterprises if the postconsumer
waste generated within the facility is treated at a processing
facility licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers
for recycling the materials specified in § 556-9 from solid waste in as
pure a form as is technically feasible.
§ 556-13 LAKE MILLS CODE § 556-16
1:420
§ 556-16. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
multiple-family dwellings.
Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings not enrolled in
the City contracted service shall do all of the following to recycle the
materials specified in § 556-9 :
§ 556-17. Hazardous, toxic, medical or biomedical wastes.
No hazardous or toxic wastes, and no medical or biomedical wastes, may
be placed in the recycle carts or the garbage carts supplied by the City
contractor, and no disposal of these items may occur by persons enrolled or
not enrolled in the City program, except as permitted under the laws of the
State of Wisconsin.
§ 556-18. Prohibitions on disposal of recyclable materials separated
for recycling.
No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid
waste treatment facility any of the materials specified in § 556-9 which have
been separated for recycling, except waste tires may be burned with energy
recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
A. Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
B. Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling
and at least semiannually thereafter about the established recycling
program.
C. Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
D. Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which
materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet
the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and
hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name,
address and telephone number.
E. The requirements specified in Subsections A through D above do not
apply to the owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings if
the post-consumer waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a
processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural Resources
that recovers for recycling the materials specified in § 556-9 from solid
waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
F. Apartment units of five or more units in which each unit independently
pays a separate charge for garbage, refuse, and recycle pickup and
disposal to the City shall be treated as single-family residences for the
purpose of this chapter.
§ 556-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 556-19
1:421
§ 556-19. Collection and disposal regulations. [Amended 9-16-2014
by Ord. No. 1135A; 2-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1199A]
The collection of garbage, refuse, and recycle materials by the City
contractor shall be made in accordance with the following schedules and
practices:
A. Regular weekly garbage service. The contractor shall furnish weekly
collection service of garbage that has been placed in the carts furnished
for that purpose. Such pickup shall occur on Mondays from every
residential unit or enterprise enrolled in the City contract program,
unless the pickup schedule has been modified to Tuesdays in the case of
legal holidays that have been recognized by the contractor.
B. Recycle service. The contractor shall furnish collection of recyclable
items that have been placed in carts furnished for that purpose. Such
pickup shall occur on every other Monday from every residential unit or
enterprise enrolled in the City contract program, unless the pickup
schedule has been modified to Tuesdays in the case of legal holidays
that have been recognized by the contractor.
C. Bulk pickup service. Items not placed in the carts furnished by the
contractor for garbage and recycle service may be picked up at
curbside by the contractor. Such bulk pickup service shall be scheduled
by the owner or occupant of a property by contacting the contractor
and verifying a date for such bulk pickup service.
D. All carts for garbage or recycle service shall be placed curbside for
designated pickup times by no later than 6:00 a.m. on the morning of
the scheduled pickup. No carts may be placed in the tree lawn or in the
driveway apron adjacent to any property prior to 6:00 p.m. on Sundays,
and all carts so placed shall be removed from the public right-of-way by
no later than 8:00 a.m. on the Tuesday immediately following the
pickup on Monday. In the case of a holiday pickup on Tuesdays, all carts
shall be removed by no later than 8:00 a.m. on the Wednesday
immediately following the pickup on Tuesday.
E. No carts may be stored on the right-of-way, including the tree lawns or
driveway aprons, at any time other than the times listed in Subsections
C and D above.
F. No carts may be stored on private property in any required front yard
or in any required side yard that fronts on a street, in the case of a
corner lot.
G. Carts shall be placed on opposite sides of private driveway aprons,
when possible, and near the curb at single-family residences, with the
side of the cart that has the metal bar attached to it facing the street.
Carts may not be placed between parked vehicles and the street.
H. No items to be placed curbside for bulk pickup may be so placed more
than 48 hours preceding the bulk pickup scheduled with the City
§ 556-19 LAKE MILLS CODE § 556-19
1:422
§ 556-20. Garbage, refuse, recycle collection rates.
§ 556-21. Contractor requirements.
contractor. Any items placed for bulk pickup more than 48 hours prior
to the pickup scheduled with the City contractor shall be deemed to
be public nuisance and may subject the owner or occupant or other
responsible person to a citation and forfeiture of $100, plus costs, for
the first violation. Second, and subsequent, violations may be subject
to a citation and forfeiture of $200, plus costs. In addition, or as an
alternative, if items intended for bulk pickup have been placed in the
public right-of-way more than 48 hours preceding the pickup scheduled
with the City contractor, the City may cause the public nuisance to be
abated through summary abatement procedures, and the cost of such
abatement shall be charged in accordance with the public nuisance
regulations in the City Code.
I. The collection of materials not included in the City contract may be
obtained through private contracts of the responsible persons'
choosing.
J. It shall be unlawful for any individual or organization to remove any
recyclable items from the carts placed at curbside unless such
individual or organization is the person responsible for placing the
recycle cart curbside or unless such individual or organization is an
agent of the City.
K. The care and cleaning of the carts shall be the responsibility of the
person to whom the carts have been issued by the City contractor. Any
theft or vandalism of such carts shall be promptly reported to the Lake
Mills Police Department and the City contractor by the person to whom
they have been issued.
L. Unless acting as an agent of the City, it shall be unlawful for any
individual or organization to remove any recyclable items from any
trash receptacle, dumpster, or cart on public property within the City of
Lake Mills, including but not necessarily limited to public parks, tree
lawns and driveway aprons.
M. It shall be unlawful for any individual or organization to dump the
contents of any trash receptacle, dumpster or cart onto public property
within the City of Lake Mills.
A. Rates established. All residential units of four units or less and all
enterprise units enrolled in the City provided contract service shall pay
a monthly charge as determined by the City Council. This charge may
be adjusted from time to time as determined by the City Council.
B. Additional services provided by any contractor to any apartment unit of
five units or more or any enterprise shall be by private agreement with
private hauler.
§ 556-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 556-21
1:423
§ 556-22. Condition of trucks; equipment.
The contractor shall use enclosed, leakproof packer-type truck bodies for all
garbage collections. All trucks must be in good condition. The City has the
right to inspect this equipment any time during normal hours. If equipment
does not meet with the approval of the City, the contractor shall have a
reasonable time to repair equipment and must then get the approval of the
City. All refuse shall be collected and transported in such a manner as to
prevent any falling or spilling of the materials. When spillage does occur,
the materials shall be picked up immediately and returned to the vehicle
and the area properly cleaned.
§ 556-23. Landfill regulations.
§ 556-24. Recycle reporting requirements.
A. Complaints. The contractor shall undertake all obligations required of
him under the garbage and recycle collection contract in a neat, orderly
and efficient manner, and shall use care and diligence in the
performance of said contract, and shall provide neat, orderly and
courteous employees and personnel on its crews. All complaints shall
be given prompt and courteous attention, and in the case of alleged
missed scheduled collections, the contractor shall investigate the
complaint, and if the allegations are verified, shall arrange for the
pickup of all disposal materials not collected with 24 hours after the
complaint is received.
B. Compliance. The contractor covenants and agrees to comply at all times
with all proper laws, ordinances and regulations of the City of Lake
Mills, County of Jefferson and State of Wisconsin, at any time properly
applicable to the contractor's operations under said contract.
C. Insurance. The contractor shall carry insurance in accordance with the
specifications and conditions of the current contract.
A. The contractor will dispose of all garbage and/or refuse at a WDNR
approved and licensed landfill facility.
B. The City will not maintain any landfill facility/operation.
C. Residents and enterprises needing landfill services must establish a
private agreement with a private landfill operator for the use of such
facilities.
A. The contractor will provide monthly reports to the City on the
quantities of recyclable materials picked up and disposed of under the
terms of the City contract.
B. Any enterprise not enrolled in the City contract service for recyclable
material will provide to the City an annual statement on the quantities
of recycle materials picked up and disposed of through the private
recycle contractor. This statement will be in a format provided by the
§ 556-21 LAKE MILLS CODE § 556-24
1:424
§ 556-25. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 565
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 650. Zoning regulations — See Ch. 660.
§ 565-1. Declaration of purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to prevent safety hazards caused by
inappropriate discharge of stormwater and to reduce the unnecessary costs
City. The statement must be authenticated by the private contractor
and submitted to the City Clerk no later than March 1 of each calendar
year for the previous calendar year.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the City
of Lake Mills may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling,
post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites
and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family
dwellings and enterprises (nonresidential facilities and properties) and
any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept
confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No
person may refuse access to any authorized officer, employee or
authorized representative of the City of Lake Mills who requests access
for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials.
No person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such an inspection.
B. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be issued a
citation by the City of Lake Mills. The issuance of a citation shall not
preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the
same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law
relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance
of a citation under this subsection.
C. Penalties for violating this chapter may be assessed as follows:
(1) Any person who shall violate § 556-19may be required to forfeit
$100, plus costs, for a first violation and $200 for a second and
subsequent violation. Each day of a continuing violation is
considered a separate violation.
(2) Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter, except
§ 556-19, may be required to forfeit not less than $50 nor more
than $200 for each violation, plus costs.
§ 556-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-1
1:425
and burdens associated with the treatment of stormwater by the
Wastewater Utility. The City Council of the City of Lake Mills finds that
the discharge of stormwater from private properties onto public rights-ofway
creates a safety hazard to pedestrians and motorists. The City Council
also finds that the discharge of stormwater to the sanitary sewers adds to
the cost of treating sewerage and it detracts from the available capacity
of the wastewater treatment plant. Further, the City Council declares that
violations of this chapter regulating stormwater shall constitute a public
nuisance.
§ 565-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISCHARGE — A discernible, confined and discrete conveyance of
stormwater.
OUTFALL — The point at which stormwater is discharged to the City storm
sewers, to the surface of the ground, or to any other collection system.
PERSON — An individual, owner, operator, corporation, partnership,
association or entity.
STORMWATER — Water runoff from downspouts, roofs, sump pumps,
surface water runoff and drainage, provided none of the foregoing is
combined with sewerage or other pollutants requiring treatment by the
Wastewater Utility.
§ 565-3. Stormwater discharges.
A. No person may discharge stormwater from an outfall by combining
such discharge with the sanitary sewer distribution or collection system
of the City.
B. No person may discharge stormwater from an outfall in such a manner
that the discharge disperses directly onto the surface of any public
sidewalk or paved portion of any street.
C. Persons may discharge stormwater directly to a storm sewer, provided
the manner of connection has been approved in writing by the Director
of Public Works.
D. If no storm sewer exists adjacent to the property, storm sewer
discharges from roof downspouts may discharge directly to the paved
portion of the street, provided no obstruction to any public sidewalk is
created, and provided the outfall location and plan therefor are
approved in writing by the Director of Public Works and, if also required
by law, by the Plumbing Inspector.
E. Property owners, whose properties are not adjacent to a storm sewer,
may apply for compliance deferral relative to the requirements of
Subsection B above. Such deferral shall be effective until October 1,
§ 565-1 LAKE MILLS CODE § 565-3
1:426
§ 565-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 573
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public improvements — See Ch. 161.
Bicycles — See Ch. 264.
In-line skating — See Ch. 417.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 491.
Sidewalk cafes — See Ch. 548.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 650.
2000, provided such property owners have filed with the Director of
Public Works a completed application on forms provided by the City
Clerk by no later than October 1, 1999.
A. The Director of Public Works is empowered to investigate any
suspected violations of this chapter through any lawful means.
B. Upon finding a violation of this chapter, the Public Works Director may
issue a notice of noncompliance to the property owner. Such notice
shall state that the noncompliance is required to be corrected within 30
days of receipt of the notice, or within such longer time deemed
reasonable by the Director of Public Works, taking into consideration
such factors as the nature of the outfall, the weather conditions which
may interfere with any likely corrective measures, and any relevant
difficulties presented by the topography and configuration of the
property.
C. Upon failure to correct the noncompliance within the time stated in the
notice, the Director of Public Works shall issue an order directing the
property owner to correct the violation within 30 days of receipt of the
notice or otherwise be subject to possible municipal citations and
forfeitures of up to $100 per violation per day, plus costs.
D. In addition to the foregoing, or as an alternative in cases of immediate
hazard to public safety, the City Attorney may seek other lawful
remedies in an effort to abate a public nuisance.
§ 565-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-4
1:427

ARTICLE I
Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Sec. 5-1-4 of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 573-1. Prohibited obstructions.
No person shall stand, sit, loaf or loiter or engage in any sport or exercise
on any public street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground within the City in
such manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic thereon or to prevent or hinder free ingress to or from any
place of business or amusement, church, public hall or meeting place.
§ 573-2. Use of play vehicles.
Subject to the provisions of § 573-1, bicycles, play vehicles and in-line
skates are permitted on all sidewalks except sidewalks adjacent to the
following streets: Main Street between Water Street and Madison Street;
Lake Street and Main Street on the west side between Lake Street and
Madison Street; the south side of East Lake Street between Ford Court and
Main Street; West Lake Street between Main Street and a point 260 feet
west from the west line of Church Street where Church Street intersects
West Lake Street. As used herein, the term "play vehicle" shall mean a
coaster, skateboard, roller skates, sled, toboggan, unicycle or toy vehicle
of any form upon which a person may ride. "Play vehicle" does not mean
strollers or wagons used for transporting children when the children being
so transported are under the direct control and supervision of an adult.
§ 573-3. Prohibited activity.
No person riding upon any play vehicle, as defined in § 573-2, may attach
the play vehicle or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway or go
upon any roadway while riding upon any play vehicle, except while crossing
a roadway at a crosswalk.
§ 573-4. Violations and penalties
Penalties for violating § 573-2 shall be the penalties set forth in §§ 264-8
and 417-6 of the Municipal Code. Penalties for violating § 573-3 shall be not
more than $20 plus costs of prosecution for a first offense, and not more
than $50 plus costs of prosecution for second and subsequent offense within
one year of the first offense.
§ 573-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-4
1:429

ARTICLE II
Sidewalks and Vaults
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Sec. 5-1-5 of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 573-5. Prohibition.
No person shall keep or leave open any cellar door or grating of any vault
on any highway or sidewalk within the City or permit the same to be left or
kept open.
§ 573-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-5
1:431

ARTICLE III
Grades and Widths
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Secs. 7-1-1 and 7-1-2, of
the 2009 Code of Ordinances]
§ 573-6. Establishment.
The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be established by the
City Council and shall be recorded in the office of the City Clerk. No street,
alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is established. The
grades of all streets having curb and gutter on the effective date hereof are
established at the levels then existing.
§ 573-7. Altering grade prohibited.
No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public
ground or any part thereof unless authorized and instructed to do so by the
City Council.
§ 573-8. Widths.
The width of the traveled roadway curblines on all streets shall be as
indicated upon profiles for the respective streets.
§ 573-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-8
1:433

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Sec. 7-1-3 of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 573-9. Expense of construction.
All sidewalks, curbs and gutters within the City shall be built, constructed
and maintained wholly at the cost and expense of the owner of the property
abutting such sidewalks, curb or gutter on the side where constructed.
Curb and gutter and sidewalk replacement to City streets shall be assessed
pursuant to § 161-4 of this Code, at the rate as determined by the City
Council of the City.
§ 573-10. Material and location.
All sidewalks hereafter built or rebuilt within the City shall be constructed
of cement concrete and shall be parallel to and 12 inches distant from the
abutting property line, except in any instance where a concrete walk has
already been built along a portion of any block, the remainder of the walk
on that side of said block may be located at a greater or less distance than
12 inches from the abutting property line to correspond with the concrete
walk already constructed.
§ 573-11. Slope.
All such sidewalks shall have an even slope of 1/4 inch to the foot towards
the adjacent gutter, and the elevation of the side of the walk next to the
property line shall be at the established grade on streets where such grade
is now or may hereafter be established.
§ 573-12. Width. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
All such sidewalks outside the business portion of the City shall be four feet
in width.
§ 573-13. Excavation.
For curb and gutter construction, the natural soil or earth when of clay or
heavy soil must be removed to a depth of 10 inches below the finished grade
of gutters.
§ 573-14. Sand foundation required.
When the subgrade has been prepared to the proper grade, there shall be
spread upon it a layer of clean sand, gravel or cinders to such a depth as
will give upon thorough consolidation a thickness of six inches. Where the
natural subgrade is sand or gravel, this will not be required.
§ 573-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-15
1:435
§ 573-15. Dimensions of gutter and sidewalks.
The gutter shall be uniformly 18 inches wide and six inches thick at the lip
with a pitch of 1 1/2 inches toward the face. The standard thickness of the
curb shall be six inches and its height six inches. The overall dimensions of
the combined curb and gutter shall be 24 inches wide and 12 inches high.
The walks shall be 4 1/2 inches thick and four feet wide, unless otherwise
specified by the City.
§ 573-16. Lines and grades.
All work shall be laid out to the lines and grades given by the Engineer.
§ 573-17. Material requirements.
§ 573-18. Sidewalk repairs.
The City Manager or a designee shall inspect sidewalks to determine
whether sidewalks are unsafe, defective, or insufficient. Inspection findings
will be reported to the City Clerk and the Public Works Board. The City
Manager shall cause unsafe, defective, or insufficient sidewalks to be
repaired or replaced at the City's expense.
A. Sidewalk and curb and gutter shall be constructed of one course, Class
"A" air-entrained, portland cement concrete conforming to Section 501
of the State of Wisconsin, Department of Transportation, Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
B. Admixtures may be used only with the written approval of the Director
of Public Works.
§ 573-15 LAKE MILLS CODE § 573-18
1:436
ARTICLE V
Obstructions and Encroachments; Privileges in Streets
[Adopted 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 1020B (Secs. 7-1-4 and 7-1-5 of the
2009 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 573-19. Obstructions and encroachments.
A. Obstructions and encroachments prohibited. No person shall encroach
upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk,
public grounds or land dedicated to public use, or any part thereof, or
permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on
any public way, unless a privilege in the street has been granted under
§ 573-20 or unless such obstruction or encroachment is permitted
under the specific conditions provided in Subsection B or C below.
B. The prohibitions of Subsection A above shall not apply to the following:
[Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 1068; at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(1) Projecting signs located over public property shall be prohibited
unless a privilege in the street is obtained under § 573-20.
(2) Sandwich board signs, otherwise known as sidewalk signs, in the
B-1 Zoning District, provided such signs meet the standards as set
forth under § 660-121.
(3) Merchandise displays on public sidewalks in the B-1 Zoning
District, provided such items meet the standards as set forth under
§ 660-84.
(4) Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded
and which do not extend more than three feet onto a public
sidewalk, provided such items do not so remain for a period of more
than two hours.
(5) Awnings installed to extend over the public sidewalk in the B-1
Zoning District, provided they maintain a minimum height of seven
feet above the sidewalk surface, and provided they have been
previously authorized and are in existence prior to the enactment
of this article. Any new awnings that were not authorized prior to
the date of enactment of this article shall be subject to § 573-20,
Privileges in streets.
(6) Signs on awnings in the B-1 Zoning District that are consistent with
the requirements of § 660-98G(2)(j)[3].
(7) Planters on the public sidewalk in any B-1 Zoning District, provided
the planters are subject to a permit granted by the Council on April
4, 2000, addressing the size, design and placement of such planters
by the Lake Mills Chamber of Commerce, as well as the care of the
plants placed within such planters. Any planters not covered by the
§ 573-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-19
1:437
Chamber permit that will be or have been placed on the right-ofway
shall be subject to § 573-20, Privileges in streets.
(8) Sidewalk cafes that have been licensed under regulations in
Chapter 548.
(9) Fire escapes and jump platforms, which do not extend below any
point 10 feet above the sidewalk or alley, and which have been
permitted by the Council on a case-by-case basis prior to the
enactment of this article. Any fire escapes or jump platforms that
replace such existing, approved structures and any newly placed
fire escapes or jump platforms that will extend over the public
right-of-way after the enactment of this article shall be subject to
§ 573-20, Privileges in streets.
(10) Temporary encroachments or obstructions authorized by permit
from the Public Works Director for no more than 90 days, and in
accordance with § 573-36.
(11) Excavations and openings permitted under Article VIII of this
chapter.
(12) Public utility encroachments duly authorized by the Wisconsin
Statutes or this Code.
(13) American flags may be placed on tree lawns (terraces) by adjacent
property owners, provided the total height of any such flag and
staff does not exceed 30 inches.
C. The prohibitions of Subsection A above shall not apply to mailboxes in
the right-of-way, provided any such mailbox complies with the
following:
(1) The post or other support for the mailbox must be set back at least
one foot from the face of the curb.
(2) The mailbox must be set back at least six inches from the face of
the curb.
(3) The bottom of the mailbox shall be not less than 42 inches above
the traveled portion of the street closest to the mailbox.
(4) The mailbox and its post or support shall not encroach upon or
obstruct any sidewalk or in any way interfere with the use of the
sidewalk by pedestrians.
(5) The post or support for the mailbox shall not exceed dimensions of
4.5 inches in diameter or four inches by four inches across.
D. Mailboxes that do not comply with the requirements of Subsection C
above are deemed obstructions and may be subject to orders for
removal. If removal is so ordered, the owner of the property abutting
such obstruction shall remove said obstruction within 30 days of receipt
§ 573-19 LAKE MILLS CODE § 573-19
1:438
§ 573-20. Privileges in streets.
of such order, and if said obstruction is not removed prior to the
expiration of such thirty-day period, the property owner may be subject
to citations under § 1-19 of this Code for each day the obstruction
continues, unless the property owner makes application for and
receives a privilege in the street under § 573-20.
E. Any person depositing snow or ice onto any public sidewalk or street or
other public property, or causing the same to be so deposited, unless
specifically authorized by the Director of Public Works, may be subject
to a forfeiture of no less than $25 and no more than $100, plus costs of
prosecution, for each violation of this section.
F. Any person placing, or causing to be placed, any hoses used to convey
stormwater or groundwater onto or across public right-of-way may be
subject to a forfeiture of no less than $100, plus costs. Each day on
which a violation of this section occurs and continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. Section 66.0425 of the Wisconsin Statutes, entitled "Privileges in
Streets," and § 86.04 of the Wisconsin Statutes, entitled "Highway
Encroachments," along with any amendments thereto, are adopted by
reference as fully as if set out verbatim herein. Privileges for an
obstruction or encroachment in the public right-of-way or on other
public property, or for an enlargement or alteration to an obstruction or
encroachment within the public right-of-way or on other public property
shall be granted only as provided in this section.
B. All existing, new or enlarged encroachments or obstructions that are
nonconforming to the provisions of § 573-19B or D shall comply with the
requirements of this section.
C. Property owners presently having or using encroachments or
obstructions of the public right-of-way or public property that are not
exempted under § 573-19B or C, or who are contemplating the
installation of such encroachments or obstructions, shall forthwith
apply to the City Council for authority to continue or to install the same,
as the case may be, on the terms and conditions hereinafter stated.
D. Applications for privileges in streets shall be filed with the Director of
Public Works and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
and initial processing fee of $150. There shall be no proration of the
application and initial processing fee.
(1) If the encroachment is aboveground or underground, the
application shall include a drawing to scale of not less than one
inch equals 10 feet on paper 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches in size. This
drawing shall show the location and dimensions of the
aboveground or underground encroachment, e.g., projecting sign,
overhanging clock, awning, fire escape, jump platform, or structure
§ 573-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-20
1:439
under the surface of the right-of-way or public property, in relation
to the applicant's property and in relation to the right-of-way or
other public property where such encroachment does or will exist.
(2) If the encroachment is located on the surface of the right-of-way or
other public property, the application shall include a plat of survey
at a scale of not less than one inch equals 10 feet on paper 8 1/2
inches by 14 inches in size. This survey must show the area subject
to the privilege in streets in relation to the owner's property and in
relation to the right-of-way or other public property where the
encroachment does or will exist. The survey shall include a legal
description and square footage of the public area to be occupied by
the privilege in streets.
(3) If the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, recommends
approval of an application for a privilege in streets, the Director
shall inform the applicant in writing of the recommendations and
any special conditions of approval which are listed in Subsection
D(7). In the event that the Director does not recommend approval
of the privilege to the Council, or recommends approval with
special conditions listed in Subsection D(7) to which the applicant
is in disagreement, the applicant may appeal that decision to the
Council within 30 days of receipt of the Director's written reasons
for not recommending the grant of the privilege or placing special
conditions on the proposed privilege. The Council may affirm,
reverse or modify the initial determination of the Director, and the
process for approval shall continue under Subsection D(4) below.
(4) Following concurrence with the applicant with the recommended
conditions of approval, or following a reversal or modification of
the determination of the Director by the Council on appeal, the City
Attorney, in cooperation with the Director, shall prepare an
agreement setting forth the requirements and conditions under
which the privilege in streets would be permitted if the City Council
approves the application and the agreement.
(5) The Council may, in its discretion, grant or deny such application. If
denied, the Council may, in the case of an existing use, order the
same to be removed within 30 days pursuant to the terms,
conditions and penalties provided in § 86.04, Wis. Stats. In the
event of failure or refusal on the part of the property owner so
ordered, the Council may, under § 86.04(2), seek a court order for
the removal by the time stated in the order, and if not so removed,
then the City may cause the removal thereof and assess the costs of
such removal to the property as a special charge.
(6) If said application is granted by the Council, it shall be granted only
upon the following conditions:
(a) By its acceptance, the applicant, or his or her heirs and assigns
shall:
§ 573-20 LAKE MILLS CODE § 573-20
1:440
[1] Become liable for damages to person or property by
reason of the granting of the privilege; and
[2] Be obligated to remove the same upon 10 days' written
notice by the City.
(b) The applicant shall file a bond in an amount determined by the
Council not to exceed $10,000 that runs to the City and such
third parties as may be injured or have incurred damages.
Such bond shall be to secure the performance of the conditions
in Subsection D(6)(a), and said bond shall be approved by the
City Attorney.
(c) Following approval of the privilege by the Council, the
resolution granting the privilege, and the agreement setting
forth the requirements and conditions under the privilege,
shall be recorded in the Office of the Jefferson County Register
of Deeds.
(d) The Clerk shall verify annually that the bond continues to
remain in force, and if said bond should lapse, then the
applicant is to be notified immediately to file a bond within 10
days or the matter will be brought to the Council for
termination of the privilege. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1103]
(7) Special privileges - optional conditions. If a privilege is granted by
the Council, it may, if the circumstances warrant, require any or all
of the following as additional conditions of the grant of the
privilege:
(a) The applicant may be required to furnish proof that sufficient
and proper public liability insurance is carried which will
afford adequate protection to the City in connection with said
privilege;
(b) The applicant may be required to make such alteration,
reconstruction and safeguarding of any special privilege as the
Council deems necessary;
(c) The property owners and/or contractors working for the
property owners that receive the grant of a privilege may be
required to execute waivers or agreements in favor of the City
exonerating it from any liability for damages connected with
the use of such privilege, or caused by construction, operation
or maintenance of such privilege.
(8) The following additional responsibilities shall be applicable to any
grant of a privilege in the streets:
(a) The holder of such privilege shall be entitled to no damages for
removal of the obstruction or encroachment, if so ordered by
§ 573-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-20
1:441
the City, and if he or she does not remove the same upon due
notice, it shall be removed at his or her expense.
(b) Third parties whose rights are interfered with by the granting
of the privilege shall have a right of action only against the
holder of the privilege.
(9) Removal of encroachment or obstruction. The recipient of the
privilege shall remove said encroachment or obstruction and
restore the public right-of-way or other public property upon 10
days' written notice by the City of Lake Mills. Additionally, the
applicant or the applicant's heirs or assigns may terminate the
privilege by removing the encroachment or obstruction and by
restoring the surface of the area affected by the same to a condition
comparable to that of the remainder of the right-of-way or other
public property adjacent to the area affected by the privilege, and
by recording a suitable document terminating the privilege, and
filing the same with the City Clerk. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 573-20 LAKE MILLS CODE § 573-20
1:442
ARTICLE VI
Use Restrictions
[Adopted 6-3-1997 by Ord. No. 769B (Sec. 7-1-6 of the 2009 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 573-21. Machines with lugs or cleats prohibited.
No person shall operate or draw any vehicle or machine having metal lugs
or cleats on the wheels over any permanent street or alley within the City
except upon conditions imposed by the Director of Public Works.
§ 573-22. Locked wheels prohibited.
No person shall operate any wheeled vehicle upon any permanent street
with any wheel locked or fastened so that it will not revolve.
§ 573-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-22
1:443

ARTICLE VII
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 970 (Sec. 7-1-7 of the 2009 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 573-23. Clearing of snow from sidewalk.
The owner, occupant or person in charge of each property located within the
City shall, as soon as practicable, and within 24 hours after the cessation of
any storm depositing snow on the sidewalk abutting the property, clear the
snow from the entire width of the sidewalk.
§ 573-24. Ice upon sidewalk.
When ice has formed upon any such sidewalk through melting and
refreezing or for any other reason, the owner, occupant, or person in charge
of each property abutting such sidewalk shall keep the same sprinkled with
ashes, sawdust, sand or salt in such a way as to prevent the sidewalk from
being slippery or creating a hazard.
§ 573-25. Treatment by City; costs.
If under §§ 573-23 and 573-24 of this article the sidewalks are not kept clear
of snow, or if any ice forming on the sidewalks is not treated to minimize
slip hazards, the City may treat the ice or clear the snow from the sidewalk
and the property owner may be charged for the costs associated with such
work performed by the City.
§ 573-26. Failure to pay charges.
If the property owner fails to pay or cause to be paid such charges, the
charges shall be placed on the tax roll pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627.
§ 573-27. Courtesy notice.
A. Whenever a principal structure is located on the property abutting such
sidewalk that has not been cleared of snow or that has not had ice
properly treated to minimize slip hazards, as required under § 573-23
or 573-24 of this article, a courtesy notice may be affixed to the main
entrance of such principal structure notifying the owner or occupant
that the City will be removing the snow or treating the ice if, within 12
hours after the issuance of such notice, the owner or occupant has still
failed to cause the sidewalks to be cleared of snow or has still failed to
treat the ice to minimize slip hazards.
B. Failure by the owner or occupant to receive the courtesy notice prior to
the performance of the work shall not be deemed an adequate reason
for the property owner to avoid paying any charges incurred as a result
of the City performing the work.
§ 573-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-28
1:445
§ 573-28. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the City from maintaining an action to
enforce §§ 573-23 and 573-24 by issuing a citation, subjecting the property
owner to the penalty as provided in § 1-19 of this Code, or by abating a
public nuisance under § 479-1 of this Code.
§ 573-28 LAKE MILLS CODE § 573-28
1:446
ARTICLE VIII
Excavations
[Adopted 7-7-1998 by Ord. No. 810 (Title 7, Ch. 2, of the 2009 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 573-29. Excavation authority.
No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation in or under any
street, alley, sidewalk, or tree lawn in the City of Lake Mills ("City") without
first obtaining a permit from the City which authorizes such excavation. City
employees, under the direction of their immediate supervisor, are exempt
from the requirements of this section.
A. Application for permit and bond requirement. The excavation permit
may be issued only upon a written application signed by the applicant,
and shall describe the place where the excavation is proposed to be
made with such certainty that the excavation site may at all times be
readily located and shall specify the purpose for which the excavation is
to be made, and when the excavation is proposed to begin. The permit
application shall state that, in consideration of being permitted to make
the excavation, the permittee will leave the street, sidewalk, alley or
tree lawn, in as good condition as it was when the work was
commenced, and that at all times the place where the excavation is
made shall be properly marked with adequate safety warning devices,
including barricades with operational warning lights, and the permittee
shall save the City harmless from any damages, costs and charges that
may arise from the permittee's use of the street, sidewalk, alley, or tree
lawn. The permit may be conditioned on a requirement to post a surety
bond with the City. All such applications shall be numbered and filed
with the City Clerk. The City Council may establish a fee by resolution
for such permits from time to time.
B. Two-year maintenance. The person to whom the permit is issued shall
be responsible for correcting all defects in excavations and restorations
occurring within two years from the completion of the work and shall be
liable for all expenses or damages resulting from any defects or repairs
of defects. The cost of maintenance and repair during the two-year
period shall be at the expense of the permittee.
C. All applicants for a permit and all work authorized by the permit shall
meet the requirements of §§ 573-31 through 573-35.
D. Record of excavation permits. A record of all permits issued under the
provisions of this chapter by the Director of Public Works shall be kept
in the office of the City Clerk, which record shall state the name of each
applicant, and shall also contain the facts as to location, purpose of
excavation and time when the work is to begin, which are required to be
stated in the application, and this record shall be open to public
inspection.
§ 573-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-29
1:447
§ 573-30. Gas company excavations.
Employees or agents of the natural gas utility providing service to
properties within the City may request an all encompassing written
authority from the Director of Public Works to conduct excavations in
order to provide and maintain essential services. This written authority
shall expire one year from date of issuance. All gas utility excavations and
restorations shall comply with the provisions of §§ 573-32 through 573-35.
§ 573-31. Display of permit.
Any person receiving a permit under this chapter shall have the permit at
the place where the work is being done during working hours and shall
exhibit said permit to any police or other officer of the City on demand.
§ 573-32. Unpaved streets.
When excavations are made in macadam streets or unpaved streets and
alleys surfaced with gravel, they shall be made and filled in the following
manner: The backfilling below the surface shall be done with gravel, sand
or crushed stone, firmly tamped, and all earth, stone or other material
excavated shall be hauled away by the person authorized to make the
excavation. All backfilling shall be inspected by a representative of the
Department of Public Works prior to patching. All such excavations shall be
given a temporary asphalt surface two inches thick immediately following
the completion of the inspection.
§ 573-33. Paved streets.
Excavations in paved streets shall be made and filled in the following
manner: The opening in the pavement shall be sawed, unless otherwise
permitted by the Director of Public Works, and the foundation must be at
least 16 inches larger in all directions than the size of the trench to be
excavated so that there may be a shoulder of solid earth eight inches wide
on all sides of the opening to support the new pavement. If the sides of
the trench cave during the progress of the work, additional pavement shall
be broken to retain eight inches of the shoulder on all sides. The backfill
below the pavement shall be done with gravel, sand or crushed stone, firmly
tamped, and all stone, earth and other material excavated shall be hauled
away by the person authorized to make the excavation. All material used
shall comply with City regulations and specifications. The backfilling shall
E. Contract excavations. Private contractors under contract to the City for
the purpose of constructing public works are considered agents of the
City and are exempt from the above permit application requirements,
but such agents shall be required to post a bond and certificate of
insurance with the City which shall save the City harmless from any
damages, injuries, costs, and charges which may arise from the agents'
use of the street, alley, sidewalk, or tree lawn, and all such agents shall
meet the requirements of §§ 573-32 through 573-35.
§ 573-29 LAKE MILLS CODE § 573-33
1:448
be inspected by a representative of the Department of Public Works prior
to patching. Restoration of the surface of a paved street or alley shall be
the responsibility of the permittee. Such restoration shall consist of either
concrete or a permanent hot patch of asphalt as specified in the permit
as soon as weather permits and shall consist of a temporary cold patch of
asphalt only until such permanent patch can be laid. The surface of the
patched area shall be level with the existing street. Such restoration shall
be inspected by the City under the supervision of the Director of Public
Works.
§ 573-34. Sidewalks and tree lawns.
Excavation of sidewalks shall be made and restored in accordance with
Article IV of this chapter of the Municipal Code. Excavations in tree lawns
shall be made in such a manner as to minimize the area excavated. Backfill
shall consist of sand firmly tamped with a minimum of six inches of topsoil
to restore the tree lawn to its previous level. Sod shall be placed in all areas
that have been excavated, unless seeding has been allowed in the permit.
§ 573-35. Defective restoration.
Whenever the Director of Public Works determines that any restoration is
or has become defective during the two-year guarantee period, he shall give
written notice to the permittee or its surety stating the defect, the work to
be done, and the period of time deemed reasonable for completion of the
correction of the defect. After receipt of the notice by certified mail, the
permittee or surety shall repair the defect or indemnify the City for the cost
of the work. Such repair or payment shall occur within the time set forth
in the notice. If no such repair or indemnification occurs during said period
of time, the City shall proceed with enforcement as provided in this article,
and the City shall cause the defect to be corrected at the expense of the
permittee.
§ 573-36. Temporary obstructions.
Property owners or their agents may request that portions of streets, alleys,
or sidewalks be temporarily obstructed or blocked in order to facilitate
construction activities on private property. Requests shall be submitted to
the Department of Public Works five working days prior to the requested
period. Approval authority is the Director of Public Works. Requests shall
include the period of time the obstruction will be in place and a detailed
description of the area containing the obstruction, including the specific
street address. Property owners or their agents shall be responsible for
insuring that adequate safety warning devices, including barricades with
operational flashing lights, are placed around all permitted obstructions.
§ 573-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rules and
regulations adopted hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
§ 573-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-37
1:449
§ 1-19of this Code. Each violation and each day on which a violation occurs
and continues shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not
preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or
remove a violation of this chapter.
§ 573-37 LAKE MILLS CODE § 573-37
1:450
ARTICLE IX
Pedestrian Malls
[Adopted 6-7-2011 by Ord. No. 1080A (Title 7, Ch. 12, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 573-38. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDESTRIAN MALL — A street, road, alley, or public way that has been
designated by the City Council for use by pedestrians. Vehicular traffic
on such designated pedestrian malls may be restricted or prohibited as
determined by the Council through enactment of an ordinance.
§ 573-39. Pedestrian malls designated.
§ 573-40. Restrictions and prohibitions of vehicular traffic in
pedestrian malls.
A. Ford Court. The entire right-of-way between East Lake Street and
Water Street that is known as "Ford Court" is designated as a
pedestrian mall and shall be referred to as "Ford Court Pedestrian
Mall."
B. Main Street. The entire right-of-way of the alley that intersects with the
east side of South Main Street, to a point 67 feet east of said
intersection, is designated as a pedestrian mall, and said pedestrian
mall shall be referred to as "Main Street Pedestrian Mall."
C. The pedestrian malls designated in this section shall have restrictions
on and prohibitions of vehicular traffic as provided in § 573-40.
A. Motor vehicles of all kinds are prohibited in all of the designated
pedestrian malls.
B. The use of bicycles, in-line skates, strollers, wagons, and other similar,
nonmotorized play vehicles is permitted in the Ford Court Pedestrian
Mall, provided the operators of such vehicles yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians.
C. The use of skateboards in the Ford Court and Main Street Pedestrian
Malls is prohibited.
D. No restriction or prohibition of any type of wheelchair or electric
personal assistive mobility device is intended by any of the provisions
that restrict or prohibit vehicular traffic in the Ford Court Pedestrian
Mall.
E. No use of bicycles, in-line skates, skateboards, and other similar,
nonmotorized play vehicles is permitted in the Main Street Pedestrian
§ 573-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-40
1:451
Mall due to the construction of stairs and the steep incline on the entire
length of the Main Street Pedestrian Mall.
§ 573-40 LAKE MILLS CODE § 573-40
1:452
Chapter 581
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 660.
§ 581-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure, above or below ground, which is
designed to contain water in excess of 12 inches and is primarily used for
recreational activities of wading and/or swimming. This chapter shall apply
to outdoor pools only.
§ 581-2. Permit required.
No person shall construct or have constructed a swimming pool without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Inspector. Permits shall be
obtained under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 581-3. Fences required; exceptions.
A. Every swimming pool constructed in the City shall be enclosed by a
fence at least four feet in height and shall have no openings greater
than four inches. Gates allowing access to the pool area shall be
designed such that small children cannot open or close them. It shall be
at the discretion of the Building Inspector as to whether or not a gate
installed under this section meets this requirement.
B. Exceptions. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to the following:
(1) An aboveground type of pool with a deck extending perpendicular
from the sides of the pool, if it has an affixed fence at least 30
inches in height above the deck level. Combined height of the pool
plus the fence must be at least four feet in height; provided,
however, that the minimum height of the pool plus the fence for any
pool constructed between July 25, 1983, and the effective date of
this chapter shall be at least 42 inches in height. Access to such
deck or pool shall have removable steps or ladder, or a ladder that
can be flipped up and locked to prevent uncontrolled access, or a
fence, minimum of four feet, enclosing the access area.
(2) The entire swimming area is covered or enclosed by a plastic or
fiberglass dome or bubble capable of supporting a one-hundredfifty-
pound load. The gate or door which allows access into the
§ 573-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 581-3
1:453
§ 581-4. Additional requirements. [Amended 10-2-1984 by Ord. No.
442]
All swimming pools maintained in the City shall meet with any state, county,
or local requirements involving health regulations or other rules applicable
to swimming pools.
Chapter 587
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 615.
§ 587-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TAXICAB — A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than eight persons and
not operated on a fixed route. The term shall not include: taxicabs licensed
in other municipalities who use the City streets temporarily; rent-a-cars;
and motor vehicles operated as ambulances or funeral cars.
§ 587-2. Licensing requirements.
swimming area must be self-closing and self-latching which will
prevent uncontrolled access.
(3) An above-the-ground type of swimming pool whose accumulative
height, with or without affixed fence, is at least four feet above
ground at all points. Access to such pool shall have removable steps
or ladder, or a ladder that flips up and can be locked so as to
prevent uncontrolled access.
(4) Small portable plastic wading or kiddie pools are not required to
have a fence surrounding them, provided the pool is emptied of all
water whenever it is unattended.
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any taxicab within the
City without first obtaining a license for said taxicab.
B. Application for a license to operate one or more taxicabs, or an
application to operate additional taxicabs under an existing license,
shall be made in writing to the City Clerk on forms furnished by the City,
and shall include the address from which the business is to be
conducted and shall be signed by the owner of the business or its
authorized agent. The application shall also state for each vehicle to be
§ 581-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 587-2
1:454
§ 587-3. Insurance.
§ 587-4. Inspection.
operated the make, model and year of manufacture, the vehicle
identification number (VIN), the capacity for passengers, and the
Wisconsin certificate of title number and vehicle registration number.
[Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
C. The application shall be submitted to the City Clerk, who shall present
each application to the Council at its next regular meeting. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
D. The Council shall approve such application and grant such license
within 30 days from its presentation to the Council, unless it finds that
public convenience and necessity would not be served by granting such
license. In making its findings, the Council may hold a public hearing,
and may procure such additional information as it may deem necessary
or advisable.
A. No taxicab license shall be issued until the applicant deposits with the
Clerk a policy of liability insurance covering all vehicles to be included
under the license. Such policy shall describe each vehicle by make,
model and VIN, the number of passengers capable of being
accommodated therein at one time and the vehicle registration number.
Such insurance policy shall be issued by a company licensed to do
business in Wisconsin and shall insure against loss from liability to the
amount of $50,000 for damage to property and $100,000 for injury or
death of a person or persons caused by the negligent operation of such
vehicle. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
B. Such insurance certificate shall include the City of Lake Mills as an
additional insured.
C. Any holder of a taxicab license shall have a continuing duty to notify the
City Clerk within five days of the lapse of insurance. If such insurance
lapses for any reason, the vehicle or vehicles covered thereby shall not
be operated until a new certificate of insurance that meets the
requirements of this section is filed with the City Clerk. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1103]
A. No license shall be issued until each taxicab to be operated under such
license has been annually examined by the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, and found to be in a thoroughly satisfactory and safe
condition for the transportation of passengers, clean, of good
appearance and well painted.
B. No vehicle shall be licensed if equipment violations under Wis. Stats.
Ch. 347 are found during the inspection.
§ 587-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 587-4
1:455
§ 587-5. Rates to be posted.
Every taxicab licensed under this chapter shall have at all times prominently
posted and displayed so as to be visible to the passengers therein, the rates
or fares for the use of such taxicab. Failure to display said rates may be
grounds for revocation of the taxicab license.
§ 587-6. Revocation.
Upon notice and a hearing, the Council may revoke such license for:
§ 587-7. Exemption from licensing requirements.
The operations of taxicab service in the City of Lake Mills under the Public
Transportation for Non-Urbanized Areas Program (Shared-Ride Taxi) are
to be in accordance with contract specifications and are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 587-8. Licenses not to be transferred.
Licenses issued or granted under this chapter shall be nonassignable and
nontransferable.
§ 587-9. License fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
An annual fee as set by City Council shall be paid by any applicant for a
taxicab license prior to the submission of the license application to the City
Council for its decision.
C. Every vehicle shall be distinctly marked on two sides in letters not less
than 1 1/2 inches in height with "TAXICAB" together with the licensee's
name.
D. If more than one vehicle is operated by the licensee, each vehicle shall
be marked with a distinct number.
A. Failure of the licensee to maintain the equipment of each taxicab in
operation in accordance with Wis. Stats. Ch. 347;
B. More than three convictions for violations of traffic laws within any sixmonth
period by the licensee or by persons driving vehicles under such
taxicab license;
C. Operating a taxicab without the required insurance; or
D. Conduct by the licensee which is prejudicial to the public safety,
welfare, morals or good order of the community.
§ 587-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 587-9
1:456
Chapter 594
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 16.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 271.
Nuisances — See Ch. 479.
§ 594-1. Purpose and applicability.
§ 594-2. Powers and duties.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the
safety, health, and welfare of the general public through the regulation
of planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other
plants within the City of Lake Mills.
B. Applicability. This chapter provides the full power and authority over all
trees, shrubs, and plants located within street rights-of-way, parks, and
public places of the City; and to trees, shrubs, and plants located on
private property that constitute a hazard or threat described herein.
A. Parks and Forestry Director. The Parks and Forestry Director shall be
designated as the City Forester and shall have the power and duties as
follows:
(1) Direct, manage, supervise, and control the City street tree program
to include all planting, removal, maintenance, and protection of all
trees and shrubs on public areas.
(2) Follow and update monthly the City of Lake Mills Street Tree
Management Plan and Street Tree Master Plan.
(3) Promote plant health care of all trees and shrubs within the City so
as to prevent the spread of disease or pests and to eliminate
dangerous conditions that may affect the life, health, or safety of
persons or property.
(4) Enforce rules, regulations and specifications of this chapter.
(5) Such powers and duties as are provided by ordinance of the City,
and as directed by the City Council.
B. Parks Board. The City of Lake Mills Parks Board shall be an advisory
body to the City Council and make recommendations concerning
planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants
for all parks and parklands within the City of Lake Mills.
§ 587-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 594-3
1:457
§ 594-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOULEVARDS and MEDIAN STRIPS — Those lands that divide a traveled
roadway.
BOUNDARY TREES — Those trees with part of the main trunk existing
along the dividing line between public and private properties.
PARK TREES — Trees in public parks or any area to which the public has
free access as a park.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Lands owned by private citizens, firms or
corporations within the City limits of Lake Mills.
PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC LAND — Any lands owned by the City and used
by the public, including parks, playgrounds, parking lots and any and all
other public lands not used for vehicular traffic.
STREET TREES — Trees on public rights-of-way between the curb and
property line along side of streets or medians of all streets, avenues or ways
within the City.
TERRACE and TREE LAWN — That portion of the street right-of-way lying
between the sidewalk and back of curb. Where no sidewalk and/or curbing
exist, the terrace shall be field-determined.
TREE — Any woody single-stem perennial plant (including root system) with
a callipered trunk of no less than one inch measured one foot above the root
collar.
§ 594-4. Permits and insurance. [Amended 10-19-2010 by Ord. No.
1069]
§ 594-5. Planting and trimming.
A. Permits required. No person shall trim, fell, plant, spray, remove or
affect any tree, including root system, in any boulevard, street, or
public place without first obtaining permission from the City Forester.
B. Insurance required. Persons given such permission or their contractors
and persons hired as agents of the City for purposes of tree trimming,
felling, or removal must provide proof of public liability insurance with
a company authorized to do business in the State of Wisconsin. Such
policy shall be written in accordance with a standard form now in
general use and contain liability limits acceptable to the City Forester.
A. Planting.
(1) The City Forester shall develop and maintain a list of desirable
trees for planting in terrace areas in three size classes: small (15
feet to 30 feet), medium (30 feet to 45 feet), and large (45 feet to 70
feet). All plantings shall be in accordance with the Street Tree
§ 594-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 594-5
1:458
Master Plan, with variances approved by the City Forester. A
species list of trees not suitable for planting also shall be developed
and maintained.
(2) No person shall plant any tree, shrub, or other plant in any City
tree lawn, boulevard, or public place without the permission of the
City Forester. All such permitted plantings shall be with the
following regulations:
(a) Spacing. The spacing of trees shall be not less than 40 feet,
except in special plantings designed or approved by the City
Forester.
(b) Utilities. No street trees other than those species listed herein
as small trees may be planted under or within 20 lateral feet of
any overhead utility wire, or within three lateral feet of any
underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other
utility, and five feet from any stop box.
(c) All planting sites shall be at least 35 feet away from street
corners, at least 10 feet away from fire hydrants, driveways,
utility poles and 20 feet from streetlights.
(d) Distance from curb and sidewalk. The required distance that
trees shall be planted from curb and sidewalk shall be in
accordance with the three size classes listed in this chapter,
and no trees shall be planted closer to any curb and sidewalk
than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three
feet; and large trees, four feet.
(e) The spacing of all consecutively planted oak trees of all species
shall be a minimum of 50 feet to help prevent oak wilt spread.
B. Trimming.
(1) All trimming and pruning of City trees shall be conducted in
accordance with the accepted standards of the National Arborist
Association or the International Society of Arboriculture and
according to the following guidelines:
(a) Clean smooth cuts are to be made so as not to disturb or cut
into the branch collar or branch bark ridge.
(b) Dead branches are to be cut back to sound, healthy wood and
with no interruption of the present callus tissue.
(c) City street and park trees shall be trimmed and removed
accordingly to maintain public safety.
(d) City street trees shall be placed on a routine trimming cycle of
three years for young trees (less than 12 inches diameter at
breast height) and six years for older trees (greater than 12
§ 594-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 594-5
1:459
§ 594-6. Tree removal and wood disposal.
inches at breast height), unless safety consideration, as
determined by the City Forester, requires additional trimming.
(e) On an annual basis, the City Forester shall review and make
any necessary modifications to a trimming area map that
indicates areas and years for trimming operations of street
and/or park trees. Said map shall be kept on file at the office of
the City Forester. [Amended 10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 1069]
(2) It shall be an unlawful practice for any individual to top any tree on
public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of
limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's
crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree. Exceptions may be allowed for situations due to
storm damage, the location of electric lines, or when such trimming
is the only reasonable method for saving the tree. [Amended
10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 1069]
(3) Abutting property owners may conduct minor trimming of street
trees in order to maintain safe passage on public sidewalks and
streets.
A. Tree removal. No person shall remove or cause to be removed any tree
or shrub existing in or upon any terrace or public place without a permit
from the City Forester.
B. Wood disposal. Any wood from trees growing on City property,
including tree lawns, which are designated by the City Forester to be
cut and removed, shall be the property of the City and shall be disposed
of appropriately or stacked and stored for the purpose of resale to the
highest bidder. [Amended 10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 1069]
C. The City Forester shall follow the procedures in this section with
regards to tree removals from any public property, except Tyranena
Park: [Amended 4-7-1998 by Ord. No. 803B; 10-19-2010 by Ord.
No. 1069]
(1) Develop a list of trees that require removal due to disease, poor
health, or safety reasons.
(2) Inform the adjacent property owner in writing of each tree
identified for removal and provide the property owner a minimum
of seven days to respond to the City Forester concerning the
potential tree removal.
(3) Consider the comments of the adjacent property owner before
proceeding with the tree removal.
§ 594-5 LAKE MILLS CODE § 594-6
1:460
§ 594-7. Private trees, inspection authority and abatement.
(4) The provisions of this section do not apply to any public tree that, in
the opinion of the City Forester, is an imminent safety risk to public
property, private property, or the personal safety of any individual.
D. The City Forester shall not remove any trees in Tyranena Park unless
such trees are an impending safety hazard to park patrons utilizing the
existing walking trails or other man-made facilities of the park or the
City Forester deems trees are/may cause biological or structural harm
to existing, healthy trees. [Amended 4-7-1998 by Ord. No. 803B]
A. Private trees. Trees standing on any private land adjacent to a public
thoroughfare shall be trimmed and kept trimmed by the owner of such
tree to the specifications set forth in this chapter. The owner of such
tree shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or limbs that
constitute a menace to the health and safety of other plants and the
general public. The City reserves the right to trim any tree interfering
with the public thoroughfare as part of its enforcement of any public
nuisance under the provisions in Chapter 479, Nuisances, of this Code.
[Amended 10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 1069]
B. Inspection authority.
(1) The City Forester, designated representatives, or both, are charged
with duties involving the inspection of real and personal property.
They shall ask the landowner for permission to enter private
property prior to inspection of trees, shrubs, wood pieces or wood
debris located on any private property.
(2) A written record shall be made of each request for permission to
enter private property to include the date, the property to be
entered, the landowner's name, the individual asked for
permission, if different from the landowner, and the response to the
request. These records shall be maintained for a minimum period of
three years.
(3) Should the landowner deny permission to enter the property for
inspection purposes, a special inspection warrant shall be applied
for and executed according to Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. [Amended
10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 1069]
C. Abatement. If the City Forester shall find any private or public premises
infested with injurious insects or plant disease, or if any tree, shrub or
plant upon private premises endangers the public, interferes with the
clearances as outlined in this chapter, or is injurious to any public
utility, he/she shall provide the owner or person having charge of such
premises a minimum two-week notice that removal is under
consideration on a specific date, time and place which is at least two
weeks in the future. The City Forester shall listen to comments from the
landowner and then proceed as the Forester deems best. Should this
§ 594-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 594-7
1:461
§ 594-8. Oak wilt inspection, abatement and protection.
order not be complied with, the City Forester shall cause the work to be
done and all costs involved shall be charged against the property as a
special assessment. No damages shall be awarded to the owner for the
destruction of trees pursuant to this chapter.
D. Oak trees located on private property are subject to additional
provisions of § 594-8.
A. Public nuisance declared. The City Council of the City of Lake Mills,
having determined that the health of the oak trees within the City of
Lake Mills is threatened by a fatal disease known as oak wilt
(Ceratocystis fagacearum), hereby declares the following to be a
nuisance:
(1) Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected with the oak
wilt fungus.
(2) Any dead oak tree or part thereof infected with the oak wilt fungus,
including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other oak material
from which the bark has not been removed.
B. Nuisances prohibited. No person, firm or corporation shall permit any
public nuisance as defined in Subsection A of this section to remain on
any premises owned or controlled by them within the City of Lake Mills.
C. Inspection. The City Forester shall inspect or cause to be inspected all
oak trees and parts thereof within the City to determine whether any
public nuisances as defined in Subsection A of this section exists.
D. Abatement of nuisance. If the City Forester, upon inspection or
examination in person or by some qualified person acting for them,
shall determine that any public nuisance as herein defined exists in or
upon private or public premises within the City of Lake Mills, and that
the danger to other oak trees within the City is imminent, he/she shall
immediately serve upon the owner of such property, or by public notice
if the owner cannot be found, or upon the occupant thereof a written
notice to take any and all actions necessary to abate said nuisance or to
protect other oak trees from such nuisance within 14 days of serving
said notice. Appropriate abatement or protection measures shall be
defined in said notice. If such owner or occupant does not comply with
said notice within the time provided, the City Forester shall cause the
work to be done and all cost involved charged against the property as a
special assessment as per § 594-7. No damages shall be awarded to the
owner for the destruction of any tree pursuant to this section.
E. Disposal of wood/debris. Proper disposal procedures of wood, bark and
debris from said nuisance shall be detailed in said notice. These
disposal procedures shall be followed within the time provided in the
notice.
§ 594-7 LAKE MILLS CODE § 594-8
1:462
§ 594-9. Master Street Tree Plan.
F. Important: removal or pruning of oak trees prohibited. No person, firm
or corporation shall remove, trim, prune or cause fresh wounds to any
oak tree or portion thereof, including roots, within the City of Lake Mills
between April 15 and October 15 without first securing the written
permission of the City Forester. If wounding is unavoidable during this
period, such as in the aftermath of a storm or for safety reasons, as
determined by the City Forester, a wound dressing shall be applied as
approved by the City Forester.
A. All plantings in public places shall be in accordance with § 594-5,
Planting and trimming. Species composition and location shall be
determined by the City Forester, with a primary objective towards more
native species whenever possible. Streets and blocks in a new
subdivision within the City of Lake Mills shall have plantings of the
same species composition or of similar shape and color, as determined
by the City Forester.
B. In previously planted streets and blocks, new plantings shall first be
determined by § 594-5, then by site and soil conditions, then by native
species and then by species that will match similar shapes and sizes of
current or preferred population. New subdivision and annexed property
street tree composition shall be determined by the City Forester. Future
species variations shall be determined by the City Forester.
C. New plantings along Main Street shall be restricted until other
infrastructure improvements are planned and work is completed.
[Amended 10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 1069]
D. When the genus reaches or exceeds 20% of population or the species
reaches or exceeds 10% of population, such tree shall be considered a
restricted planting, due to the high number of individual trees in the
population.
E. A map of species to be planted or already established shall be
developed and maintained. The City Forester shall change this map as
circumstances dictate.
F. Plantings along Main, Madison, East Lake and Mulberry Streets shall
be restricted to salt-tolerant species due to higher salting of major
streets in the winter. As the City expands and other major streets
develop, the same policy shall apply to those streets so designated.
G. Listings of approved, restricted, and prohibited species of trees for
street tree planting in the City of Lake Mills shall be maintained by the
City Forester. Annual purchases of trees for planting on City property
shall be made in accordance with said listings and this chapter and with
the goal of obtaining the healthiest trees for the most reasonable value.
All vendors of trees shall be prequalified by the Forester as to growing
and handling conditions. Price lists from all vendors of trees shall be
§ 594-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 594-9
1:463
obtained by the Forester prior to purchase decisions being made by the
City Forester. The City Forester may approve any other tree species
not on the listing of approved, restricted and prohibited species, at his/
her discretion, and may add or delete any species listed. [Amended
10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 1069]
H. Street trees shall be part of the infrastructure within the City of Lake
Mills. Whenever a new street is constructed or an existing street
upgraded, terrace trees shall automatically be required and designed in
unless found to be unfeasible by the City Forester. Planting sites shall
be properly prepared, as determined by the City Forester, and soil
compaction in the terrace shall be eliminated or corrected before
planting; for example, storing heavy equipment or heavy materials on
the terrace would cause unacceptable soil compaction.
(1) Species determination shall be in accordance to the Street Tree
Master Plan for Lake Mills.
(2) All street tree plantings shall meet the requirements as determined
by the City Forester.
(3) Number of trees shall be determined by the following:
Total running foot of street frontage in subdivision or along
property
40 (spacing, see § 594-5)
(a) The cost of trees and plantings for all newly mapped or platted
subdivisions, commercial, business or industrial development
shall be assessed as a special charge to be paid by the
subdivider or developer. The special charge shall be computed
as follows:
a/b x c
d
Where:
a = total running feet of street frontage in subdivision
or along property
b = 40 (feet-spacing)
c = $180 (average cost per tree, including planting
and maintenance) [Amended 10-19-2010 by
Ord. No. 1069]
d = 0.80 (survival rate, average taken in plantings in
Lake Mills)
(b) Factor "c" shall be increased annually by an amount equal to
the increase in the Consumer Price Index from the previous
calendar year.
§ 594-9 LAKE MILLS CODE § 594-9
1:464
§ 594-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 594-11. Claims and appeals. [Amended 10-19-2010 by Ord. No.
1069]
A person who receives an order from the City Forester and objects to all or
a part thereof may seek review using the administrative review procedures
in § 16-1of this Code.
Chapter 609
VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN
(4) Fees collected shall be used only for planting operations in the
specific subdivision or development for which the special charges
are paid. The City Forester shall plant, maintain and irrigate such
trees at such times and places as the development of the
subdivision, its occupants and other conditions make feasible.
[Amended 10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 1069]
(5) If a street tree special charge would otherwise be required in
connection with a plat or certified survey map first submitted to the
City for approval on or after June 14, 2006, then the Subdivider
shall agree by developer's agreement to be special assessed for the
cost of purchasing, planting and then maintaining street trees for a
period of 12 months after planting, and in the event that the trees
are, in the opinion of the Forester, not healthy or they do not
survive the initial twelve-month period after planting, then the
trees may be removed and replanted, and those additional costs
may then be special assessed to the Subdivider. In the alternative,
the subdivider may agree to be subject to the special charges for
street trees based on the formula set forth in Subsection H.
[Amended 10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 1069]
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rules
and regulations adopted hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in § 1-19of this Code. Each violation and each day on which a
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. This
section shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate
action to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
B. The City Forester shall have the power to promulgate and enforce the
rules, regulations and specifications of this chapter and may serve
notice on any person in violation thereof or institute legal proceedings
as may be required, and the City Attorney is hereby authorized to
institute appropriate proceedings to that end.
§ 594-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 609-1
1:465
§ 609-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the definition of an "all-terrain vehicle," and all
other definitions set forth in § 23.33(1), Wis. Stats., are incorporated herein
by reference.
§ 609-2. Adoption of state statutes.
The provisions of § 23.33, Wis. Stats., are incorporated herein by reference,
as the same exist as of the adoption of this chapter, or as the same be
amended from time to time. These provisions relate to the registration,
rules of operation, age restrictions, equipment requirements and accident
reporting requirements as set forth in § 23.33, Wis. Stats.
§ 609-3. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
issuance of a citation in conformance with § 23.54, Wis. Stats., and the
deposit schedule adopted and revised by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference.
Upon conviction of any violation under this chapter, a forfeiture, penalties
and costs as set forth in § 23.33(13), Wis. Stats., exclusive of penalties
requiring imprisonment, may be imposed by the court.
Chapter 615
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 264.
Parks, recreation and public property — See
Ch. 496.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 587.
All-terrain vehicles — See Ch. 609.
§ 609-1 LAKE MILLS CODE § 609-3
1:466
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 6-3-1997 by Ord. No. 769B (Title 6, Ch. 1, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 615-1. State traffic laws adopted. [Amended 1-4-2011 by Ord. No.
1074]
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the provisions of
Chapters 340 through 348 and Chapter 350, and § 23.33, Wis. Stats., and
§ Trans 305, Wis. Adm. Code, describing and defining regulations with
respect to vehicles and traffic, exclusive of any regulations for which the
statutory penalty is imprisonment, are hereby adopted and by reference
made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to
be performed or prohibited by any statute or rule incorporated herein by
reference is required or prohibited by this article. Any future amendments,
revisions, renumbering or modifications of the statutes and rules
incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this article in order
to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic in the state.
§ 615-2. Citations and deposits.
§ 615-3. Penalty.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this article shall be a forfeiture
as hereinafter provided, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 615-4. Speed limits.
A. Citation. Uniform traffic citations specified in § 345.11, Wis. Stats.,
shall be issued for traffic violations, except parking violations.
B. Deposit. Deposits for violations of traffic regulations shall be
determined in accordance with the deposit schedule established by the
Wisconsin Judicial Conference.
A. State forfeiture statutes. Forfeitures for violation of sections adopted
from Chapters 340 through 348 and Chapter 350, Wis. Stats., shall
conform to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for violation of the
statutes adopted by reference, including any variations or increases for
subsequent offenses.
B. Local regulations. Where no other penalty is specified by state
forfeiture statutes, the penalty for violation of any such provision of this
article shall be as provided in § 1-19 of this Code.
A. Park and recreational areas. In accordance with the authority granted
by § 346.57(4)(i), Wis. Stats., and § 349.11(1), Wis. Stats., the speed
limit on all streets within the following public park and recreational
areas shall be 15 miles per hour at all times when children are playing
within or going to or from said parks or areas:
§ 615-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-4
1:467
§ 615-5. Miscellaneous traffic regulations.
School bus operators shall use flashing red warning lights in a residence
or business district when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be
loaded or unloaded at a location at which there are no traffic signals and
such person must cross the street or highway before being loaded or after
being unloaded.
§ 615-6. Neighborhood electric vehicles permitted. [Amended
2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1026B]
(1) Lakeside Park and the adjoining and adjacent portions of South
Ferry Drive.
(2) East Pine Street/Birch Street: a distance of 508 feet east, more or
less, extending southerly on Birch Street to the Prospect Street
intersection (both sides of the street).
(3) Those portions of Fargo Street, Franklin Street, and Owen Street
which are adjacent to Memorial Park shall have a speed limit of 15
miles per hour at all times when children are playing within or
going to or from Memorial Park. [Amended 9-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 919]
B. Outlying areas. In accordance with the authority granted by
§§ 349.11(3)(c) and 346.57(4)(e) and (f), Wis. Stats., the speed limit on
East Lake Street shall be 25 miles per hour beginning at Ashland
Avenue continuing easterly on East Lake Street to Wakeman Drive; and
the speed limit on East Lake Street from Wakeman Road to Harvey
Road shall remain as already posted. [Amended 7-17-2001 by Ord.
No. 856]
A. "Neighborhood Electric Vehicle" (NEV) means a motor vehicle that is
propelled by electric power and that conforms to the definition and
requirements for low-speed vehicles as adopted in the federal motor
vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles under 49 CFR 571.3(b)
and 571.500. Neighborhood electric vehicle does not include a golf
cart.
B. An NEV shall be operated by licensed drivers only and in accordance
with this article, which incorporates the state traffic laws under
§ 615-1.
C. Subject to Subsection D, NEVs may be operated only within the
highway jurisdiction of the City and only on a roadway for which the
speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less.
D. On connecting STH 89, NEVs may be operated only from points north of
its intersection with CTH A and only from points south of its
intersection with Pine Street. All operation of NEVs on STH 89 that lie
outside these jurisdictional limits at CTH A and Pine Street is
prohibited.
§ 615-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 615-6
1:468
§ 615-7. Golf cart crossings. [Added 9-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1170A]
E. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section may be
subject to the penalty provisions of § 615-3.
A. Golf cart crossings are designated and marked with official signs at the
locations where cart paths have been approved by the City and
constructed at specific locations where the cart paths intersect with
Sandy Beach Road, Pinnacle Drive, Forest View Court and Country
View Lane.
B. All golf carts shall stop and yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the street before entering and crossing the street at the
golf cart crossing.
C. Golf carts are prohibited from crossing streets in and near the golf
course at locations other than the designated and officially marked golf
cart crossing.
§ 615-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-7
1:469

ARTICLE II
Traffic Control
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 6, Ch. 2, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 615-8. Through, yield, one-way streets.
Under the authority of §§ 349.07 and 349.10, Wis. Stats., the following
through, yield and one-way streets are designated.
A. Through streets. In the interest of public safety, the following streets in
the City are hereby declared to be through streets:
Name of Street Location
American Way From CP Avenue to its endpoint
Brookstone Drive From East Lake Street to American
Way
CP Avenue From East Lake Street to its endpoint
East Mills Drive From East Tyranena Park Road (CTH
V) to East Lake Street (CTH B)
East Washington Street From East Lake Street to Mulberry
Street
Ferry Drive From West Prospect Street to
Woodland Beach Road, except West
Lake Street
Grove Street From East Lake Street to East Lake
Park Place
Lake Shore Drive From West Lake Street to Fremont
Street
Lake Street From the east City limits to Lake Shore
Drive, except Main Street (State Trunk
Highway 89)
Madison Street From East Lake Street to the north City
limits, except Main Street (State Trunk
Highway 89)
Mulberry Street From Madison Street to the north City
limits
Owen Street From East Lake Street to North CP
Avenue
Pinnacle Drive From South Main Street to East Lake
Park Place
Prospect Street From Madison Street to Prairie, except
Main Street (State Trunk Highway 89)
and Birch Street
§ 615-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-8
1:471
§ 615-9. Four-way stops. [Amended 3-19-2002 by Ord. No. 885A; at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
In accordance with the provisions of § 349.07, Wis. Stats., drivers of
vehicles shall cause their vehicles to come to a complete stop before
entering or proceeding through the following intersections:
Name of Street At Intersection of
Lake Street (County Trunk Highway
"B")
Main Street (State Trunk Highway
89)
Madison Street (County Trunk
Highway "B")
Main Street (State Trunk Highway
89)
Prospect Street Birch Street
Name of Street Location
Reed Street From Washington Street to O'Neil
Street
State Trunk Highway 89
(Main Street
From the north City limits to the south
City limits
Tyranena Park Road From North Main Street to East Lake
Street, except Mulberry Street
Water Street From South Main Street (State Trunk
Highway 89) to Grove Street
Woodland Beach Road From South Main Street (State Trunk
Highway 89) to Ferry Drive
B. Yield right-of-way. Provided that signs have been erected and
maintained at intersections, all vehicles shall stop before entering a
through street and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which
have entered the through street or are approaching the intersection on
any through street designated herein.
C. One-way streets and alleys. Pursuant to § 349.10, Wis. Stats., the
following streets or alleys and parts thereof are declared to be one-way
streets and no person shall operate any vehicle thereon except in the
indicated direction:
Name of Street Direction Location
Catlin Drive North To Main Street
Commercial Alley East A distance of 66 feet from the
South Main Street entrance
A distance of 100 feet in
the alley entering from
South Main Street
West Between 117 and 119 South
Main
A distance of 79 feet
entering the alley
East From Church Street
§ 615-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 615-10
1:472
§ 615-10. Stop signs, placement.
In accordance with the authority granted by § 349.07, Wis. Stats., unless
otherwise designated within this article, stop signs shall be installed at the
intersections of streets where they cross through streets and also at the
specific intersections designated herein.
Name of Street At Intersection of
Alley entering Church Street Parking
Lot from Madison Street
Parking lot
Alley connecting West Lake Street
and Campus Street [Added 3-5-2019
by Ord. No. 1202]
Campus Street
American Way CP Avenue
Autumn Crest Lane Honeysuckle Lane
Birch Court [Added 1-3-2017 by
Ord. No. 1174]
Birch Street
Birch Street East Grant Street
Birch Street [Added 8-16-2016 by
Ord. No. 1168]
Pine Street
Brookstone Drive East Lake Street
Brown's Court Fargo Street
Buttercup Way Crestview Lane
Buttercup Way Oakbrook Drive
City Alley Campus Street
Cook Street College Street
Cook Street Fremont Street
Crestview Lane Valleyridge Drive
Elm Street [Added 12-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 1160]
Grant Street
Elm Street [Added 8-16-2016 by
Ord. No. 1168]
Pine Street
Ferry Drive (North) West Prospect Street
Honeysuckle Way Harvey Road
Honeysuckle Way Ridgeview Drive
Jefferson Street CP Avenue
Lakeview Avenue College Street
Lilac Lane [Amended 2-4-2014 by
Ord. No. 1126]
The north curbline of East Lake
Park Place
Lilac Lane [Amended 2-4-2014 by
Ord. No. 1126]
The west curbline of Grove Street.
§ 615-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-10
1:473
Name of Street At Intersection of
Municipal alley Church Street
Norton Street Grant Street
Oakbrook Drive Valleyridge Drive
Owen Street North CP Avenue (south side)
Pleasant Street Elm Street
Prairie Avenue Birch Street
Reed Street O'Neil Street
Rosewood Avenue Valleyridge Drive
Stonehedge Lane Crestview Lane
Valleyridge Drive Ridgeview Lane
Woodland Beach Road South Ferry Drive
§ 615-11. Traffic control at intersections.
Right-of-way intersections shall be designated in accordance with the
authority granted by § 349.08, Wis. Stats., and yield right-of-way signs shall
be installed at the following intersections:
Name of Street At Intersection of
Church Street The north curbline of Campus
Street
Elm Street The north curbline of Grant Street
Grove Street The south curbline of Jefferson
Street
Meadowridge Circle The north curbline of Lake Park
Place
Mildred Court The north curbline of Prospect
Street
Norton Street The south curbline of Fargo Street
Pope Street Prairie Avenue (eastbound only)
Topel Street (County Trunk Highway
A) [southbound]
At its intersection with Mud Lake
Road
§ 615-12. School crossing zones.
School crossing zone intersections shall be designated in accordance with
the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 346.57(4)(b) and "school crossing"
signs shall be installed at the following intersections:
Intersection
Birch Street and Birch Court [Added 1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1174]
East Pine Street and Birch Street [Added 1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1174]
§ 615-10 LAKE MILLS CODE § 615-12
1:474
Intersection
Mulberry Street and Fargo Street
North Main Street and Oak Street
North Main Street and Pine Street
North Main Street and Prospect Street
South Main Street and Catlin Drive/Keyes Street
South Main Street and Catlin Drive/Milton Street
South Main Street and Lake Park Place
South Main Street and Woodland Beach Road
West Madison Street and Church Street
West Madison Street and College Street
West Madison Street and Fremont Street
§ 615-13. Prohibited turns.
The operator of a vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon a highway at any of the following places:
A. At any place where signs prohibiting such turn have been erected by
the authority in charge of the maintenance of the highway, and such
places shall include the following:
(1) The entire length of Birch Street from East Grant Street to Pine
Street.
B. At any place prohibited under § 346.33, Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 615-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-13
1:475

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 6, Ch. 3, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 615-14. Parking time limitations.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle on any street or part of the street for a period of
time longer than the posted limits; provided, however, that the limitations
set forth herein shall apply only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays:
A. Fifteen-minute parking.
Name of Street Side Location
East Oak Street
[Amended
5-19-2015 by Ord.
No. 1146]
North From a point that is 54 feet west of
the intersection with Mulberry
Street to a point no closer than 4
feet from the driveway exiting the
U.S. Post Office
B. One-hour parking.
Name of Street Side Location
Giles Street North From Grove Street to Washington
Street
Giles Street South From Grove Street to Washington
Street, between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Grove Street West From Water Street to Giles Street,
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.
C. Two-hour parking.
Name of Street Side Location
Lake Street (E)
[Amended
7-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1099A]
North Angle parking from a point 23 feet
east of Ford Court crosswalk to a
point 68 feet east of the intersection
with East Madison Street
Lake Street (E)
[Amended
7-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1099A]
North Angle parking from a point 65 feet
east of Main Street to a point 50 feet
west of the Ford Court crosswalk
§ 615-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-14
1:477
Name of Street Side Location
Lake Street (E)
[Amended
7-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1099A]
South Angle parking from a point 39 feet
east of Main Street to a point 41 feet
west of the Ford Court crosswalk
Lake Street (E)
[Amended
7-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1099A]
South From a point 60 feet east of Ford
Court crosswalk to a point 15 feet
west of the South Madison Street
crosswalk
Lake Street (W)
[Amended
7-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1099A]
North From a point 15 feet west of the near
limits of the crosswalk at the
intersection with South Main Street
to a point 44 feet east of the
intersection with Church Street,
except that between 5:00 p.m. and
9:00 p.m. on all days, the parking
space that begins 44 feet east of
Church Street and ends 66 feet east
of Church Street shall have parking
limited to no longer than 15 minutes
Lake Street (W)
[Amended
7-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1099A]
North From a point 43 feet west of Church
Street to a point 122 feet west of
Church Street
Lake Street (W)
[Amended
7-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1099A]
South From a point 20 feet west of the near
limits of the crosswalk at the
intersection with South Main Street
to a point 143 feet west of the near
limits of the crosswalk at the
intersection with South Main Street
Lake Street (W)
[Amended
7-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1099A]
South From a point 32 feet west of
Merchants Alley to a point 209 feet
west of Merchant's Alley
Main Street East From a point 227 feet south of Water
Street to a point 437 feet south of
Water Street
Main Street East From a point 23 feet from the south
end of the meter island north to a
point 144 feet north
Main Street East From a point 43 feet north from the
south end of the meter island to a
point 167 feet north of the south end
of the meter island
§ 615-14 LAKE MILLS CODE § 615-14
1:478
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street East From Lake Street to a point 115 feet
south of Madison Street
Main Street East From Madison Street to Oak Street
Main Street East From Water Street to a point 124
feet north (farthest east side of the
meter island)
Main Street West From Lake Street south to a point 32
feet north of the north curbline of
Veteran's Lane on the west side of
South Main Street, except the
loading zone between signs auto
parking only
Main Street West From Lake Street south to a point 55
feet north of Veteran's Lane, except
the loading zone between signs
Main Street West From the north side of Greenwood's
drive through to a point 188 feet
south of Madison Street
Municipal Parking
Lot No. 1
In the parking area between the 2
islands located between Church
Street and Greenwood's State Bank.
This parking restriction shall not be
applicable to any designated
handicapped parking stalls, nor shall
it be applicable at times other than
between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
Mondays through Fridays.
Water Street Both From South Main Street easterly as
far west as the west edge of the alley
west of the telephone company
D. Twelve-hour parking. [Amended 11-18-2011 by Ord. No. 1086B]
Name of Street Side Location
Madison Street (E) North From a point 10 feet east of the fire
hydrant in front of the library to a
point 53 feet west of the near limits
of the Mulberry Street crosswalk
Madison Street (E) North From a point 15 east of Mulberry
Street, as measured from the near
limits of the unmarked crosswalk, to
a point 158 feet west of the
intersection with East Lake Street
§ 615-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-14
1:479
§ 615-15. No-parking zones.
Where signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time
park a vehicle upon the following described streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Birch Street [Amended
5-19-2015 by Ord. No.
1147]
East From a point that is 58 feet north of
the center of the intersection with
Birch Court to a point that is 93 feet
south from the center of the
intersection with Birch Court
Birch Street [Amended
5-19-2015 by Ord. No.
1147]
West From the intersection with Pine
Street to the intersection with
Prospect Street
Name of Street Side Location
Madison Street (E) North From a point 99 feet east of the
intersection with Main Street to a
point 25 feet west of the fire hydrant
in front of the library
Madison Street (E) South Angle parking from a point 25 feet
east of the near limits of the
Mulberry Street unmarked crosswalk
to a point 106 feet west of the
intersection with East Lake Street
Madison Street (E) South Angle parking from a point 88 feet
east of the intersection with Main
Street to a point 19 feet west of the
near limits of the Mulberry Street
crosswalk
E. Forty-eight-hour parking:
Name of Street Location
Municipal Parking Lot No. 1 In the parking areas in the Church
Street parking lot, except in those
areas designated as two-hour parking
areas
Municipal Parking Lot No. 2 All stalls of the parking area bordered
by Ford Court
F. Notwithstanding the limitations of designating parking restrictions
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in this § 615-14, parking
shall be permitted only for 15 minutes on the north side of West Lake
Street between 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on all days at the location that
begins 44 feet east of the intersection with Church Street and that ends
60 feet east of that same intersection. [Amended 10-17-2006 by Ord.
No. 996B]
§ 615-14 LAKE MILLS CODE § 615-15
1:480
Name of Street Side Location
Brooks Street South From Ray Street west to lake
C.P. Avenue [Amended
12-6-2011 by Ord. No.
1094]
East From a point 10 feet north of the fire
hydrant across the street from 305
South C.P. Avenue to a point 184 feet
south of the fire hydrant
C.P. Avenue North Both From Owen Street easterly, 160 feet
C.P. Avenue South To points 100 feet to either side of
the East Lake Street intersection
Campus Street North From Church Street to a point 10
feet west of the fire hydrant at the
west side of school property
Catlin Drive Both Between Keyes Street and Milton
Street during school hours
Catlin Drive, east of
Milton Street [Added
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
North From the eastern line of the
crosswalk at the intersection of
Catlin Drive and South Main Street
to a point approximately 250 feet
east located at the eastern boundary
of the Catlin Drive right-of-way
Catlin Drive, east of
Milton Street [Added
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
South From the back of the eastern curb of
South Main Street at the intersection
of Catlin Drive to a point 45 feet east
Catlin Drive [Amended
8-4-2015 by Ord. No.
1153]
South From the crosswalk at the
intersection with South Main Street
to a point that is 65 feet east
Church Street Both From Madison Street to Campus
Street
Church Street East From West Lake Street to Madison
Street
College Street North From a point 259 feet from the west
curbline extended of Madison Street
to a point 277 feet from the west
curbline extended of Madison Street,
7:30 a.m. to 12:00 Noon Sundays
College Street South From Cook Street to Madison Street
during school hours
College Street South From Lake Shore Drive to Lake View
Avenue
Elm Street [Added
8-16-2016 by Ord. No.
1169]
East From the sidewalk on CTH V where it
intersects with Elm to a point 267.5
feet south
§ 615-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-15
1:481
Name of Street Side Location
Erinside Road East and
south
From Fremont Street to Griffith
Street
Erinside Road North
and west
From Griffith Street to a point 182
feet west and from that point 22 feet
southerly
Ferry Drive East From Lake Street to Fremont Street
Ferry Drive East From the north side of the north
parking bay to Lake Street
Ferry Drive East From the south parking bay north 30
feet to the north parking bay
Ferry Drive East To points 70 feet north and 100 feet
south of either side of the ends of the
bridge over Rock Creek
Ferry Drive West From the north curbline of Lakeside
Park north to Lake Street
Ferry Drive West From the north curbline of the
southernmost parking bay north and
west to a point 20 feet west of the
most westerly curb and gutter
Ferry Drive West To points 100 feet to either side of
the ends of the bridge over Rock
Creek
Ford Court East From Lake Street to a point 147 feet
south
Ford Court West From Lake Street to Water Street
Fremont Street North From Erinside to Lake Shore Drive
Grove Street West From Jefferson Street to Giles Street
Grove Street [Amended
1-4-2011 by Ord. No.
1073]
West From Water Street to 75 feet north of
the intersection, as measured from
the curbline
Hubbs Street Both Entire length
Lake Park Place (E)
[Amended 12-17-2013
by Ord. No. 1120A]
North From 113 feet west of the
intersection with Lilac Lane to the
intersection with Meadowridge
Circle
Lake Shore Drive West From Fremont Street to Lake Street
Lake Shore Drive/
Fremont Street
Both Commencing at the Erinside Road
intersection and extending to the
College Street intersection
§ 615-15 LAKE MILLS CODE § 615-15
1:482
Name of Street Side Location
Lake Street (E)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
North From a point 35 feet east of Rock
Creek bridge to a point 175 feet west
of Rock Creek bridge
Lake Street (E)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
North From a point 50 feet west of Ford
Court to a point 23 feet east of Ford
Court
Lake Street (E)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
North From a point 68 feet east of East
Madison Street to the intersection
with Madison Street
Lake Street (E)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
North From the intersection with Main
Street to a point 65 feet east
Lake Street (E)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
South From a point 100 feet west of CP
Avenue to a point 100 feet east of CP
Avenue
Lake Street (E)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
South From a point 100 feet west of
Enterprise Drive to a point 100 feet
east of Enterprise Drive
Lake Street (E)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
South From a point 41 feet west of Ford
Court to a point 60 feet east of Ford
Court
Lake Street (E)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
South From a point 50 feet east of Rock
Creek bridge to a point 162 feet west
of Rock Creek Bridge
Lake Street (E)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
South From the intersection with Main
Street to a point 39 feet east
Lake Street (W)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
North From a point 165 feet west of the
intersection with Church Street to a
point 189 feet west of Church Street
Lake Street (W)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
North From the intersection with Church
Street to a point 43 feet west
Lake Street (W)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
North From the intersection with Church
Street to a point 44 feet east
Lake Street (W)
[Amended 7-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1099A]
South From Merchants Alley to a point 32
feet west of Merchants Alley
Madison Street (E)
[Amended 11-18-2011
by Ord. No. 1086B]
North From the intersection with Lake
Street to a point 158 west
§ 615-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-15
1:483
Name of Street Side Location
Madison Street (E)
[Amended 11-18-2011
by Ord. No. 1086B]
North From the intersection with Main
Street to a point 99 feet east
Madison Street (E)
[Amended 11-18-2011
by Ord. No. 1086B]
North From the near limits of the Mulberry
Street crosswalk to a point 53 feet
west
Madison Street (E)
[Amended 11-18-2011
by Ord. No. 1086B]
South From the intersection with Lake
Street to a point 106 feet west
Madison Street (E)
[Amended 11-18-2011
by Ord. No. 1086B]
South From the intersection with Main
Street to a point 88 feet east
Madison Street (E)
[Amended 11-18-2011
by Ord. No. 1086B]
South From the near limits of the Mulberry
Street crosswalk to a point 19 feet
west
Madison Street (E)
[Amended 11-18-2011
by Ord. No. 1086B]
South From the near limits of the Mulberry
Street unmarked crosswalk to a point
25 feet east
Madison Street (W)
[Amended 11-18-2011
by Ord. No. 1086B]
East From the intersection with Fremont
Street to the City limits
Madison Street (W)
[Amended 11-18-2011
by Ord. No. 1086B]
West From the intersection with College
Street to a point 75 feet north
Madison Street (W)
[Amended 11-18-2011
by Ord. No. 1086B]
West From the intersection with College
Street to the intersection with
Church Street from 7:30 a.m. to
12:00 noon on Sundays
Main Street [Amended
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
East From Woodland Beach Road south to
the City limits
Main Street [Amended
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
East From the northside curb of East
Madison Street to a point 53 feet
north
Main Street East From Oak Street to Tyranena Park
Road
Main Street [Added
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
East From the southside curb of East
Madison Street to a point 60 feet
south
Main Street [Added
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
East From a point 80 feet south of the
southside curb of East Madison
Street to a point 122 feet south
§ 615-15 LAKE MILLS CODE § 615-15
1:484
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street [Added
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
East From the northside curb of East Lake
Street to a point 53 feet north
Main Street [Added
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
East From the southside curb of East Lake
Street to a point 161 feet south
Main Street [Added
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
East From the northside curb of Water
Street to a point 48 feet north
Main Street [Amended
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
East From the southside curb of Water
Street to a point 388 feet south
Main Street [Repealed
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
Main Street [Added
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
West From a point 74 feet north of the
northside curb of Veterans Lane to a
point 234 feet north of the northside
curb of Veterans Lane
Main Street [Amended
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
West From a point 34 feet north of the
northside curb of Veterans Lane
south to the City limits
Main Street [Repealed
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
Main Street West From Madison Street north to a point
210 feet north of Madison Street
Main Street West From Tyranena Park Road south to a
point 500 feet south of Tyranena
Park Road
Main Street [Added
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
West From a point 67 feet north of the
northside curb of West Lake Street
south to the northside curb of West
Lake Street
Main Street [Added
10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 1206A]
West From the south line of the crosswalk
crossing South Main Street at the
intersection of West Lake Street to a
point 20 feet south of the south line
of the crosswalk
Main Street [Amended
5-19-2015 by Ord. No.
1147; 10-15-2019 by
Ord. No. 1206A]
East From a point that is 84 feet south of
the intersection with Pine Street
north to the City limits
§ 615-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-15
1:485
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street [Amended
6-21-2011 by Ord. No.
1082]
West From Madison Street to a point 43
feet south
Main Street Annex
[Added 10-15-2019 by
Ord. No. 1206A]
North From a point 143 feet from the
northern line of the crosswalk at the
intersection of the Main Street Annex
and Water Street to the intersection
of the Main Street Annex and South
Main Street
Main Street Annex
[Added 10-15-2019 by
Ord. No. 1206A]
South From a point 99 feet from the
northern line of the crosswalk at the
intersection of the Main Street Annex
and Water Street to the intersection
of the Main Street Annex and South
Main Street
Milton Street [Amended
8-4-2015 by Ord. No.
1153]
South From the crosswalk at the
intersection with South Main Street
to a point that is 84 feet west
Mulberry Street East From Madison Street north to O'Neil
Street
Mulberry Street East From the south side of the CP
Avenue right-of-way to a point 166.4
feet north of CP Avenue right-of-way
Mulberry Street NorthwestFrom Washington Street to a point
50 feet northeast (northwest side)
and to a point 50 feet southwest
O'Neil Street South From Mulberry Street to Owen
Street
Oak Street North From Lake Street to a point 107 feet
northwesterly and including all of the
triangle at the junction of these
streets
Oak Street South From Main Street to Lake Street
Oak Street (E)
[Amended 5-19-2015
by Ord. No. 1146]
North From the intersection with Mulberry
Street to a point that is 54 feet west
of Mulberry Street
Owen Street Both From North CP Avenue to Tyranena
Park Road (CTH V)
Pine Street [Amended
5-19-2015 by Ord. No.
1147]
South From the intersection with Main
Street to a point that is 369 feet east
of Main Street
§ 615-15 LAKE MILLS CODE § 615-15
1:486
Name of Street Side Location
Pine Street/Birch Street South
and West
Commencing 342 feet from the
intersection of North Main Street
and East Pine Street and extending
to East Prospect Street
Prospect Street North From Birch Street to Main Street
during school hours
Prospect Street South From Madison Street to Main Street
Sandy Beach Road North From Main Street to west end of the
bowling alley property
Sandy Beach Road South From Main Street to west end of
Sandy Beach park
Tower Street Both From the tennis courts west to a
point 81 feet therefrom
Veteran's Lane North From Main Street west to the boat
ramp
Veteran's Lane South
and east
From Main Street along the curbline
to the end of curb
Washington Street Both From Mulberry Street to a point 50
feet northwest (both sides) and to a
point 50 feet southeast
Washington Street North From Lake Street to a point 108 feet
northwesterly and including all sides
of the triangle at the intersection of
these streets
Washington Street North Main Street to Scott Street
Washington Street South Main Street to Lake Street
Water Street North From 40 feet east of the driveway
entrance to the Sentry Parking Lot to
40 feet west of said driveway
entrance
Water Street South From 40 feet west of the driveway
entrance to the Lake Mills Municipal
Building parking lot entrance
Water Street South From the east side of the driveway
entering City property at the location
of the Housing Authority to Grove
Street
Woodland Drive Both Entire length
§ 615-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-16
1:487
§ 615-16. School parking zones.
Where signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop or
leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended or whether
temporarily or otherwise, on any of the following streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
College Street
[Amended
07-20-2010 by
Ord. No. 1063]
North 7:30 a.m. and 8:30
a.m., and between
the hours of 2:30
and 3:30 p.m., on
any days during
which the Lake Mills
Middle School is in
session
From a point that is
360 feet west of the
extended curblines
at the intersection of
Madison and College
Streets to a point
that is 424 feet west
of the extended
curblines at the
intersection of
Madison and College
Streets
Grant Street
[Amended
8-17-2010 by Ord.
No. 1067A]
South 7:30 a.m. and 8:30
a.m., and between
the hours of 2:30
p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on
any days during
which Prospect
Elementary school is
in session
From the eastern
curbline of Norton
Street to 15 feet
east of designated
crosswalk at the
intersection with
Birch Street
Prospect Street
(East) [Amended
5-19-2015 by Ord.
No. 1147]
South 7:30 a.m. and 8:30
a.m., and between
the hours of 2:30
p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on
any days during
which Lake Mills
Elementary School
is in session
From the
intersection of Main
and Prospect Street
to the intersection of
Birch and Prospect
Street
§ 615-17. Night parking prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle on any streets between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m. during the months of December, January, February and March of any
year.
§ 615-18. Loading zones only. [Amended 7-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1100]
Where signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time
park a vehicle upon the following described streets, except temporarily for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading:
§ 615-16 LAKE MILLS CODE § 615-18
1:488
Name of Street Side Location
Birch Street [Added
1-3-2017 by Ord. No.
1174]
West and
adjacent
to
elementary
school
Where marked with official signs, no
person may park a vehicle, except to
load or unload passengers, and no
such vehicle may be left unattended
at any time
CP Avenue Both From a point 160 feet east of Owen
Street easterly to a point 450 feet
from Owen Street
Main Street West From East Lake Street 46 feet south
to a point 73 feet south of West Lake
Street between signs
Water Street South From a point on Water Street that is
25 feet east of the intersection with
South Main Street easterly to a point
43 feet east of the intersection with
South Main Street
§ 615-19. Truck parking restriction.
No person shall park any vehicle weighing in excess of 10,000 pounds on
any of the streets of the City or on any of the parking lots in the City, except
those streets or parking lots included in an area described as follows:
§ 615-20. Miscellaneous parking provisions.
§ 615-21. Parking lots.
The following regulations shall apply to all persons using municipal parking
lots:
A. Beginning at the intersection of Main Street and Water Street, then east
on Water Street to the intersection of Madison Street, then north and
west on Madison Street to the intersection of Church Street, then south
on Church Street to the intersection of Lake Street, then east on Lake
Street to the intersection of Main Street, then south of Main Street to
the intersection of Water Street.
B. Parking shall be permitted on both sides of any street located within the
above-described boundaries.
A. Ferry Drive. No person shall park any vehicle on Ferry Drive beginning
at the bridge crossing the flowage between Mill Pond and Rock Lake
and proceeding northerly a distance of 350 feet, except in areas which
shall be clearly marked for such parking, which areas shall be
perpendicular to Ferry Drive.
A. No person shall park any motor vehicle not bearing a current license
plate on any off-street parking lot owned or operated by the City.
§ 615-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:489
§ 615-22. Removal of illegally parked vehicle.
§ 615-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or permit anyone to violate the parking
provisions of this article shall forfeit not less than $1 nor more than $25,
or a late fee that can increase the original penalty to a maximum of $35 if
not paid within 48 hours, and in default of payment of such penalty, shall
be issued a uniform traffic citation under Wis. Stats. § 346.56, or may be
subject to registration suspension until the forfeiture or any applicable late
fee is paid.
B. No person shall park at the same time more than two motor vehicles
registered in his name or bearing license plates issued to him as
manufacturer, distributor or dealer, on any such off-street parking lot.
C. No person shall use such off-street parking lot or any part thereof for
the repair (except for emergency repair), display, or storage of any
motor vehicle. A vehicle shall be deemed as being parked for storage if
it is parked on a parking lot continuously for more than 48 hours.
D. All parking of motor vehicles in such an off-street parking lot shall be
within the lines provided therefor, as marked upon the pavement, and
no such vehicle shall be permitted to occupy more than one parking
space as laid out and designated by lines upon the pavement.
E. Any motor vehicle that cannot be parked within the spaces provided for
parking shall be parked in that section of the parking lot designated for
truck parking.
A. The Lake Mills Police Department is authorized to take any action
authorized by Wis. Stats. §§ 349.13(3), 349.13(3m), 342.40(3), and
341.65(2), in addition to exercising any other lawful authority or duties
with respect to the removal of vehicles from highways and public and
private property within the City of Lake Mills. For the purposes of this
section, "tow" and "towing" means to move or remove a vehicle to a
place where parking is permitted or to either a private or public parking
or storage premises or direct or contract for the same.
B. Pursuant to its authority under Wis. Stats. §§ 349.13(3), 349.13(3m),
342.40(3), and 341.65(2), the City of Lake Mills hereby establishes a
towing charge penalty. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully towed by or at the
direction of the Police Department, the owner or operator of the towed
vehicle shall forfeit $25, and this penalty, which may increase after 48
hours to an amount not to exceed $35 if not paid, shall be in addition to
any other charges which may lawfully be charged to the owner or
operator of the vehicle for the cost of removal, impounding, storage or
disposal of said vehicle.
§ 615-21 LAKE MILLS CODE § 615-24
1:490
§ 615-24. Parking of recreational vehicles and campers.
No person other than the owner shall park any recreational vehicle, camper
or trailer which is designed, intended or used for camping purposes upon
any property in the City without first obtaining permission from the Chief
of Police. Such permission may be granted by the Chief of Police, or his
designee, provided that the parking of the recreational vehicle, camper or
trailer, shall not be permitted for more than three consecutive nights.
§ 615-25. Parking prohibited in certain specified places.
No person shall stop or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, and whether temporarily or otherwise, in any of the following
places:
§ 615-26. Manner of parking on streets.
Upon streets where parking or stopping is permitted, a vehicle is not
lawfully parked or stopped unless it complies with the following
requirements:
A. Within an intersection;
B. On a crosswalk;
C. On or across a sidewalk;
D. On the roadway side of any parked vehicle (double parking);
E. Upon any portion of a City street where and at the time when parking or
standing is prohibited by official signs indicating the prohibition of any
parking or standing;
F. In an alley in a business district, unless it is temporarily engaged in
loading or unloading or discharging or receiving passengers and the
vehicle is attended by a licensed operator so that it may promptly be
moved in case of an emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic;
G. Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;
H. Closer than 15 feet to the near limits of a crosswalk;
I. Within four feet of the entrance to an alley or a private road or roadway.
A. Upon a street where traffic is permitted to move in both directions
simultaneously and where angle parking is not clearly designated, a
vehicle must be parked parallel to the edge of the street, headed in the
direction of traffic on the right side of the street.
B. Upon streets where angle parking is clearly authorized by official
markings, vehicles shall be parked at the angle and within the spaces
indicated.
§ 615-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-26
1:491
§ 615-27. Parking at marked disabled parking spaces.
When official signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful
for any person to park a vehicle in any parking space designated for
use by disabled persons unless the vehicle displays specific authorization
granted by the Department of Transportation to park the vehicle in such
designated parking space. In addition to designated parking spaces at
locations within publicly or privately controlled parking lots, the following
locations on street rights-of-way shall each have one officially designated
parking space that is restricted from use by vehicles other than those
specifically authorized to park in such disabled person parking spaces.
Name of Street Side Location
East Lake Street South Between South Main Street and Ford
Court
East Madison Street
[Added 9-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 1152]
South At a location that begins 131 feet
east from the near limits of the
crosswalk at the intersection with
Mulberry Street
Lake View Avenue West At a location that is 50 feet south of
College Street
Lake View Avenue West At a location that is 70 feet south of
College Street
North Main Street West Between Madison Street and Lake
Street
South Ferry Drive West Between West Lake Street and the
Mill Pond
§ 615-28. Boat launch parking.
Any vehicle used in launching or removing watercraft at any City boat
launching facility shall be subject to a forfeiture of $25 if such vehicle
does not properly display the boat launching permit at all times that the
C. Upon streets where parallel parking is clearly authorized by official
markings, vehicles shall be parked parallel to the curb and within the
spaces indicated.
D. The vehicle must be parked not more than 12 inches from the right
hand curb when parallel parking, or 12 inches from the horizontal plane
of the front bumper to the curb when angle parking.
E. The vehicle is parked on private property without the consent of the
owner or lessee of the property.
F. The vehicle does not remain on the street, in the same vicinity, for a
consecutive period that exceeds 72 hours.
G. The vehicle is not parked on the City right-of-way/tree lawn.
§ 615-26 LAKE MILLS CODE § 615-28
1:492
watercraft is in Rock Lake or the Mill Pond and the vehicle is parked at or
near the boat launching facility. (See § 496-8 of this Code.)
§ 615-29. Parking in parks.
In addition to the provisions of this article, parking of all vehicles at parks
in the City of Lake Mills is regulated in § 496-5 of this Code.
§ 615-30. School-bus-parking-only zones [Added 1-3-2017 by Ord.
No. 1174]
No vehicle other than a school bus may be parked at any time on the north
side of East Prospect Street where official signs are erected giving notice
that the area is reserved for school bus parking only.
§ 615-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-30
1:493

ARTICLE IV
Heavy Traffic Routes
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 7, Ch. 5, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 615-31. Routes established. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1134]
No person shall operate any vehicle classified as a "heavy traffic" vehicle
by § 615-32of this article over any streets in the City, except the following
named streets, which are hereby designated as heavy traffic routes:
Name of Street Location
CP Avenue From the City limits to East Lake
Street
East Lake Street From North Main Street to City limits
East Madison Street From North Main Street to East Lake
Street
Madison Street From the City limits to Main Street
North CP Avenue (Clark Street) Entire length
North Main Street From the City limits to South Main
Street
Owen Street Entire length
South Main Street From the City limits to North Main
Street
§ 615-32. Definitions. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1134]
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
given:
HEAVY TRAFFIC — All vehicles not operating completely on pneumatic
tires and all vehicles or combination of vehicles, other than motor buses,
designed or used for transporting property of any nature and having a gross
weight of more than 6,000 pounds.
§ 615-33. Heavy traffic allowed.
Nothing herein shall prohibit heavy traffic from using a street for the
purpose of obtaining orders for supplies or moving or delivering supplies
or commodities to or from any place of business or residence fronting on
such street. Truck delivery or pickup of supplies from businesses or other
addresses not on heavy traffic routes shall be made by the shortest, most
practical route from and to the heavy traffic routes listed herein.
§ 615-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-34
1:495
§ 615-34. Heavy traffic routes marked by signs. [Amended 9-2-2014
by Ord. No. 1134]
Any street or highway designated herein as a heavy traffic route shall be
marked with appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
§ 615-34 LAKE MILLS CODE § 615-34
1:496
Chapter 623
WATER AND SEWER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 565.
§ 615-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-34
1:497

ARTICLE I
Cross-Connections
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 4, Ch. 2, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances; amended in its entirety 4-3-2018 by Ord. No.
118616]
§ 623-1. Definition.
A cross-connection is defined as any physical connection or arrangement
between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable
water from the City of Lake Mills public water system, and the other
of which contains water from a private source, water of unknown or
questionable safety, or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there may be a
flow from one system to the other, with the direction of flow depending on
the pressure differential between the two systems.
§ 623-2. Cross-connections prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation may establish, maintain, or permit to be
established or maintained, any unprotected cross-connection. Crossconnections
shall be protected as required in Wis. Adm. Code NR 810.15 as
amended from time to time.
§ 623-3. Inspections.
Lake Mills Light & Water, the City of Lake Mills Utility, may inspect or
arrange for an inspection of property served by the City of Lake Mills Utility
for the existence of cross-connections. As an alternative, the City of Lake
Mills Utility may require a person, firm, or corporation who owns, leases or
occupies property to have their plumbing inspected, at their own expense
by a State of Wisconsin certified cross-connection inspector/surveyor. The
frequency of inspections shall be established by the City of Lake Mills Utility
in accordance with the Wisconsin Administrative Code. Any unprotected
cross-connections identified by any inspection by the City of Lake Mills
Utility, its agent, or any company contracted by the City of Lake Mills, shall
be promptly corrected. Failure to promptly correct an unprotected crossconnection
shall be sufficient cause for the City of Lake Mills Utility to
discontinue water service to the property.
§ 623-4. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of credentials, a representative of the City of Lake Mills
Utility shall have the right to request entry, at any reasonable time, to a
property served by a connection to the City of Lake Mills water system for
the purpose of inspecting the property for cross-connections. Refusing entry
to such City of Lake Mills Utility representative shall be sufficient cause for
the City of Lake Mills Utility to discontinue water service to the property.
16.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 623-5 and 623-6 as §§ 623-6.2
and 623-6.3, respectively.
§ 623-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-4
1:499
If entry is refused, a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119
may be obtained.
§ 623-5. Provision of requested information.
The City of Lake Mills Utility may request an owner, lessee, or occupant of
property served by a connection to the City of Lake Mills water system to
furnish the City of Lake Mills Utility with pertinent information regarding
the piping system of the property. Refusing to provide requested
information shall be sufficient cause for the City of Lake Mills Utility to
discontinue water service to the property.
§ 623-6. Discontinuance of water for violation.
The City of Lake Mills Utility may discontinue water service to any property
wherein any unprotected cross-connection in violation of this chapter exists,
and take other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any
danger of contamination of the City of Lake Mills water system. Water
service may be discontinued, however, only after reasonable notice and
opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats. Chapter 68. Water service to such
property shall not be restored until the unprotected cross-connection has
been eliminated.
§ 623-6.1. Emergency discontinuance.
If it is determined by City of Lake Mills Utility an unprotected crossconnection
or emergency endangers public health, safety, or welfare, and
requires immediate action, and if a written finding to that effect is filed
with the Director of Public Works and delivered to the customer's premises,
water service may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall have
an opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats. Ch. 68, within 10 days of
such emergency discontinuance. Water service to such property shall not
be restored until the unprotected cross-connection or emergency has been
eliminated.
§ 623-6.2. Adoption of state regulations.
The City hereby adopts by reference Chapter SPS 383 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
§ 623-6.3. Private wells.
A. Wells to be filled. All private wells located on any premises which is
served by the public water system of the City shall be properly filled by
November 1, 1982. Only those wells for which a well operation permit
has been granted by the City shall be exempt from this requirement.
B. Well operation permits. A permit may be granted to a well owner to
operate a well for a period not to exceed one year if the following
requirements are met:
§ 623-4 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-6.3
1:500
(1) The well and pump installation meet the requirements of Chapter
NR 812, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and a well constructor's
report is on file with the Department of Natural Resources, or
certification of the acceptability of the well has been granted by the
private water supply section of the Department of Natural
Resources.
(2) The well has a history of producing safe water and presently
produces bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by three
samplings two weeks apart, taken between April 1 and October 30.
Initial samplings will be done by and paid for by the Water Utility.
(3) No physical connection shall exist between the piping of the public
water system and the private well. Applications shall be made to
the City Clerk on forms provided by the City, and shall be
accompanied by an application fee as set by City Council.
Application shall be approved annually by the City Council for year
beginning July 1 and ending June 30.
C. Abandoned wells.
(1) Method of filling. Wells to be abandoned under Subsection A herein
shall be filled according to the procedures outlined in § NR 811.13,
Wisconsin Administrative Code. The pump and piping must be
removed and any obstruction or liner must similarly be removed
before the well is filled.
(2) Reports and inspection. A well abandonment shall be submitted by
the well owner to the Department of Natural Resources on forms
provided by that agency. The report shall be submitted immediately
upon completion of the filling of the well. The filling must be
observed by a representative of the City.
D. Penalties. Any person, firm or other well owner violating this section
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $500 together with the cost of prosecution. Each twentyfour-
hour period during which violation exists shall be deemed and
constitute a separate offense.
§ 623-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-6.3
1:501

ARTICLE II
Water and Sewer Connections
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 4, Ch. 6, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 623-7. Compulsory connection.
§ 623-8. Sewage utility.
A. To assure preservation of public health, comfort and safety, it shall be
the duty of the owner or the agent of the owner of any building used for
human habitation and located adjacent to a sewer or water main, or in a
block through which one or both of such systems extend to connect
therewith after notice as provided herein.
B. When a sewer or water main becomes available to any building used for
habitation, the City Manager shall notify the owner in writing or his
agent to connect therewith and to install a water closet and such other
facilities as may be reasonable necessary to protect the public health,
welfare and safety. The manner of connecting shall be prescribed by the
Plumbing Inspector.
C. The notice required by this section shall be given in the manner
prescribed by § 801.11, Wis. Stats., or by registered mail addressed to
the last known address of the owner or his agent.
D. If the owner or his agent fails to comply after 10 days' notice as herein
provided, the City Manager may cause connection and installations to
be made and the expense thereof assessed as a special tax against the
property.
E. The owner or his agent may, within 30 days after completion of the
work, file a written option with the City Treasurer electing to pay the
special tax in five equal annual installments with interest at 6% per
annum. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
F. After connection of any building used for human habitation to a sewer
main, no privy, cesspool or waterless toilet shall be used in connection
therewith.
A. The sewerage system shall be operated as a public utility by the City.
Said system shall include the wastewater treatment facility, sewer lines,
laterals and all necessary appurtenances, extensions and improvements
to said system.
B. Rates and charges for the services of said system will be fixed in an
amount sufficient to pay the costs of operating and maintaining said
system and to provide an amount of revenues sufficient to pay debt
service, reserve, replacement and improvement requirements and all
other requirements and covenants provided in the Revenue Bond
§ 623-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-8
1:503
§ 623-9. Water and sewer main extension; cost advancement.
Water and sewer main extensions shall be financed by cost advancements
when deemed advisable by the City Council. In general, the cost
advancement method shall be used only when application is made for
public water and sewer service which would require the extension of mains
through sparsely occupied areas to serve such applicant, or through areas
which in the judgment of the City Council are unlikely to develop extensively
within the next 10 years. Where extensions are authorized on a costadvancement
basis, the procedure shall be as follows:
Ordinance No. 349. The Treasurer of the City shall be custodian of
all financial records and funds belonging to or associated with said
system and such funds shall be deposited in the Bank of Lake Mills
of Lake Mills, Wisconsin, which bank is a member of the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation. The rates and charges for all services
and facilities rendered by said system shall be reasonable and just,
taking into consideration the costs and value of said system and the
cost of maintaining, repairing and operating the same and the amounts
necessary for the principal and interest on all bonds, and there shall
be charged such rates and charges as shall be adequate to meet such
requirements.
C. The City shall maintain complete books and records relating to the
operation of the system and its financial affairs and cause such books
and records to be audited annually at the end of each fiscal year as set
forth in said Revenue Bond Ordinance No. 349. The management,
operation and control of the sewerage system are vested in the City
Council. All records, minutes and all written proceedings thereof shall
be kept by the City Clerk.
D. The provisions of this section are subject to the laws of the State of
Wisconsin.
A. The applicant shall deposit with the City Treasurer a sum sufficient to
pay the total estimated cost of the extension, less unapportionable
costs, if any.
B. Such deposit shall be made before construction is started or contracted.
If the actual apportionable cost shall be less than the amount deposited,
the excess of the deposit over the cost shall be refunded to the applicant
within 30 days after payment for the completed project. If the
apportionable cost shall exceed the deposit, the applicant shall pay the
deficiency prior to the granting of water or sewerage service.
C. Any property connected to such main after its installation, other than
the applicant's, shall pay to the City a connection charge determined by
the City Council, which shall be equivalent to the special assessments
which would have been levied by the City at the time such extension
was made.
§ 623-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-9
1:504
§ 623-10. Maintenance of sewer laterals.
D. All connection charges collected by the City under Subsection C above
shall be paid to the applicant or his assigns or heirs unless specifically
provided otherwise in writing.
A. Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining sewer laterals
from the service main to the building to be serviced. Where it is
determined by the City, upon inspection, that the sewer laterals
servicing the building are not in a good state of repair, notice of the
deficiency shall be provided the property owner in writing, and the
property owner shall, within 30 days after receipt of such written
notice, cause the sewer lateral to be repaired or replaced, as the case
may require, so as to eliminate the noticed deficiency. In the event the
property owner fails to repair or replace the sewer lateral so as to
eliminate the noticed deficiency, the City shall repair or replace the
sewer lateral as the case may require, and the cost of such repair or
replacement shall be charged to the property owner and be a lien
against the lot or parcel served in accordance with the provisions of
§ 66.0911, Wis. Stats.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, in the event the City
determines that a sewer lateral is deficient and in need of replacement
or repair under circumstances which may require the deficiency to be
corrected immediately, the City may, at its election, undertake the
repair or replacement of the sewer lateral, as the case may require, and
charge the cost thereof, or the average current cost of replacing or
repairing such sewer laterals to the property owner, which charge shall
be a lien against the lot or parcel served in accordance with the
provisions of § 66.0911, Wis. Stats. The City shall, where circumstances
require the immediate replacement or repair of a sewer lateral, notify
the property owner that such repair or replacement has, or will be,
undertaken, the reason or circumstance which required the immediate
replacement or repair of the sewer lateral, the actual or estimated cost
of the repair or replacement, and shall advise the property owner that
the charge will constitute a lien upon the lot or parcel served until paid.
§ 623-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-10
1:505

ARTICLE III
Sewer Use Regulations
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 4, Ch. 7, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 623-11. Authority.
This article is adopted under the authority granted by §§ 62.18, 62.185 and
62.19 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 623-12. Title.
This article shall be known as, referred to and cited as the "User Charge
and Sewer Use Ordinance for the City of Lake Mills, State of Wisconsin,"
and hereinafter referred to as "this article."
§ 623-13. Findings and declaration of policy. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The City Council hereby finds that the requirement for the issuance of state
loans and the acceptance of such loans by the City under the Wisconsin
Clean Water Fund Program and Environmental Improvement Fund,
§§ 281.57 and 281.59, Wis. Stats., respectively, and other state and federal
financial aid, and the regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources as set forth in Chapters NR 110, 162, and NR 210, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, for the construction and operation of waste treatment
works to improve the quality of effluent discharges from the City establish:
§ 623-14. Purpose and intent. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, prosperity,
aesthetics, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and is designed
to provide the legislative enactments required under applicable state and
federal regulations for the acceptance of financial assistance to improve
the quality of effluent discharges from the wastewater treatment works. It
is further intended to provide for administration and enforcement of this
article and to provide penalties for its violations. It is further intended to
implement provisions of agreements by and among the City, the Town of
Lake Mills and the former Rock Lake Sanitary District No. 1 relating to the
dissolution of the sanitary district and the transfer of assets and liabilities
thereof to the City.
A. The necessity of adopting a user charge system that would be
proportionate to all classes of users and produce the revenue required
to sustain the sewage collection and waste treatment system;
B. The necessity of enacting regulations that control the use and inflow
into wastewater treatment works.
§ 623-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-15
1:507
§ 623-15. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, rules, regulations, ordinances or permits previously adopted
or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this article imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this article shall govern.
§ 623-16. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor
of the City and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power
granted by the Statutes of the State of Wisconsin.
§ 623-17. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall be used. Words
used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes
the plural number; and the plural number includes the singular number.
The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, while the word "may" is
permissive.
ACCRUED RESERVES — A method of keeping accounts of the segregated
resources over several years to determine the funds available to offset
capital expenditures to maintain an ongoing, online waste treatment facility.
AUDIT — An audit as a separate report from other funds and shall cover the
following:
AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES — Those expenditures authorized by the
City Council of the City and made payable from the accounts kept for the
expenditures of the user charge. Expenditures from the reserve funds shall
be limited to those for which the fund was created.
BILLABLE BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — A user's loading in
pounds of BOD calculated using the billable flow and concentration of BOD
in the waste as determined by the City Engineer. Minimum waste strength
of BOD shall be the domestic waste concentration of 200 milligrams per
liter for the purpose of billing for user charges.
A. To determine that financial operations are properly conducted;
B. Financial reports are presented fairly;
C. Applicable laws and regulations have been complied with;
Resources are managed and used in an economical and efficient
manner; and
D.
Desired results and objectives are being achieved in a financially
effective manner.
E.
§ 623-15 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-17
1:508
BILLABLE FLOW — A user's recorded quarterly water usage as metered
by the appropriate water utility, plus metered water from wells and other
sources, and less any sewer-exempt metered data. Residential users on
unmetered wells and users with no history of billable flow shall have their
billable flow estimated by averaging the billable flow of other residential
users of the same class.
BILLABLE TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLID (TSS) — A user's loading in pounds
of TSS calculated using the billable flow and concentration of TSS in the
waste as determined by the City Engineer. Minimum waste strength of TSS
shall be the domestic waste concentration of 250 milligrams per liter for the
purpose of billing for user charges.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five
days at 20° C.
BUILDING DRAIN, SANITARY — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of
a drainage system which receives sanitary or industrial sewage only and is
located inside the walls of a building and conveys the sewage to the building
sewer, which begins three feet outside the building wall.
BUILDING DRAIN, STORM — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives stormwater or other clear water discharge,
but receives no wastewater from sewage or other drainage pipes, and is
located inside the walls of a building and conveys the sewage to the building
sewer, which begins three feet outside the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER, SANITARY — The extension from the building drain to
the public sewer or other place of disposal and conveys only sanitary or
industrial sewage. This is also known as a "house connection."
BUILDING SEWER, STORM — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal and conveys stormwater or other
clear water drainage, but no sanitary or industrial sewage. This is also
known as a house connection.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — The equivalent quantity of oxygen,
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), utilized in the chemical oxidation of
organic and inorganic matter under standard laboratory procedures.
CITY — The City of Lake Mills.
CITY COUNCIL — The governing body of the City.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer of the City of Lake Mills, Wisconsin,
or its designated engineer.
CLASS OF USERS — The division of wastewater treatment customers by
waste characteristics and process discharge similarities or function, such as
residential, commercial, institutional, industrial or governmental.
COLLECTION SEWER — A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewater from individual point source discharges.
§ 623-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-17
1:509
COMBINED SEWAGE — A combination of both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and
storm or surface water.
COMMERCIAL USER — For the purpose of the user charge system, a user
engaged in the purchase or sale of goods, or in a transaction or business, or
who otherwise renders a service.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — BOD, suspended solids (SS), pH, and fecal
coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit,
if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants
and, in fact, does remove them to a substantial degree.
DEPOSITED — Placing funds in control of the City and, if said deposit is in
the form of a bank check, deposit shall not be deemed collected within this
definition until the applicable rules of the bank's collection procedures are
fulfilled.
DEPRECIATION — An annual operating cost reflecting capital consumption
and obsolescence (reduction of future service potential) of real and personal
properties.
DISSOLVED SOLIDS — That concentration of matter in the sewage
consisting of colloidal particulate matter one micron in diameter or less, and
both organic and inorganic molecules and ions present in solution.
DOMESTIC LEVEL USER or RESIDENTIAL USER — For the purpose of the
user charge system, a user whose premises or building is used primarily as
a domicile for one or more persons and whose wastes originate from the
normal living activities of its inhabitants.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right, less than fee simple, for the specific
use of land owned by others.
FECAL COLIFORM — Any number of organisms common to the intestinal
tract of man and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator
of pollution.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility
approved by the City.
FORCE MAIN — A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
FUNCTIONAL BETTERMENT — A process improvement in the increased
size facilities or a process improvement in existing facilities that is directly
anticipated to preclude physical betterment or is an indirect improvement
to the process as a result of renewal on a cost-effective basis.
FUNCTIONAL OBSOLESCENCE — The process deficiency of a functional
element of a plant beyond the capacity of a preventive maintenance
program to such extent that a new process device or piece of equipment
would be more cost-effective.
§ 623-17 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-17
1:510
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage,
and sale of produce.
HOLDING TANK — An approved watertight receptacle for the collection
and holding of sewage.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any nontreatable waste product including
nonbiodegradable dissolved solids.
INDUSTRIAL USER —
INFILTRATION — The water unintentionally entering the public sewer
system, including sanitary building drains and sewers, from the ground
through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints,
connections, or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is
distinguished from, inflow.
Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly owned
treatment works that discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000
gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary waste and that is identified in the 2012
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS), as amended
and supplemented under one of the following sectors: Sector 11,
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing, and Hunting; Sector 21, Mining,
Quarrying, Oil & Gas Extraction; Sector 31-37, Manufacturing; Sector
48-49, Transportation and Warehousing; Sector 56, Administrative and
Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
In determining the amount of a user's discharge, the City Council
will exclude domestic waste or discharge from sanitary
conveniences.
(1)
After applying the sanitary waste exclusion in the above subsection
of this definition, discharges in the above divisions that have a
volume exceeding 25,000 gpd or the weight of biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) or suspended solids (SS) equivalent to that weight
found in 25,000 gpd of sanitary waste are considered industrial
users. Sanitary waste, for purposes of this calculation of
equivalency, shall be wastes of normal concentration as defined in
this article.
(2)
A.
Any nongovernmental user who discharges wastewater to the City's
sewers, which wastewater contains toxic pollutants or poisonous solids,
liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by interaction
with other waste, to contaminate the sludge of the municipal sewer
systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process,
or which constitute a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public
nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the
waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works.
B.
§ 623-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-17
1:511
INFILTRATION/INFLOW — The total quantity of water from both infiltration
and inflow without distinguishing the source.
INFLOW — The water discharge into a sanitary sewer system, including
building drains and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to: roof
leaders, cellar, yard and area drains; foundation drains; unpolluted cooling
water discharges; drains from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers;
cross-connections from storm sewers and/or combined sewers; catch
basins; stormwaters; surface runoff; street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow
does not include, and is distinguishable from, infiltration.
INTERCEPTOR SEWER — A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility.
LATERAL — The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal and conveys only sanitary or industrial sewage. Also
known as the house connection or building sewer drain.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface or groundwater.
NORMAL CONCENTRATION —
NORMAL WASTEWATER — Wastewater in which BOD, suspended solids or
phosphorus concentrations do not exceed normal concentrations.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — Includes all costs, direct and
indirect, not including debt service or equipment replacement, but inclusive
of expenditures attributable to administration and treatment and collection
and pumping of wastewaters, necessary to insure adequate wastewater
collection and treatment on a continuing basis which conforms to applicable
regulations and assures optimal long-term facility management.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group, discharging any wastewater to the wastewater treatment facility.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — For the purpose of the user charge system, all
equipment owned by the City, and used in the transport and treatment of
sewage. Such equipment must be mechanical, electronic, or electrical or
have movable parts.
pH — Used to express the intensity of the acid or base condition of a
solution, calculated by taking the logarithm of the reciprocal of the
hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
PHOSPHORUS — The total phosphorus concentration as determined by a
test conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as published by the American
A. Five-day 20° C., BOD of not more than 200 mg/l.
B. A suspended solids content of not more than 250 mg/l.
C. A phosphorus content of not more than six mg/l.
§ 623-17 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-17
1:512
Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the
Water Environment Federation.
PHYSICAL BETTERMENT — The expansion of a physical facility to increase
capacity of the treatment works.
PHYSICAL OBSOLESCENCE — The material deficiency of a functional
element of a treatment plant to a point that repair as normal or preventive
maintenance is not cost-benefit effective.
PRETREATMENT — The treatment of industrial sewage from privately
owned industrial sources by the generator of that source prior to
introduction of waste effluent into a publicly owned treatment works.
PRIVATE SEWER — A sewer that is not owned by the City.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer which is owned and controlled by the City and
is separate from and does not include sewers owned by other governmental
units.
PUMPING STATION — A station positioned in the public sewer system at
which wastewater is pumped to a higher level.
REAL PROPERTY — For the purpose of the user charge, all fixed physical
facilities owned by the City and used in the transport and treatment of
sewage which do not have movable parts, such as buildings, tanks, sewers,
structures and the like.
RENEWAL COSTS — The expenditures from reserve funds or other funds
to overcome physical and/or functional consumption of plant capacity or
function or obsolescence of same, in order that the equivalent in function of
plant is present at the end of the anticipated useful life.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — The expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories, or appurtenances necessary during the service life
of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which
such works were designed and constructed.
REPLACEMENT RESERVE — An account for the segregation of resources
to meet capital consumption of personal or real property.
SANITARY DISTRICT — Rock Lake Sanitary District No. 1 with boundaries
existing in 1972.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries only sanitary or sanitary and
industrial wastewaters from residences, commercial building, industrial
plants, and institutions and to which storm, surface and groundwater are
not intentionally admitted.
SEPTAGE — Wastewater or contents of septic or holding tanks, dosing
chambers, grease interceptors, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage
trenches, privies or portable rest rooms.
SEWAGE — The combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions,
including polluted cooling water and unintentionally admitted infiltration/
inflow.
§ 623-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-17
1:513
SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the low conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch [1.25
centimeters] in any dimension.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRY — Any industry that will contribute greater than
10% of the design flow and/or design pollutant loading of the treatment
works.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater in concentration of any
given constituent or in any quantity of flow which exceeds for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times and allowable
concentration of flows during a normal working day (i.e., 1, 2 or 3 shift
operation) and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or
performance of the wastewater treatment works.
STANDARD METHODS — The laboratory procedures set forth in the
following sources: most recent edition of "Standard Method for the
Elimination of Water and Wastewater," prepared and published jointly by
the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association,
and Water Pollution Control Federation; "Methods for Chemical Analysis of
Water and Wastes," 1971, prepared and published by the Analytical Quality
Control Laboratory, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; "Guidelines
Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants," enumerated
in 40 CFR 136.1 et seq. (1975), as amended; and/or any other procedures
recognized by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the
State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries only stormwaters, surface runoff,
street wash, and drainage and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastes
are not intentionally admitted.
SUMMER QUARTER — The user's quarter starting in June, July or August
and ending accordingly in August, September or October.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — Total
suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension
in or water, wastewater, or other liquids and is removable by laboratory
filtration as prescribed in the "Standard Methods" enumerated and defined
in this section.
TOTAL SOLIDS — The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
Sanitary sewage shall mean the combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
A.
Industrial sewage shall mean a combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes discharged from any industrial establishment and resulting from
any trade or process carried on in that establishment and shall include
the wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.
B.
Combined sewage shall mean wastes, including sanitary sewage,
industrial sewage, stormwater, infiltration, and inflow carried to the
wastewater treatment facilities by a combined sewer.
C.
§ 623-17 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-17
1:514
TOWN — Town of Lake Mills, Wisconsin.
TOXIC AMOUNT — Concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which, upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism, will
cause adverse effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations, and physiological
manifestations, as defined in standards issued pursuant to Section 307(a) of
Public Law 92-500, as amended.17
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of a quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that is of sufficient quality that it would
not be in violation of federal or state water quality standards if such
water were discharged into navigable waters of the State. Unpolluted water
would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater
treatment facilities provided.
USEFUL LIFE — The anticipated term in years of physical and/or functional
productivity of elements and/or the whole of the wastewater treatment
system which can be reevaluated as a result of preventive maintenance,
renewal which offsets physical and/or functional obsolescence, renewal
of capital elements due to consumption, and physical and/or functional
betterment, direct or indirect.
USER CHARGE SYSTEM — The system of charges levied on users for
the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement reserve
requirements on new and old wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER — The material in the sewage solids
transformed to gases or vapors when heated at 500° C. for 15 minutes.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — The structures, equipment and
processes required to collect, transport and treat domestic and industrial
wastes and to dispose of the effluent and accumulated residual solids.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
WATERWORKS — All facilities for water supply, treatment, storage
reservoirs, water lines, and services and booster stations for obtaining,
treating and distributing potable water.
WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION PERMIT — A permit
issued under the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(WPDES) for discharge of wastewater to the navigable waters of Wisconsin
pursuant to § 283.31, Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 623-18. Revenue.
A. Establishment of revenue system. A user charge shall be assessed to all
users by the City in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. User charge system.
(1) Budget and appropriation.
17.Editor's Note: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
§ 623-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-18
1:515
(a) The City shall annually prepare an estimate of the anticipated
cost of service associated with treatment costs, collection
system costs, lift station costs, and administrative costs. Costs
for each of these four functional areas shall be further defined
by revenue requirements in these four areas: operation and
maintenance, replacement fund, debt service, and capital
additions. Finally, the four revenue requirements in each of the
four functional areas of the utility shall be allocated to the
parameters of demand, volume, BOD, total suspended solids
(TSS), phosphorus, and customer costs. These estimates shall
be in the form of a rate ordinance and shall be proposed to the
City Council for enactment prior to the enactment of the
budget of the ensuing year. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(b) Fixed or minimum charges are determined by summing the
revenue requirements of the four functional areas allocated to
the parameters of demand and customer cost, and dividing by
the number of equivalent meters or the number of actual
customers respectively.
(c) The volume charge is determined by summing the revenue
requirements of the four functional areas allocated to the
parameters of volume (or flow), BOD, TSS, and phosphorus,
and dividing by the total billable flow in 1,000 gallons, billable
pounds of BOD, and billable pounds of TSS, and phosphorus,
respectively. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) Operation and maintenance expenses. Operation and maintenance
expenses are allocated to the parameters of demand, volume, BOD,
suspended solids, phosphorus, and customer costs on the following
basis: [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(a) Labor, by treatment category, is allocated to parameters based
on the specific wastewater parameters being treated in that
treatment category.
(b) Electricity cost is allocated to wastewater parameters based on
estimates of use to parameter.
(c) The cost for repairs and replacement for that part of the sewer
lateral that extends from the building or facility to the property
line shall be paid in full by the property owner. The cost of
repairs and replacement for that part of the sewer lateral
which extends from the private property line under a public
right-of-way to a connection with the public sewer main, to
include the connection itself, shall be the responsibility of and
be paid by the City of Lake Mills Sewer Utility. The cost of
routine cleaning of the entire lateral from the building or
§ 623-18 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-18
1:516
facility to the junction with the sewer main is the sole
responsibility of the property owner.
(3) Replacement expense.
(a) The replacement expense shall be sufficient to replace any
equipment in the sewers or sewage works owned by the City as
required, in order to assure the continued peak performance of
the equipment and to maintain the capacity for which the
sewers and sewage works were designed and constructed. The
service life for real and personal property shall be established
by the City Engineer in cooperation with the City auditors, in
accordance with experience of the City, state and federal
guidelines and accepted accounting procedures. Each piece of
equipment shall be evaluated biannually to determine if its
useful life has been extended as a result of preventative
maintenance programs or repairs.
(b) Yearly replacement costs for each piece of equipment shall be
allocated in accordance with their applicability to the
parameters. This breakdown shall be reviewed annually by the
City Engineer and approved by the City.
(4) Debt service expense, and capital additions expense. Allocations of
debt service expense and routine plant additions expense are
distributed using percentages derived from the allocation of the
cost of the treatment plant, collection system and lift stations to the
parameters.
(5) Additional charges. Additional charges shall be billed, as required,
for the following:
(a) Actual costs incurred for commercial and industrial as well as
for user-requested sampling and analyses.
(b) Actual costs incurred for water meter inspection requested by
the user or as required because of improper maintenance.
(c) Actual costs incurred for special handling not provided for
elsewhere in this article.
(d) Actual costs incurred for handling a user's check returned
because of insufficient funds.
(e) Costs for revenue bond amortization per Ordinance No. 349.
(f) Each user which discharges toxic pollutants which cause an
increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of
the treatment works shall pay for such increased costs and
toxic monitoring.
(g) Surcharge for other than normal wastewater.
§ 623-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-18
1:517
[1] Such surcharge shall be based on flow, BOD, Suspended
solids, phosphorus, and such other constituents that affect
the cost of collection and treatment. Charges shall be
made in accordance with rates established in a separate
rate ordinance.
[2] All users discharging wastes into the public sewers are
subject to a surcharge, in addition to any other wastewater
service charge, if their wastewater has a concentration
greater than "normal concentrations" (see definition). The
volume of flow used for computing waste surcharges shall
be metered water consumption, subject to adjustments as
otherwise herein provided, or the actual volume of waste
as determined by an industrial waste metering installation.
The amount of surcharge shall reflect the cost incurred by
the City in removing BOD, suspended solids, phosphorus,
and other pertinent constituents.
(h) An impact fee as set forth by a rate ordinance enacted by the
City Council.
(i) Septage or holding tank waste disposal fee.
C. Wastewater user charges.
(1) All users. The wastewater user bill to be paid by all users shall
consist of the fixed or minimum charge and the volume charge plus
any additional charges as may be appropriate, including those
identified in Subsection B(5) above.
(2) Industrial and commercial users.
(a) In addition to the basic wastewater user bill described in
subsection A of this section for the user charge system,
wastewater user bills for industrial and commercial users shall
consist of industrial waste monitoring charges as described in
§ 623-18B(5)(a) of this article.
(b) Industries with wastes classified by the City Engineer as
having special problems shall, if directed by the City Engineer,
install at the industry's own cost and in a structure located on
the building service line, whatever sampling devices are
required by the City Engineer to obtain exact information
about the waste.
(3) Additional charges. Additional charges as described in
§ 623-18B(5) of this article shall, if required, be listed on the
wastewater user bill.
(4) The rates of surcharge for concentrations greater than "normal
concentration" of BOD, suspended solids, phosphorus and other
pertinent constituents shall be at the prevailing rate at the time of
§ 623-18 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-18
1:518
§ 623-19. User charges.
discharge to the sanitary sewer. Said prevailing rates may be
amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(5) All other rates, to include any applicable impact fees, shall be as
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
D. Wastewater user bill.
(1) Bill period. A bill shall be prepared and submitted to each user once
every month.
(2) Delinquent bills.
(a) Any bill not paid 20 days after date of billing shall be declared
delinquent and a past due notice issued to the billed party. The
past due notice shall contain an additional handling charge to
offset all costs incurred for generating and issuing the past due
notice.
(b) On or before October 15 of each year, the sanitary sewer utility
shall give notice to the owner or occupant of any lot or parcel
of real estate to which sanitary sewer service has been
provided, and for which there is owing at the giving of the
notice, sewer user charges established in accordance with this
article. The form and content of the notice, as well as the
procedural requirements established in § 66.0809, Wis. Stats.,
shall apply.
(c) Nonreceipt of any bill described in this section shall not release
the user of liability for any of those charges. In any case where
the user is responsible for the nonreceipt of the bill, the
conditions herein described for late payment and penalties
shall apply. In those instances where the City is responsible for
the nonreceipt of the bill, the City may, at its discretion, grant
the user an extension of the discount period and late payment
conditions described herein.
(3) Forms. Forms for bills and delinquent payment shall be as
determined by the City.
E. Debt service. Revenues to pay for debt service shall be collected as
provided for in the Revenue Bond Ordinance No. 349.
A. Money. All user charge payments and all funds received from the
Sanitary District shall be placed in segregated accounts as detailed in
Ordinance No. 349. Such money shall be used only to cover the costs of
operation and maintenance, replacement, debt service and other costs
as outlined in § 623-18B of this article.
§ 623-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-19
1:519
§ 623-20. Sewage collection and treatment regulations.
B. Expenditures. Expenditures shall be made from the user charge moneys
by the City in accordance with the detailed annual budget and
ordinances authorized by the City Council.
C. Replacement reserve expenditures. Expenditures from the accrued
replacement reserve on facilities shall be for making renewals to
accommodate wear of physical elements and/or movable property that
would result in an extended useful life or meet the anticipated useful
life of the present plant and not for plant expansion or additions.
Replacement revenues as defined herein shall be segregated in a
separate account under the depreciation fund provided for in
Ordinance No. 349.
D. Renewals. Renewals to accommodate wear of physical elements and/or
movable property shall be capital expenditures that cause the annual
estimate for accrued reserves from replacement to be evaluated in
terms of extended useful life as a result of preventive maintenance
programs or of such renewal. The expenditures to overcome physical
and/or functional obsolescence shall be capitalized against the element
of the facility and charged to the fixed assets groups of accounts as an
improvement to such element. Future estimates of accrued reserve
requirements shall be evaluated and reflected in the replacement
reserve requirements.
E. Audit. An audit shall be performed annually at the same time that the
other books of account of the City are audited and in the same manner.
F. Excess revenues. Excess revenues collected within a segregated
account or user class shall be applied to that account or user class for
the next year and the rate adjusted accordingly.
A. Conditions for discharge into treatment system.
(1) Public wastewater collection facilities are required to be used for
the deposit of human wastes, garbage and other liquid wastes that
cannot be discharged into a receiving stream or disposed of in any
other manner in accordance with federal and state statutes and
state administrative regulations and approved by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
(2) No building or facility shall be connected to any sewer unless the
portion of the property on which the building or facility is situated
is located within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Mills or
within the area designated as Rock Lake Sanitary District #1,
except as provided in § 623-20Eof this article.
(3) No person shall place, deposit or discharge, or cause to be placed,
deposited or discharged, upon public or privately owned property
any wastewater within the corporate limits of the City unless done
§ 623-19 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-20
1:520
so within adequately sized holding facilities approved by all
applicable federal, state and local agencies.
(4) No person shall deposit or discharge, or cause to be deposited or
discharged, to any wastewater collection facilities, any solid, liquid
or gaseous waste unless through a connection approved under the
terms of this article.
(5) No person shall discharge any sewage, waste or material,
industrial waste, or any polluted water into a stream or in the air or
onto the land, except where the person has made and provided for
treatment of such wastes which will render the content of such
wastes' discharge in accordance with applicable City, state and
federal laws, ordinances and regulations.
(6) In case of natural outlet discharges, at the time construction of the
waste treatment works is commenced, each owner or operator
shall furnish the City an Approved Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (WPDES) permit setting forth the effluent
limits to be achieved for compliance with such limits by the
required date. The WPDES permit shall be kept on file with the City
Engineer and updated by such information as periodically required
by the City, state and/or federal agencies.
(7) Any person who owns property within the corporate limits of the
City, which property is improved with one or more residences,
houses, buildings or structures for or intended for human use,
occupancy, employment, or any other similar purpose whatever,
and which property abuts on any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is located a sewer within 100 feet from the nearest
property line shall, within 10 days after notice that such sewer is in
service, at his expense, install suitable toilet and waste disposal
facilities in the residences, houses, buildings or structures and
connect the facilities with the sewer in accordance with the terms
and provisions of this article; provided, however, that in the event
compliance with this section causes economic hardship to the
person, he may apply to the City for exemption. An application for
exemption shall state in detail the circumstances that are claimed
to cause the economic hardship. Exemptions shall only be granted
to residential users and shall not apply to commercial and
industrial users. Any connection to the sewer under this article
shall be made only if the City determines that there is capacity,
including BOD and TSS capacity, available in all downstream sewer
lift stations and sewer lines and in the treatment plant. The
provisions of this subsection shall apply to any person who owns
property within the unincorporated area to which service is
provided under the terms of this article, except that the obligation
to connect the facilities with the sewer shall apply only to buildings
used for human habitation and located within real estate adjacent
to a sanitary sewer main or lateral and within 200 feet of the
§ 623-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-20
1:521
sanitary sewer main or lateral. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(8) Persons described in Subsection A(5) through (7) of this section
shall not avoid connection to the sewer by reason of the actual
distance between the building or structure and the connecting
point of the sewer line.
(9) Every person desiring to connect to the sewer system shall file an
application in writing to the City Engineer on such form as is
prescribed for that purpose. Blanks for such applications will be
furnished at the Office of the City Clerk. The application must state
fully and truthfully all the wastes that will be discharged. If the
applicant is not the owner of the premises, the written consent of
the owner must accompany the application. Persons connected to
the sewer system of the City are referred to herein as "users." If it
appears that the service applied for will not provide adequate
service for the contemplated use, the City Engineer may reject the
application. If the City approves the application, it shall issue a
permit for services as shown on the application.
B. Limitations on discharge.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, groundwater, surface drainage, basement drainage or
unpolluted industrial cooling waters to any sewer connected to the
City's waste treatment plant.
(a) No connections of building downspouts from residential,
commercial, institutional, or industrial sewer users or
properties to any sewer connected to the City's waste
treatment plant may be made or continued. No basement sump
pumps or building foundation drains may discharge to any
sewer connected to the City's waste treatment plant. Any
existing connections of downspouts, sump pumps, or building
foundation drains to any sewer connected to the City's waste
treatment plant shall be removed within 30 days of receipt of a
written order from the City.
(b) All private, interceptor sanitary sewers and laterals, or any
other private sanitary sewer connection, shall be constructed
and maintained by the property owner or sewer user in such a
manner that the sewers or laterals are reasonably impervious
to infiltration and inflow. If the City determines that private,
interceptor sewers or laterals or any other private sanitary
sewer connection contributes inflow or infiltration
unreasonably or in an excessive amount to the City's waste
treatment plant, the property owner or sewer user may be
ordered to repair or replace the private, interceptor sewer or
laterals or other private sanitary sewer connection within 30
days of receipt of such written order.
§ 623-20 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-20
1:522
(c) Failure to comply with the written order received under either
Subsection B(1)(a) or (b) may result in the issuance of a
citation under this article for each day of noncompliance with
said order, and such noncompliance and the conditions ordered
to be disconnected, repaired or replaced may also be
considered a public nuisance which may be remedied by
whatever lawful means is available to the City. If the property
subject to such written order is located in the Town of Lake
Mills, the Town shall, through mutual aid agreements, or any
other written agreement, such as the boundary and revenue
sharing agreement with the City, cooperate with the issuance
of any required citations.
(d) In addition to all other remedies, the City may discontinue
sanitary sewer service to the user or property owner until the
user or property owner complies with any written order
required by either Subsection B(1)(a) or (b). Prior to
discontinuation of sewer service, the property owner or sewer
user shall be given a ten-day written notice of the action to
discontinue service sent by certified mail. The property owner
or sewer user shall be informed in said notice of a right to
appeal such determination to discontinue service to the public
works board. If notice of such appeal is made in writing to the
City Clerk within seven days of receipt of such notification, no
discontinuation of service may be exercised under this section
unless the Public Works Board has provided a hearing and
unless the decision to discontinue service has been confirmed
by the Public Works Board.
(e) If the property subject to a notice of discontinuation of service
under Subsection B(1)(d) is located in the Town of Lake Mills,
the Town Clerk shall also be sent a copy of the notice. Failure
to comply with the notice requirement to the Town, if such
failure is inadvertent or unintentional, shall not void any
proceedings under this section to enforce the orders of the City
to discontinue sewer service to a property located in the Town
of Lake Mills.
(2) Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged any of the following materials to any sewer
connected to the City's treatment plant:
(a) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
(b) Any water or wastes which may contain more than 100
milligrams per liter of malt, oil, grease or hexane extractable
material, or substances which may solidify or become viscous
at temperatures between 32° and 150° F.
§ 623-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-20
1:523
(c) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other combustible,
flammable, or explosive liquid, solid or gas of whatsoever kind
or nature.
(d) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(e) Any gases, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or
any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works.
(f) Any water or wastes having a pH lower than six or higher than
nine or having any other corrosive properties capable of
causing damage or hazard to sewers, structures, equipment or
personnel of the waste treatment works.
(g) Any waters or wastes containing any toxic or poisonous
substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process or that would constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, or that could create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(h) Any waters or wastes containing BOD, suspended solids, or
phosphorus of such character or quantity that unusual
attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the
sewage treatment plant, except as may be permitted by
specific, written agreement with the City, which agreement
may provide for special charges, payments or provisions for
treating the testing equipment. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(i) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance.
(j) Any amount of the following constituents exceeding that listed
below:
mg/l
Aluminum 800.0
Arsenic 0.25
Barium 2.0
Boron 1.0
Cadmium 0.2
Chlorides 700.0
Chromium total 10.0
Chromium (Hexavalent) 0.6
Copper 2.5
§ 623-20 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-20
1:524
mg/l
Cyanide 0.9
Fluorides 1.2
Iron, total 56.0
Lead 1.5
Manganese 1.0
Mercury 0.0001
Nickel 1.5
Phenols 0.3
Selenium 1.0
Silver 0.1
Total Dissolved Solids 1,500.0
Zinc 5.0
(k) Ammonia nitrogen in such an amount as would cause the City
to be in noncompliance with regulations of the State of
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(l) Any septage or holding tank wastes.
(m) No provision of this section shall be construed to provide lesser
discharge standards than are presently or may hereafter be
imposed or required by the United State Environmental
Protection Agency or the State of Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources.
C. Pretreatment.
(1) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be installed by the industrial
or commercial or institutional user at its own expense when, in the
opinion of the City Engineer, such interceptors are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, oils, or
sand in excessive amounts, or any inflammable wastes, or such
other harmful ingredients. Such opinion may be formed in whole or
in part by taking into account § 623-20B(2), Limitations on
Discharge. The requirement to install interceptors under this
subsection shall not include individual residential users within the
meaning established under Subsection C(1)(g)below. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City
Engineer, and shall be located such that they are easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be constructed
and maintained by the user in accordance with the state plumbing
codes and Subsection C(1)(a) through (f) and (2)of this section.
(a) General. All plumbing installations for users, other than
individual dwelling units, where grease, fats, oil or similar
waste products of cooking or food are introduced into the drain
§ 623-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-20
1:525
system shall be provided with grease or oil interceptors in
accordance with this subsection. All drains and drain piping
carrying oil, grease or fats shall be directed through one or
more interceptors as specified in Subsection C(1)(b), (c) or (d)
of this section.
(b) New plumbing systems. Notwithstanding the state plumbing
codes, and unless otherwise exempted in this section, all new
plumbing systems that discharge to the sewers shall be
provided with one or more exterior grease interceptors.
(c) Altered or remodeled plumbing systems. Notwithstanding the
state plumbing codes, all existing plumbing systems serving
users other than individual residential users that are altered or
remodeled as to that part of the plumbing system, and which
discharges from kitchens or food processing areas shall be
provided with one or more exterior grease interceptors.
(d) Existing installations. The City may require the installation of
exterior or interior grease interceptors for existing plumbing
installations where the capacity of the sewer system is reduced
due to congealed grease, or where congealed grease
downstream from the industrial, commercial or institutional
user otherwise impairs the proper functioning of the sewer
system.
(e) Exterior or interior grease interceptors shall receive the entire
waste discharge from kitchens or food processing areas of
commercial, industrial or institutional users required to install
or maintain exterior or interior grease interceptors. All grease
interceptors shall be designed, constructed, installed and
maintained in accordance with the standards contained in the
state plumbing code and any additional requirements from the
City Engineer.
(f) The user required to install or maintain an interior or exterior
grease interceptor shall maintain written records of all
inspections and maintenance of each interceptor and all such
records shall be maintained for a minimum of seven years. All
such records shall be made available for on-site inspection by
representatives of the City during all operating hours of the
commercial, industrial or institutional user.
(g) For purposes of this section, a commercial user is a
nonindustrial user that is also not an individual residential user
or an institutional user. A multiple-family residential structure
may constitute a commercial user if eight or more dwelling
units are in the structure and if individual laterals are not
provided for individual dwelling units, or if all laterals
discharge to a private interceptor sewer. An industrial user is
as defined in this article, but for purposes of this section, an
§ 623-20 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-20
1:526
industrial user may also be a noncommercial, noninstitutional,
nonresidential user, provided the industrial user discharges
wastewater of a character that reasonably allows the City
Engineer to determine that the discharges from the user
contain sufficient concentrations of grease or oil or sand to
require that a grease or sand interceptor be installed. An
institutional user is defined in this section as a user that is a
governmental facility that discharges grease or oil from food
service activities or other activities that reasonably allows the
City Engineer to determine that the discharges are likely to
contain sufficient concentrations of grease or oil or sand to
require that a grease or sand interceptor be installed. In
addition, the institutional user may also be defined as a school
that serves food that is prepared or processed on site, or a
similar facility that has wastewater characteristics which may,
in the opinion of the City Engineer, warrant the installation of
a grease or sand interceptor.
(2) Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the user, at his own expense, and shall be kept in
continuous and efficient operation at all times.
(3) In the event City approves the admission of any materials into its
sewers as set forth in § 623-20B(2) of this article, the City shall
direct the user causing admission of any such materials to, at his
own expense, construct, install and operate such preliminary
treatment plants and facilities as may be required in order to:
(a) Reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million and the suspended
solids to 350 parts per million by weight.
(b) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within
the maximum limits provided for in § 623-20B(2) of this article.
(c) Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
(4) No preliminary treatment plant and facility shall be constructed or
operated unless all plans, specifications, technical operating data,
and other information pertinent to its proposed operating and
maintenance shall conform to all City, State of Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources and any other local, state or
federal agency regulations, and unless written approval of the
plans, specifications, technical operating data, and sludge disposal
has been obtained from the State of Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources, and any other local state or federal agency
having regulatory authority with respect thereto.
(5) All such preliminary treatment facilities as required by this article
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operating condition by the user or person operating and
maintaining the facility served thereby, and at the user's expense.
§ 623-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-20
1:527
(6) No provision contained in this article shall be construed to prevent
or prohibit a separate or special contract or agreement between
the City and any industrial user whereby industrial waste and
material of unusual strength, character, or composition may be
accepted by the City for treatment, subject to additional payment
therefore by the industrial user; provided, however, that such
contract or agreement shall have the prior approval of the City.
(7) The City reserves the right to reject admission to the system of any
waste harmful to the treatment or collection facilities or to the
receiving stream.
D. Further limitations on wastewater strength.
(1) National categorical pretreatment standards as promulgated by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency shall be met by
all users of the regulated industrial categories.
(2) State requirements and limitations on discharges to the treatment
facility shall be met by all users that are subject to such standards
in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this or any other
applicable ordinance.
(3) The City reserves the right to amend this article to provide for more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
treatment facility where deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives set forth in this article.
(4) No user shall increase the use of potable or process water in any
way, nor mix separate waste streams for the purpose of diluting a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this
article.
(5) The City may impose mass limitations on users that are using
dilution to meet the pretreatment standards or requirements of this
article, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is
deemed appropriate by the City.
(6) Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by this
article. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge
of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the
user's cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted
to the City for review, and shall be approved by the City before
construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and
operating procedures by the City shall not relieve the user from the
responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this article.
§ 623-20 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-20
1:528
(a) Users shall notify the City immediately upon the occurrence of
a "slugload," or accidental discharge of substances prohibited
by this article. The notification shall include location of
discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration
and volume, and corrective actions. Any user who discharges a
slugload of prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense,
loss or damage to the City wastewater facilities or wastewater
treatment works, in addition to the amount of any fines
imposed on the City on account thereof under state or federal
law.
(b) Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on
user's premises, advising employees who to call in the event of
a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all
employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with
respect to emergency notification procedure.
E. Private sewage treatment and disposal.
(1) Where a public sewer is not available, as set forth in § 623-20Aof
this article, the building or structure shall be connected to a private
sewer, and a disposal or treatment system shall be constructed in
compliance with the terms and provisions of all applicable City,
county, state and federal laws and regulations.
(2) Within 90 days after a property served by a private sewer or
disposal system as described in this section shall become subject to
the terms and provisions of § 623-20A(7) of this article, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer according to the
terms and provisions of this article, and all private sewers, disposal
systems, septic tanks, cesspools, and other appurtenances of such
private sewer and disposal system shall be disconnected and
abandoned and all openings, tanks, or other containers of human
wastes, garbage and other wastes shall be permanently filled with
granular material.
(3) The City shall not be responsible in any way for the operation and
maintenance of a private sewer or disposal system or facility.
(4) No provision of this article shall be construed to provide lesser
requirements for private sewers and disposal systems than are
presently or may hereafter be imposed and required by any other
local governmental body or the state or federal government.
F. Service of outlying territory. In accordance with § 66.0813, Wis. Stats.,
the City shall provide service to unincorporated lands located in the
Town of Lake Mills, which lands were formerly located in the Rock Lake
Sanitary District and are delineated on a map which is being approved
contemporaneously with the adoption of this article, which shall be
maintained at the office of the City Clerk and which is attached hereto
as an exhibit. The extension of sanitary sewer service within the area
described shall be conditioned upon an agreement between the City
§ 623-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-20
1:529
and the property owner requesting such service whereby the property
owner agrees to reimburse the City, either directly or by special
assessment, for the cost of extending sanitary sewer service to the
property. The terms of the agreement shall be determined on the same
considerations as if the property serviced were located in the City.
The City shall have no obligation to provide service beyond the area
delineated on the map that is made a part of this article.
G. Discharge permits.
(1) The City reserves the right to require a discharge permit from
commercial or industrial users of the sewer, and, if the City does
exercise the option, commercial or industrial users shall not
discharge to a sewer without having first applied for and obtained a
permit from the City. Upon official notification from the City, each
commercial or industrial user presently discharging material to the
sewer shall apply for and obtain such a discharge permit within 90
days from the date of such notification.
(2) The application for a discharge permit shall be made on a form
provided for that purpose by the City, and shall be fully completed
under oath by the property owner, user, or a duly authorized and
knowledgeable officer, agent, or representative thereof, and
acknowledged. If requested, the person making application shall
also submit such scientific or testing data, or other information as
may be required by the City. The City Engineer shall also have, at
his discretion, the right to personally inspect the premises,
equipment and material, and laboratory testing facilities of the
applicant.
(3) A fee as set by City Council shall be charged for a discharge
application or permit. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(4) No discharge permit shall be issued by the City to any person
whose discharge of material to sewers, whether shown upon the
application or determined after inspection and testing conducted
by the City Engineer, is not in conformance with federal, state or
city statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, unless a waiver or
variance of such standards and requirements is granted by the City
in the manner hereinafter set forth. The City shall state in writing
the reason or reasons for denial or requirement for waiver-variance
and said written communication shall be mailed or personally
delivered to the applicant within five days after denial.
(5) In the event the type of volume of material from property for which
a discharge permit was previously granted shall materially and
substantially change, the person granted such permit previously
shall make a new application to the City, in the same manner and
form as originally made.
§ 623-20 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-20
1:530
(6) If the application for a new permit or for one because of change in
the type or volume of material discharge is denied by the City, or if
the discharge indicated from the permit application or inspection is
not in accordance with the requirements of Subsection G(5) of this
section, and a waiver or variance is required, the user may have the
entire City Council review the denial or may request waivervariance,
provided the user shall give written notice of his request
within 30 days after receiving the denial. The entire City Council
shall review the permit application, the written denial, and such
other evidence and matters as the applicant and City Engineer
shall present at its next regular meeting following receipt of
request for its review, and the decision of the entire City Council
rendered publicly at said meeting shall be final.
(7) Should any discharge of material to a sewer materially and
substantially differ in type and volume than shown in the
application and permit, the person and user shall immediately,
under order of the City Engineer, cease and desist from such
discharge and shall also be subject to disconnection, fine and other
penalties provided by this article.
(8) A grant of waiver or variance by the City Council may set forth such
conditions, exceptions, time limitations, durations, and expirations
as the Council deems necessary and proper.
H. Construction of sewers and connections for buildings.
(1) The construction of sewers and connections for buildings shall be
made as required by the applicable ordinances of the City and by
regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
Building drains-sanitary and buildings sewers-sanitary, together
with all connections thereto, shall be constructed water tight to
exclude all infiltration and inflow.
(2) A construction permit shall first be applied for and obtained from
the City before a person, after the effective date of this article, can
connect to any sewer located on properties within the corporate
limits of the City or on properties outside the City where services
have been contracted for with the City.
(3) Construction permits shall not be issued unless it has been
determined by the City that there is capacity available in all
downstream sewerage facilities.
(4) No plumber, pipe fitter, or other person will be permitted to do any
plumbing or pipe fitting work in connection with the sewer system
without first receiving a license from the State of Wisconsin and
obtaining permission from the City Engineer or Building Inspector.
All service connections to the sewer main shall comply with state
plumbing code.
§ 623-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-20
1:531
(5) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided by the
industrial user and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the user shall be responsible for the proper removal
and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and
shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal that are
subject to review by the City Engineer. Any removal and hauling of
the collected materials not performed by the user(s) personnel
must be performed by currently licensed disposal firms.
I. Reporting criteria for nonresidential users.
(1) The City reserves the right to require any nonresidential user to
submit quarterly to the City on forms provided by the City, a
certified statement of the characteristics of its industrial wastes
discharged in the sewers and treatment works of the City or to any
sewers connected to its treatment works. This statement shall be
filed with the City Engineer no later than the 10th day of the month
following the quarter for which the report is required. The City
Engineer may require additional certified statements at any time if,
in his judgment, the same shall be necessary to determine the
source of materials which have been found in the City sewer.
(2) The waste characteristics to be measured and certified by the user
shall be:
(a) BOD in milligrams per liter.
(b) Suspended solids in milligrams per liter.
(c) Such other constituents of wastewater as directed by the City
Engineer.
(3) Should there be a difference in understanding between the City
and user as to the characteristics in this section, the City reserves
the right to use the City results from analyses for purposes of
billing. Should submission not be made during the ten-day period,
the City shall use its results from analyses for purposes of billing.
(4) Whenever required by the City, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer that carries nonresidential wastewater or
material shall install a large manhole or sampling chamber in the
building sewer in accordance with plans and specifications which
have been submitted to and approved by the City Engineer. Such
device shall be installed and maintained at all times at the user's
expense. Such device shall have ample room in each sampling
chamber to accurately sample the wastewater effluent entering the
sewer, and shall collect composite samples for analyses. The
chamber shall be safely, easily and independently, of other
premises and buildings of the user, accessible to authorized
representatives of the City at all times. The City shall have
exclusive access to such device, and no keys shall be in the
§ 623-20 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-20
1:532
possession of any user or any agent of the user. Where construction
of such a device is not economically or otherwise feasible, the City
Engineer may approve alternate arrangements for sampling.
(5) Each sampling chamber shall contain a Parshall flume, weir, or
similar device with a recording and totalizing register for
measuring liquid quantity; or the metered water supply to the
industrial plant may be used as measure of liquid quantity where it
is substantiated by the City Engineer that the metered water
supply and waste quantities are approximately the same or where a
measurable adjustment agreed to by the City Engineer is made in
the metered water supply to determine the liquid waste quantity.
(6) Samples shall be taken periodically with such degree of frequency
as the City Engineer shall, in his discretion, determine. They shall
be properly refrigerated and composited in proportion to the flow
so as to present a representative twenty-four-hour sample. Such
sampling shall be done as prescribed by the City Engineer to insure
representative quantities for the entire reporting period. Minimum
requirements for determination of representative quantities or
characteristics shall include reevaluation during each twelvemonth
period. The determination of representative quantities and
characteristics shall include not less than seven consecutive
calendar days of twenty-four-hour composite sampling taken
during periods of normal operation, together with acceptable flow
measurements.
(7) The sampling frequency, sampling chamber, metering device,
sampling methods, and analyses of samples shall be subject, at any
time, to inspection and verification by the City Engineer.
(8) All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this section shall
be determined in accordance with the Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater (latest edition) or with any
other method approved by the City.
(9) The City may elect, at its option, to have the metering and sample
collection done by the industrial plant personnel and have
composite samples delivered to the City Engineer for analysis. This
procedure can also be terminated at any time by the City upon
reasonable notice.
J. Septic haulers.
(1) Nonindustrial users hauling liquid wastes to the treatment plant
shall be assessed user charge unit charges for billable flow, billable
BOD, billable TSS; and billable phosphorous; the volume of which is
determined for each by the City Engineer. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 623-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-20
1:533
(2) Liquid wastes hauled to the treatment plant containing
concentrations of constituents in excess of the limits set forth in
Subsections B(2) and D of this section shall not be accepted.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) Application for septage disposal. Between August 1 and September
1 of each year every licensed disposer wishing to discharge septage
to the City sewerage system shall file a nonrefundable filing fee and
an application in writing to the City Engineer on such a form as is
prescribed for that purpose. During the months of July and August,
forms for such application will be furnished at the office of the City
Clerk. The application must state fully and truly the type,
frequency, quantity, quality and location of generated septage to be
disposed in the City sewerage system.
(a) During the month of September, the City Engineer will
evaluate the applications and make a determination as to the
amount and conditions of septage disposal in the City
sewerage system. The City shall approve or reject all
applications by October 1 of each year. If the City cannot
accept all the proposed septage disposal then consideration
shall be given first to those generators of septage that are
within the City's sewer service area [see § NR 205.07(2)(f)].
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(b) All City approvals for septage disposal shall have the
conditions that any time the sewerage system has operational
problems, maintenance problems, or threat of WPDES permit
violations that are indirectly or directly related to septage
disposal, the City may immediately restrict septage disposal
until such time as corrective action or mitigative measures
have been taken.
(4) Septage acceptance location.
(a) Septage shall only be discharged to the City's sewerage system
by City-approved and State of Wisconsin licensed disposers
and at locations, times, and conditions as specified by this
article.
(b) Septage and holding tank waste shall be discharged to the
septage receiving facility at the wastewater treatment facility
and shall be limited to the posted normal working hours of the
facility. Documentation of the discharge shall be submitted to
the City Engineer within one working day of the discharge to
the septage receiving facility.
§ 623-20 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-20
1:534
§ 623-21. Enforcement; inspections.
(c) Forms as prescribed for the purpose of documentation of the
discharge will be furnished at the City Hall and will include the
following information:
[1] Name, address and telephone number of the hauler;
[2] License number;
[3] Type of septage;
[4] Quantity of septage;
[5] Estimated quality of septage;
[6] Location, date, time and feed rate of discharge to the
sewer-age system;
[7] Source of septage;
[8] Name and address of septage generator;
[9] Other information as required by the City Engineer.
A. Inspection rights. The Director of Public Works, or authorized designee
of the Director, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall have
the right to enter the premises of any user within the corporate limits of
the City, or outside the City if served by the sanitary sewer of the City of
Lake Mills, to determine whether the user is complying with all
requirements of this article or any wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Director or authorized
designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, observing, measuring, sampling, and testing, as may be
required, in pursuance of the implementation and enforcement of the
terms and provisions of this article.
B. Liability during inspections. While performing the necessary work on
private properties referred to in Subsection A of this section, the duly
authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the commercial or industrial
user, and the user shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City
employees, and the City shall indemnify the user against loss or damage
to its property by City employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
user and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as
such may be caused by negligence or failure of the user to maintain safe
conditions.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection A, and as a standard to be used in
evaluating requests for warrants under Subsection E, any inspections of
private residences or those areas of commercial or industrial properties
not open to the public shall be made only upon a showing of reasonable
§ 623-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-21
1:535
suspicion that the premises to be inspected is violating a provision of
the sewer user ordinance.
(1) Such inspections shall be confined to only those areas where
violations of the types that are suspected are likely to be found,
unless a relevant violation of the sewer user ordinance is in plain
sight during any such inspection.
(2) Reasonable suspicion to inspect a particular, individual property
may be found under the totality of the circumstances, provided a
reasonable articulation of the facts and circumstances surrounding
the decision to inspect is articulated by the Director or authorized
designee of the Director to the owner or legal occupant of the
property at the time of the inspection, and at the time of making
application for an inspection warrant if consent is not given for the
inspection by the owner or legal occupant of the property.
D. In the case of inspections solely for the purpose of confirming that no
sump pumps are unlawfully connected to the sanitary sewer, reasonable
suspicion to inspect a particular property may be found if the inspector
can articulate all of the following as the reasons for the inspection:
(1) The home or other building connected to sanitary sewer has not
been inspected for the presence of sump pump connections to the
sanitary sewer for a period of at least three years.
(2) The home or other building is located in a area that has been
specifically designated by the sewer utility supervisor as an area
where it is probable that adverse events, such as sewer backups
into basements or an overflow of sewerage, may occur during
periods of high flows if unlawful discharges from sump pumps to
the sanitary sewer line or lines in the designated area are allowed
to occur.
(3) The City Council of the City of Lake Mills has authorized
inspections for unlawful sump pump connections to the sanitary
sewer in the specifically designated area, and this authorization
has been granted because the Council found that the designated
area has a characteristic, such as lift stations or pumps, or a sewer
main that has flows that are nearing capacity on high flow days, or
some other similar reason that makes it probable that sewer
backups or overflows will occur during periods of heavy rains or
heavy snow melt if unlawful sump pump discharges are present in
sewer lines in such designated area.
E. If the Director or designee has been refused access to a building,
structure or property, or any part thereof that is the subject of the
inspection, the Director or designee may seek issuance of a special
inspection warrant, pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes § 66.0119, from the
Lake Mills Municipal Court if the property is located in the City of Lake
Mills, or from the Jefferson County Circuit Court if the property is
located in the Town of Lake Mills.
§ 623-21 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-21
1:536
§ 623-22. Administrative enforcement remedies.
F. In lieu of inspection by the City of Lake Mills, in the case of inspections
solely for the purpose of confirming that no sump pumps are unlawfully
connected to the sanitary sewer, any property owner may elect to hire a
plumber licensed in the State of Wisconsin to provide written
certification, which must be submitted to the sanitary sewer utility
supervisor within 15 days of election, and if such written certification
states that no sump pumps are connected to the sanitary sewer, then
the inspection shall be considered completed.
A. Notice of noncompliance. When the Director of Public Works, or
authorized designee, finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this article, wastewater discharge permit,
order issued herein, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Director or designee may serve upon that user a written notice of
noncompliance. Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be
submitted by the user to the Director. Submission of this plan in no way
relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
the receipt of the notice of noncompliance. Nothing in this subsection
shall limit the authority of the Director to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action without first
issuing a notice of noncompliance.
B. Notification of violation. When the Director of Public Works, or
authorized designee, finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this article, wastewater discharge permit,
order issued herein, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, and
has failed to provide an acceptable plan for corrective action as
required in Subsection A of this section, the Director or designee may
serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 30 days of the
receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted by this user to the Director.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Director to take
any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement
action without first issuing a notice of noncompliance.
C. Consent orders. The Director of Public Works, or authorized designee,
may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user
responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include a specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to
Subsections D and E in this section and shall be judicially enforceable.
§ 623-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-22
1:537
§ 623-23. Emergency suspensions.
D. Show cause hearing. The Director of Public Works, or authorized
designee, may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this article, wastewater discharge permit, order issued
herein, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before
the Board of Public Works and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action and a request that the
user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days prior to the
hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of
the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
E. Compliance orders. When the Board of Public Works finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article,
wastewater discharge permit, order issued herein, or any pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Board may issue an order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that the user to come into
compliance within a specified time period. If the user does not come
into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to
the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
F. Cease-and-desist orders. When the Director of Public works finds that a
user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article,
wastewater discharge permit, order issued herein, or any pretreatment
standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to
recur, the Director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease
and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
(3) The issuance of a cease-and-desist order shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
§ 623-22 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-23
1:538
§ 623-24. Termination of discharge.
In addition to the provisions of § 623-22 , any industrial or commercial user
subject to pretreatment or a wastewater discharge permit who violates the
following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
A. The Director of Public Works may immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
unreasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Director of
Public Works may also, after notice and opportunity to respond,
immediately suspend a user's discharge that threatens to interfere with
the operation of the wastewater treatment plant, or which presents, or
may present, an endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Director of Public Works may take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate suspension order. The Director may take such
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
Wastewater Treatment Plant, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to individuals. The Director may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Director that the period of endangerment has
passed, unless the termination proceedings under this section are
initiated against the user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the
Director prior to the date of any show cause hearing under
§ 623-22D or prior to initiating termination proceedings under this
section.
B. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
A. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
C. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
D. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
§ 623-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-24
1:539
§ 623-25. Judicial enforcement remedies.
E. Violation of the pretreatment standards in § 623-20C and Dof this
article.
A. Injunctive relief. When the Public Works Director finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article,
wastewater discharge permit, order issued herein, or any pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Director may petition the Jefferson
County Circuit Court through the City Attorney or Special Prosecutor
for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement imposed by
this article on activities of the user.
B. The Director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal
and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
C. Civil penalties.
(1) A residential sewer user who has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this article, wastewater discharge permit, order
issued herein, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, shall
be liable to the City of Lake Mills for a maximum civil penalty of
$1,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other longterm
average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day
during the period of violation.
(2) A commercial or industrial sewer user who has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, wastewater
discharge permit, order issued herein, or any pretreatment
standard or requirement, shall be liable to the City of Lake Mills for
a maximum civil penalty of $10,000 per violation, per day. In the
case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of violation.
(3) The Director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs
and other expenses associated with enforcement activities
including sampling and monitoring expenses and the cost of any
actual damages incurred by the City of Lake Mills.
(4) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the
user's violation; corrective actions by the user, the compliance
history of the user and any other factors as justice requires.
(5) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
§ 623-24 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-26
1:540
§ 623-26. Remedies nonexclusive.
A. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The Director
of Public Works may take any, all or any combination of these actions
against a noncompliant user.
B. The Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against any noncompliant user.
§ 623-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-26
1:541

ARTICLE IV
Water Leaks and Usage Credits
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1054 as Title 4, Ch. 8, of the 2009
Code of Ordinances]
§ 623-27. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall be used:
BILLING PERIOD — The period of time indicated by the dates,
approximately one month apart, appearing on utility bills to show the period
of service for which that bill applies.
LATERAL WATER LEAK — Unintended loss of water from an underground
water line, on privately owned property, which is outside a building or
structure.
USAGE PERIOD — The period of time, approximately three months,
between actual readings of the same utility meter.
WATER LOSS — The amount of water lost as a result of a leak verified
in accordance with § 623-28A of the Municipal Code, and calculated by
subtracting the amount of water used in the usage period preceding the
occurrence of the leak from the amount of water used in the current usage
period.
§ 623-28. Water leakage and sanitary sewer credits.
A. A customer of the Lake Mills municipal water system may request a
credit for water loss to offset a charge imposed in any one billing
period. To obtain a credit the customer shall:
(1) Submit a written request for the credit to the water utility within 30
days of the charge for which a credit is desired.
(2) Attach to the request a statement from a licensed plumber
containing the following information:
(a) The location of the leak, to include a statement the leak
occurred on the customer's property.
(b) The probable cause of the leak, to include whether the leak
occurred because of the customer's act or negligence.
(c) Identification of the plumber to include name, address,
telephone number and plumber license number.
B. If the request is complete and accurate, a credit will be computed by
multiplying the number of gallons of water loss by the rate per gallon
charged at the lowest rate allowable under the current Public Service
Commission approved rate schedule.
C. The customer may request a sewer charge credit caused by water
leakage to offset a charge imposed in any one billing period. To apply
§ 623-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-28
1:543
§ 623-29. Lateral water leak and sewer usage credits.
for the credit, the customer shall attach to the request in Subsection A
of this section an additional statement from the plumber that all of the
water from the leak was metered for discharge to the sanitary sewer
system. Water from a leak that is metered for discharge into a storm
sewer is not eligible for this credit.
D. If the request is complete and accurate, a credit will be computed by
multiplying the number of gallons of water loss by 75% of the rate per
gallon charged for discharge into the sanitary sewer.
E. The credits computed in Subsections B and C will be deducted from the
amount of the bill for the next billing period.
F. With the exception of the additional credit granted under Subsection C,
only one credit may be allowed for any one given leak.
G. Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, no credit shall be
allowed for water loss caused by an act or the negligence of the
customer claiming the credit.
H. All customers requesting credits will be advised of the status of their
request within 10 working days of submission.
A. A customer of the Lake Mills municipal water system may request a
credit for water loss due to lateral water leaks to offset a charge
imposed in any one billing period. This credit is only available if the
water flow through the lateral is metered. To obtain a credit, the
customer shall submit a written request meeting all of the requirements
of § 623-28A.
B. If the request is complete and accurate, a credit will be computed in
accordance with § 623-28B.
C. If water from a lateral water leak, for which a water loss credit is
requested, is normally discharged into the sanitary sewer but due to the
nature of the leak was disposed of through storm sewers, the customer
will receive an additional credit calculated in accordance with
§ 623-28D.
D. The credits computed in § 623-28B and C will be deducted from the
amount of the bill for the next billing period.
E. With the exception of the additional credit granted under § 623-28C,
only one credit may be allowed for any one given leak.
F. Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, no credit shall be
allowed for water loss caused by an act or the negligence of the
customer claiming the credit.
G. All customers requesting credits will be advised of the status of their
request within 10 working days of submission.
§ 623-28 LAKE MILLS CODE § 623-30
1:544
§ 623-30. Other costs.
Cost incurred by the customer to comply with this section, to include, but
not limited to, inspection, evaluation, estimates, repairs, plumbing services,
and plumber's statements, will not be paid in any part by the City of
Lake Mills, its utilities, or any of its agencies or subunits, but remain the
responsibility of the customer.
§ 623-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 623-30
1:545
Chapter 636
YARD WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 271.
§ 636-1. Purpose.
This chapter establishes procedures for the operation and scope of activity
for the City of Lake Mills Yard Waste Disposal Point and Yard Material
Distribution Point. The City shall establish and operate a location in which
City residents may dispose of selected yard waste material. The location
shall also serve as a distribution point for selected yard materials which are
desirable to City residents.
§ 636-2. Disposal of yard wastes.
§ 636-3. Distribution of yard materials.
A. Grass clippings, leaves, and leafy materials may be transported to the
yard waste disposal site by City residents and deposited in the
designated areas. Containers used for transportation may either be
retained by the resident or deposited in the designated container.
B. Branches, branch clippings and brush may be transported to the yard
waste disposal point by City residents and deposited in the designated
area.
C. Broken concrete materials, rocks, and blacktop materials, not to exceed
one cubic yard in aggregate, may be transported by City residents and
deposited in the designated area.
D. The City Manager retains the authority and discretion to allow the
disposal of additional waste materials from time to time.
A. Firewood. The City of Lake Mills shall place all natural wood materials
acquired from tree trimming and removal operations in the yard
materials distribution point. Tree materials shall not exceed 18 inches
in diameter and four feet in length. City residents may obtain this
firewood material at no cost on a first-come, first-served basis, as
available.
B. Wood chips. The City shall place and stock wood chips, as available, for
distribution to all City residents on a first-come, first-served basis at no
cost. Residents shall supply transportation and containers for wood
chips. No wood chips shall be delivered to private residences by Cityowned
vehicles or employees.
§ 623-30 LAKE MILLS CODE § 636-3
1:546
§ 636-4. Residency requirements.
All patrons of the yard waste disposal and yard material distribution point
shall be residents of the City of Lake Mills. Operators of the point may
request proof of residency. A valid driver's license or state photo ID with a
City of Lake Mills address shall constitute proof of residency.
§ 636-5. Hours of operation.
The City Manager shall establish hours of operation for the yard waste
disposal and yard materials distribution point. The placement of any yard
waste outside of the confines of the designated site is prohibited.
Part III: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 650
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plan Commission — See Ch. 27, Art. III.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 27, Art.
IV.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 286.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 470.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 565.
Trees — See Ch. 594.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 623.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 660.
C. The City Manager retains the authority and discretion to provide
additional materials for free distribution to City residents from time to
time.
D. Residential home delivery of any yard waste item by City employees or
through the use of City-owned equipment is prohibited. Yard waste
items for the purposes of this section shall include grass, firewood,
wood chips, branches, sand, gravel, fill dirt, or topsoil. [Amended
12-6-1994 by Ord. No. 695; 11-7-1995 by Ord. No. 729]
E. The delivery of leaves to residential properties in the City of Lake Mills
is permitted under such procedures established by the City Council
from time to time. [Amended 11-7-1995 by Ord. No. 729]
§ 636-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 636-5
1:547

ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 650-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 236.45, Wisconsin Statutes, which
permits the adoption of regulations more restrictive than those contained in
the state platting statute.
§ 650-2. Purpose and intent.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the subdivision of
land and the quality of such subdivision to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare of the community; to prevent the
overcrowding of land; to lessen congestion in the streets and highways;
to provide for adequate light and air; to facilitate adequate provisions
for water, sewage, and other public requirements; to provide for proper
ingress and egress; to promote proper monumenting of land subdivided
and conveyed by accurate legal description. These regulations are
made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the
character of the City and its environs with a view of conserving the
value of land and improvements placed thereon, providing the best
possible environment for human habitation, for encouraging commerce
and industry, and providing for the most appropriate use of land in the
City and its environs.
B. Intent. It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate the division of
land so as to:
(1) Support the goals of sustaining natural resources through
regulating the conservation, protection and proper development of
the City's soil, water, wetland, woodland, and wildlife resources
and attain a proper adjustment of land use and development to
realize the goal of supporting and sustaining the natural resource
base.
(2) Lessen congestion in the streets and highways.
(3) Further the orderly layout and appropriate use of land as identified
in the adopted Comprehensive Plan and adopted Conservation
Plan.
(4) Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers.
(5) Provide adequate light and air.
(6) Facilitate adequate provision for housing, transportation, water
supply, wastewater, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public
facilities and services.
(7) Secure safety from flooding, water pollution, disease and other
hazards.
§ 650-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-2
1:549
§ 650-3. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued
pursuant to law. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
§ 650-4. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of
the City and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power
granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 650-5. Disclaimer of liability.
The City does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas
designated as floodlands on plats and certified survey maps will be subject
to periodic inundation nor does the City guarantee, warrant or represent
that the soils shown to be unsuited for a given land use from tests required
by the chapter are the only unsuited soils within the jurisdiction of the
chapter; and thereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the
City Council, its agencies or employees for flooding problems, sanitation
(8) Prevent flood damage to persons and properties and minimize
expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects.
(9) Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of
surface and subsurface waters.
(10) Preserve natural vegetation and cover and promote the natural
beauty of the City and its environs.
(11) Restrict building sites on floodlands, shorelands, areas covered by
poor soils or in other areas poorly suited for development.
(12) Facilitate the further division of larger tracts into smaller parcels of
land.
(13) Ensure adequate legal description and proper survey
monumentation of subdivided land.
(14) Provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(15) Provide penalties for violations of this chapter.
(16) Implement those municipal, county, watershed or regional
comprehensive plans or plan components adopted by the City and
in general facilitate enforcement of City development standards as
set forth in the adopted regional, county and local comprehensive
plans, adopted plan components, City zoning and building codes.
§ 650-2 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-5
1:550
problems or structural damages that may occur as a result of reliance upon
and conformance with this chapter.
§ 650-6. Inconsistency with other ordinances.
This chapter shall supersede all other general and zoning ordinances or
parts thereof inconsistent or in conflict with this chapter to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
§ 650-7. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be used.
Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
includes the plural number; and the plural number includes the singular
number. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. For the
purposes of these regulations, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given in this section:
ACREAGE, GROSS — The total area of a parcel or development including
the area of perimeter street rights-of-way as measured to the center line of
the street.
ACREAGE, NET — The area of a parcel or development excluding the area
of perimeter streets, and excluding the area of all existing or proposed
rights-of-way located within the parcel or development.
AGENT — A person authorized by another person to act on the other
person's behalf.
ALLEY — A public or private right-of-way usually of reduced width that
affords only secondary access to a lot, block, or parcel of land. [See
§ 236.02(1), Wis. Stats.]
BIKEWAY — A bike route completely apart from a street and restricted to
bicycle, pedestrian and maintenance vehicle traffic.
BLOCK — An area of land within a platted subdivision that is entirely
surrounded by a combination of streets, exterior subdivision boundary lines,
public parks, cemeteries, railway right-of-way, streams, or other water
bodies.
BUILDING LINE or BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line on a lot, generally
parallel to a lot line or public or private road right-of-way line, located a
sufficient distance from either to provide the minimum yards required by
this chapter. The building line determines the area in which buildings are
permitted subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter. This is also
referred to as a "setback."
BUTT LOT — A lot the rear line of which abuts the side lot line of another
lot or lots in the same block but not separated by an open space.
CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP — A map intending to create not more than four
parcels of land as provided in § 236.34, Wis. Stats. Certified survey maps
shall, in addition to the provisions of § 236.34, Wis. Stats., bear a certificate
§ 650-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-7
1:551
of approval of the City Council, certified by the City Clerk, and shall meet
the requirements of this chapter.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Undeveloped land within a subdivision that
has been designated, dedicated, reserved, or restricted in perpetuity from
further development and is set aside for the use and enjoyment by residents
of the community. Common open space does not include any portion of
a private residential lot, and shall be substantially free of structures, but
may contain historic structures, shared recreational structures, including
but not limited to pool houses or stables, as indicated on the approved
development plan.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A comprehensive plan prepared in accordance
with Wis. Stats. § 66.1001 by the City indicating the general locations
recommended for the various functional classes of land, places and
structures, and for the general physical development of the City and
includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any
amendment to such plan or parts thereof. This comprehensive development
plan may also be known as the Comprehensive Plan or "Smart Growth" Plan.
CONCEPT PLAN — A preliminary drawing, made to approximate scale, of a
proposed land division for discussion purposes.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of property ownership providing for individual
ownership of a unit within a structure where the land, other parts of
the structure, and other facilities are held in common with other owners
pursuant to Chapter 703, Wis. Stats. A condominium is a legal form of
ownership of real estate and not a specific building type or style.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — The grant of a property right or interest
from the property owner to a unit of government or nonprofit organization
stipulating that the described land shall remain in its natural, scenic, open
or wooded, or agricultural state, precluding future or additional
development.
DEVELOPMENT PAD — Also referred to as "development envelope." That
portion of a lot which is intended to be graded, paved, or built upon.
DRAINAGEWAY — An open area of land, either in an easement or dedicated
right-of-way, the primary purpose of which is to carry stormwater on the
ground surface in lieu of an enclosed storm sewer. Drainageways may
serve multiple purposes in addition to their principal use, including, but
not limited to, maintenance, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic; sanitary sewers;
water mains; storm sewers; stormwater detention; park development; and
other related uses. Drainageways may also be referred to as "greenways."
DRIVEWAY — An all-weather vehicle access to private property from a
public or private street.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms, providing or intended to
provide permanent living quarters for not more than one family.
EASEMENT — An area of land set aside, or over or through which liberty,
privilege, or advantage in land, distinct from ownership of the land, is
§ 650-7 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-7
1:552
granted by the owner to the public or some particular person or part of the
public, or utility.
ENVIRONMENTAL FEATURE — Those lands containing concentrations of
scenic, recreational and other natural resources as identified and
delineated by Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. These natural
resource and resource-related elements include the following: lakes, rivers
and streams, together with their natural floodplain; wetlands; forest and
woodlands; wildlife habitat areas; rough topography; significant geological
formations; wet or poorly drained soils; existing outdoor recreation sites;
potential outdoor recreation and related open-space sites; historic sites and
structures; and significant scenic areas of vistas.
EXTRATERRITORIAL PLAT — Referring to unincorporated lands within 1.5
miles of the City of Lake Mills.
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE — A letter of credit, cash or certified check, or
surety bond guaranteeing performance of a contract or obligation through
possible forfeiture of the letter of credit, cash or certified check, or surety
bond if such contract or obligation is unfilled by the subdivider.
FRONTAGE STREET or FRONTAGE ROAD — A minor street auxiliary to
and located on the side of an arterial or collector street and which provides
for access and service to the abutting properties away from the arterial or
collector street traffic.
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council of the City of Lake Mills.
HALF STREET — A street, either existing as or proposed to be, half of the
required right-of-way width with the intention that the adjoining half will be
platted at the time the adjoining lands are subdivided; or an existing street,
of which, due to reasons of ownership, only half of the right-of-way is within
the boundaries of a proposed land division or annexation.
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC — Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, open channel,
water main, roadway, park, parkway, public access, sidewalk,
pedestrianway, planting strip or other facility for which the City may
ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation.
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT — An agreement guaranteeing
payment for subdivision improvements, entered into by a bank, savings and
loan or other financial institution which is authorized to do business in this
state and which has a financial standing acceptable to the City and which is
approved as to form by the City Attorney.
LAND DIVISION — Any division (or consolidation) of a lot(s) or parcel(s) of
land by the owners thereof or their agents for the purpose of transfer of
ownership, building development, or mortgage description.
LOT — A parcel of land that:
A. Is undivided by any street or private road;
Is occupied by, or designated to be developed for occupancy by a
use permitted in this chapter, including one principal building or use,
B.
§ 650-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-7
1:553
Figure 1.1: Lot Drawing.
LOT AREA — The total area in a horizontal plane within the peripheral
boundaries of a lot.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at
their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior
angle of less than 135°. On a through lot, both street lines shall be deemed
front lot lines for the purposes of this chapter.
LOT DEPTH — The average dimension of a parcel measured from the rear
lot line to the front lot line along each side yard setback.
LOT, FLAG — A lot not fronting on or abutting a public street and where
access to the public street system is by a narrow strip of land and where the
area of the lot, for zoning purposes; shall not include the narrow strip.
LOT FRONTAGE — Lot width measured at the street lot line. When a lot has
more than one street lot line, lot width shall be measured, and the minimum
lot width required by this chapter shall be provided at each such line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot, with frontage on one street.
LOT LINES — A lot line is the property line (including the vertical plane
established by the line and the ground) bounding a lot except that where
any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed public
right-of-way, the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for
applying this chapter.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on more
than one street. Double frontage lots shall normally be deemed to have
two front yards and two side yards and no rear yard. Double frontage lots
together with any accessory buildings, open spaces, and parking spaces
required by this chapter; and
C. Has its frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place.
§ 650-7 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-7
1:554
shall not generally be permitted unless the lot abuts an arterial highway or
collector roads. Double frontage lots abutting arterial highways or collector
roads should restrict direct access to the arterial highway or collector roads
by means of a planting buffer or some other acceptable access buffering
measure.
LOT WIDTH — The shortest distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured at the midpoint of the building line.
MASTER PLAN — See "Comprehensive Plan."
MINOR LAND DIVISION — Any division of land not defined as a subdivision.
Such minor land divisions shall be made by certified survey map in
accordance with Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 and this chapter.
MONUMENT or MONUMENTATION — The establishment of permanent
on-the-ground objects that mark exact locations of surveyed points and
lines in the United States Public Land Survey System. Monuments serve
to mark points used for geodetic control networks as well as points used
to reference property boundaries. Monuments can take a variety of forms.
They are the legally binding markers used for setting property lines and as
such are the culminating work of any survey.
NAVIGABLE WATER —
NONPROFIT CONSERVATION ORGANIZATION — Any charitable
corporation, charitable association, or charitable trust, the purpose or
Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within
Wisconsin, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters
within the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion
of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state.
Under § 281.31(2m), Wis. Stats., notwithstanding any other provision
of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland
ordinances required under § 62.231, Wis. Stats., and Chapter NR 117,
Wis. Adm. Code, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches
if:
(1) Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river;
Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were
not navigable streams before ditching; and
(2)
(3) Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
A.
Wisconsin's Supreme Court has declared navigable bodies of water
that have a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and levels or flow
sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest
draft on an annually recurring basis [Muench v. Public Service
Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952) and DeGaynor and Co., Inc., v.
Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975)]. For example,
a stream which is navigable by skiff or canoe during normal spring high
water is navigable, in fact, under the laws of this state, though it may
be dry during other seasons.
B.
§ 650-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-7
1:555
powers of which include retaining or protecting the natural, scenic, or
open space values of real property, assuring the availability of real property
for agricultural, forest, recreational or open space use, protecting natural
resources, maintaining or enhancing air or water quality, or preserving the
historical, architectural, or cultural aspects of this chapter.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map indicating the location, width, and extent of
existing and proposed streets, highways, drainageways, parks, playgrounds,
and other facilities, as adopted by the City Council pursuant to § 62.23, Wis.
Stats.
OUTLOT — A parcel of land, other than a lot, so designated on a plat
or certified survey and which is not intended for building or structure
development in the proposed land division.
OWNER — The owner of record of fee simple title to any lot that is a
part of properties, including contract sellers and vendees, but excluding
those having such interest merely as security for the performance of an
obligation, and excluding those who have a lien upon the property by
provision or operation of law.
OWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A community organization incorporated or
unincorporated, which combines individual parcel ownership with shared
use or ownership of common property or facilities.
PARENT PARCEL — An existing parcel (or parcels) of record, as identified
by individual tax identification numbers, as of the effective date of this
chapter, from which land divisions are proposed.
PLAN COMMISSION — The City Plan Commission established in conformity
with § 62.23, Wis. Stats, and § 660-177 of the Zoning Code.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT or PUD — A form of development usually
characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units. The
concept usually involves clustering of buildings and providing common open
space. Ordinances permitting planned unit developments allow planning a
project and calculating densities for the entire development rather than on
an individual lot-by-lot basis. It is hereby declared that regulating planned
unit developments requires greater involvement of public officials in site
plan review and development aspects of both zoning and land division
regulation since such developments require exceptions from both types of
regulation.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
PLAT, FINAL — A map prepared in accordance with the requirements of
Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., and this chapter for the purpose of dividing larger
parcels into lots and conveying those lots. The final map, drawing or chart
and accompanying materials on which the subdivider's plan of land division
is presented for approval and which, if approved, shall be recorded with the
Jefferson County Register of Deeds.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A map and other submitted information
documenting the salient features of a proposed division of land as described
§ 650-7 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-7
1:556
and required in this chapter and submitted to the City for purposes of
preliminary consideration prior to final platting.
PROTECTIVE RESTRICTIONS OR COVENANTS — Contracts entered into
between private parties which constitute a restriction on the use of all
private properties within a platted subdivision or certified survey map for
the benefit of the property owners, and which provide mutual protection
against undesirable aspects of development that would tend to impair the
stability of values.
PUBLIC WAY — Any road, street, highway, walkway, easement,
drainageway, or part thereof, intended for access to or use by the general
public and City.
REPLAT — The process of changing, or the map or plat that changes, the
boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or a part thereof. The subdivision
of a block, lot or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing
the exterior boundaries of said block, lot or outlot is not a replat, but is a
land division.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A public way dedicated to the public for the intended use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, ULTIMATE — The required future right-of-way for a street,
highway, alley, or other public way as illustrated in the adopted
Comprehensive Plan or the adopted Official Map for the City of Lake Mills.
SHORELANDS — Defined in § 59.692(1), Wis. Stats., to mean the area
within the following distances from the ordinary high-water mark of
navigable waters, as defined in § 281.31(2m), Wis. Stats.
SOIL MAPPING UNIT — Soil types, slopes and erosion factors delineated on
detailed operational soil survey maps prepared by the United States Natural
Resources Conservation Service (formerly "Soil Conservation Service").
STEEP SLOPE — Steep slopes are areas which contain a gradient of 12%
or greater (equivalent to a ten-foot elevation change in a distance of 83 feet
or less), as shown on Environmental Corridor Map or from more accurate
on-site survey.
STREET — Unless specifically designated otherwise by the City, any public
or private way that is dedicated or permanently open to pedestrian and
vehicular use, which is 21 feet or more in width if it exists at the time of
enactment of this chapter or any such public right-of-way 50 feet or more in
width when established after the effective date of this chapter, or otherwise
by approved plat.
STREET, ARTERIAL (MINOR) — A street that links cities and large towns,
spaced at such intervals so that all developed areas of the state are within a
One thousand feet from a lake, pond or flowage. If the navigable water
is a glacial pothole lake, this distance shall be measured from the highwater
mark of the lake.
A.
Three hundred feet from a river or a stream or to a landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
B.
§ 650-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-7
1:557
reasonable distance of an arterial highway. These roadways provide service
to corridors with trip lengths and travel density greater than those served
by rural collectors or local systems. Their design and function should be
expected to provide for relatively high overall speeds, with minimal traffic
control to interfere with mobility; in Lake Mills: STH 89 north of CTH V and
south of CTH A.
STREET, ARTERIAL (PRINCIPAL) — A street that provides for the
movement of relatively heavy volumes of traffic movements of substantial
statewide or interstate travel. It has a secondary function of providing
access to collector streets and tertiary function of providing access to
abutting properties; in Lake Mills: IH 94.
STREET, COLLECTOR (MAJOR) — Major collectors provide service to
smaller-to-moderate sized places and other intra-area traffic generators,
and link those generators to nearby larger population centers (cities,
villages, and towns) or higher function routes; in Lake Mills: STH 89, CTHs
A, B, and V.
STREET, COLLECTOR (MINOR) — A street that collects and distributes
internal traffic within a distinct urban area such as a residential
neighborhood, between the arterial street and local streets. It has a
secondary function of providing access to abutting properties; in Lake Mills:
Madison Street, CP Avenue, Mulberry Street, Ferry Drive, and Owen Street.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street with only one outlet and
culminating in a permanent or temporary turnaround.
STREET, DEAD-END — A street permanently or temporarily closed at one
end, with or without turnarounds.
STREET, MINOR (LOCAL) — A street of minimum continuity designed for
low speeds and volumes and to provide access to low traffic generating
property and leading into collector and arterial street systems.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground,
stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled
buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts, excepting
public utility fixtures and appurtenances.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, agent, partnership, or entity
of any sort, which divides or proposes to divide land in any manner,
including such heirs and assigns as may be responsible for the obligations
of the subdivider under the provisions of this chapter.
SUBDIVIDER'S AGREEMENT — An agreement by which the City and the
subdivider agree in reasonable detail as to all of those matters which the
provisions of these regulations permit to be covered by the subdivider's
agreement.
SUBDIVISION, CONSERVATION — A housing development that is
characterized by compact lots and common open space, and where the
natural features of the land are maintained to the greatest extent possible.
§ 650-7 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-7
1:558
SUBDIVISION, CONVENTIONAL — The division of a lot, parcel or tract of
land by the owners thereof or the owner's agent, for the purpose of transfer
of ownership or building development where the act of division creates five
or more parcels or building sites of 1 1/2 acres each or less in area; or
where the act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of
1 1/2 acres each or less in area by successive division within a period of five
years. Other divisions of land shall be termed "minor land divisions." The
definition of a subdivision shall not apply to commercial or industrial land
divisions except to the extent regulated by state law.
URBAN SERVICE AREA — That portion of the City of Lake Mills and those
areas within its extra-territorial jurisdiction or its Comprehensive Plan,
which have been designated by the City Council of the City of Lake Mills as
the areas to which services required in urban areas shall be provided in a
planned and orderly process, particularly those facilities which are placed
on or in the land as part of the urban development process. Such services
include, but may not be limited to, public sanitary sewers.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — Any public facilities installed or constructed
to obtain, store, treat, or convey water for public consumption or domestic
use.
WETLANDS — Defined in § 23.32(1), Wis. Stats., to mean an area where
water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to be capable of
supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation in which have soils indicative
of wet conditions.
ZONING CODE — The City of Lake Mills Zoning Ordinance, which is
Chapter 660 of the Code.
§ 650-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-7
1:559

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 650-8. City Manager.
This chapter shall be administered by the City Manager or his designee. The
City Manager, in the administration of this chapter, shall:
§ 650-9. Violations.
§ 650-10. Violations and penalties; remedies.
A. Receive plats and certified survey maps from the subdivider. The City
Manager shall distribute copies of plats and certified survey maps as
provided for in this chapter and shall receive review comments from
review agencies, boards and committees required to comment on such
land division.
B. Advise the subdivider of all recommendations made by the City Plan
Commission and actions taken by the City Council.
C. Maintain records of plat and certified survey map filings, approvals,
fees paid and other sureties.
D. Determine that all land divisions within the jurisdiction of this chapter
requiring review by this chapter have secured the necessary review and
approvals.
E. Assist the City Attorney in the prosecution of violations.
A. Compliance required. No person may build upon, divide, convey, record
or place monuments on any land in violation of this chapter or the
Wisconsin Statutes; and no person shall be issued a City zoning,
building or plumbing permit authorizing the building on or
improvement of any lot, block, parcel, certified survey map or any part
of any subdivision or replat within the jurisdiction of this chapter not of
record as of the effective date of this chapter until the provisions and
requirements of this chapter have been fully met.
B. Floodlands. Every structure, fill or development placed or maintained
on floodlands in violation of this chapter is hereby declared a public
nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and maintenance
thereof abated by action at suit of the state, the City or any citizen
thereof.
C. Drainage to be maintained. No person may obstruct the flow of surface
water contrary to an approved stormwater and drainage plan so as to
prevent surface water from reaching a storm sewer or drainage channel
without interim ponding, except as provided in an approved stormwater
and drainage plan.
§ 650-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-10
1:561
§ 650-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or a failure to approve a plat
may appeal therefrom, as provided in § 236.13(5) and § 62.23(7)(e)10, 14,
and 15, Wis. Stats., within 30 days of notification of the rejection of the plat.
§ 650-12. Fees.
A. Penalties. Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100
nor more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution for each offense
and the penalty for default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall
be imprisonment in the county jail until payment thereof, but not
exceeding six months. Each day a violation exists or continues shall
constitute a separate offense. Violations and concomitant penalties
shall include:
(1) Recordation improperly made is subject to a forfeiture of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 per violation as provided in
§ 236.30, Wis. Stats.
(2) Conveyance of lots in unrecorded plats is subject to a forfeiture of
not less than $100 nor more than $500 per violation as provided for
in § 236.31, Wis. Stats. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) Monuments disturbed or not placed is subject to a forfeiture of not
less than $100 nor more than $250 or imprisoned not more than
one year in county jail, per violation as provided for in § 236.32,
Wis. Stats. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Remedies. The City may institute appropriate action or proceedings to
enjoin violations of this chapter or the applicable Wisconsin Statutes. In
addition to any forfeiture imposed, the City may order an Assessor's
plat to be made under § 70.27, Wis. Stats., at the expense of the
subdivider or his agent, when a subdivision is created by successive
divisions of land.
A. Generally. The subdivider shall pay all fees required by this section to
the City Treasurer, at the times specified, before being entitled to
recording a plat or certified survey map. The City Manager is
authorized to require subdividers to enter into a written agreement for
the payment of charges for legal, engineering, and planning services in
response to plat or CSM submissions.
B. Preliminary plat review.
(1) At the time of application for approval or review of any of the
following, the subdivider shall pay a fee, as from time to time
established by resolution of the City Council, to defray the cost of
giving notice, investigation and other administrative processing:
§ 650-10 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-12
1:562
(a) Preliminary plat.
(b) Reapplication for approval of any preliminary plat which has
been previously reviewed.
(c) Sketch preliminary plat.
(2) In addition to the application fee, the subdivider shall pay the
administrative fee in Subsection D(1) of this section.
C. Certified survey map review. The subdivider at the time of application
shall pay a fee as from time to time established by resolution of the City
Council to defray the cost of giving notice, investigation or other
administrative processing for approval of a certified survey map. In
addition to the application fee, the subdivider shall pay the
administrative fee in Subsection D(1) of this section.
D. Improvements review fee.
(1) Developer's deposit. An escrow account and an administration fee
may be required of the subdivider as established from time to time
by resolution of the City Council based on either the number of
residential units or square footage potential for commercial and
industrial subdivisions or based on the estimated engineering
review and at the time of the submission of improvement plans and
specifications to partially cover the cost to the City of checking and
reviewing such plans and specifications. If at any time the escrow
account lapses beyond 30 days of nonpayment, no further
inspections or reviews will be conducted until the account is paid in
full and additional funds are deposited as determined by the City.
The fee shall also be used for any costs incurred by the City for
legal, administrative or fiscal work which may be undertaken in
connection with the plat or plan.
(2) May be recomputed. The fee may be recomputed, upon demand of
the subdivider or City Manager, after completion of improvement
construction in accordance with the actual cost of such
improvements, and the difference, if any, shall be paid by or
remitted to the subdivider. Evidence of cost shall be in such detail
and form as required by the City Manager.
E. Inspection fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee which shall be added to
the escrow account or to the financial guarantee equal to the actual or
projected cost of the City Manager's or other approving authorities
having jurisdiction for such inspection deem necessary, to assure that
the construction of the required improvements is in compliance with
the plans, specifications and ordinances of the approving authorities
having jurisdiction or any other governmental authority.
§ 650-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-12
1:563

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 650-13. Jurisdiction and compliance.
A. Jurisdiction. Jurisdiction of these regulations shall include all lands and
waters within the corporate limits of the City and those lands within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City as established in §§ 62.23(2) and
236.10, Wis. Stats. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Cemetery plats made under § 157.07, Wis. Stats., and Assessor's
plats made under § 70.27, but such Assessor's plats shall comply
with § 236.15(1)(a) to (g) and 236.20(1) and (2)(a) to (e), unless
waived under § 236.20(2)(L), Wis. Stats.
(2) Sale or exchange of parcels of public utility or railroad right-of-way
lands to adjoining property owners if additional lots are not thereby
created and if the resulting lots are not reduced below the
minimum sizes required by Chapter 236, Wis. Stats., or any other
ordinance of the City.
(3) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order if
such division applies to less than five parcels.
(4) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements.
(5) Sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots
resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by
these regulations, the zoning ordinance or other applicable laws or
ordinances.
(6) Assessors' plats made under § 70.27, Wis. Stats., but such
Assessors' plats shall comply with §§ 236.15(1)(a) to (g) and
236.20(1) and (2)(a) to (e), Wis. Stats.
B. Subdivision requirement. No land within the corporate limits of the City
or within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction shall, after the
effective date hereof, be divided or consolidated, nor may such
document be entitled to be recorded in the office of the Register of
Deeds, nor may any street be laid out, nor may any improvements be
made to the land until the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 236,
Wisconsin Statutes, are met and the plat or certified survey map and
the plan or plans of the subdivision shall have been approved by the
Plan Commission and City Council and certified thereto by the City
Clerk.
C. Land division requirement. Any division of land which results in a
subdivision as defined in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats., shall be surveyed
and a plat thereof approved and recorded as required by this chapter.
Any division or consolidation of land which results in other than a
subdivision defined in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats., shall be surveyed and a
§ 650-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-13
1:565
§ 650-14. Consistency with adopted plans, maps, and ordinances.
No subdivision plat, certified survey map or condominium plat shall be
approved or recorded for any parcel of land whose proposed subdivision
or use would not comply with the applicable standards of the City's
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, Official Map, and all other
certified survey map thereof approved and recorded as required by this
chapter.
D. Compliance. No person shall divide or consolidate any land located
within the jurisdictional limits of these regulations so that such division
results in a subdivision, minor land division or replat as defined herein;
no such subdivision, minor land division, consolidation, or replat shall
be entitled to recording; and no street shall be laid out or improvements
made to land without compliance with all requirements of this chapter
and the following documents:
(1) Provisions of Ch. 236, Wis. Stats.
(2) Rules of the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional
Services, as contained in SPS 383 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, regulating lot size and lot elevation if the land to be
subdivided is not served by a public sewer and provisions for such
service have not been made.
(3) Rules of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, as contained
in Ch. Trans 233 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, relating to
safety of access and the preservation of the public interest and
investment in the highway system if the land owned or controlled
by the subdivider abuts on a state trunk highway or connecting
street or service road. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(4) Rules of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, as
contained in Chs. NR 116 and NR 117 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, setting water quality standards preventing
and abating pollution and regulating development within floodland,
wetland and shoreland areas.
(5) Approved Comprehensive Plan or Comprehensive Plan components
of the City.
(6) The City zoning ordinance and all other applicable local and county
ordinances.
E. Building permit requirement. No building permit shall be issued by the
City authorizing the building on, occupancy, or improvement of any
parcel of land not on record as of the effective date hereof until the
provisions and requirements of this chapter have been met, and a
resolution approving the land division or consolidation has been
adopted by the City Council.
§ 650-13 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-14
1:566
ordinances. Subdividers shall refer to the Official Map for site-specific
standards related to intersection and driveway placement and spacing;
right-of-way dedications and general street and pedestrian facility routing;
stormwater management facility locations; and planned community facility
locations.
§ 650-15. Division of zoning lots.
No zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two or more zoning lots and
no portion of any zoning lot shall be sold unless all zoning lots resulting
from each such division or sale shall conform to all the applicable bulk
regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.
§ 650-16. Dedication and reservation of lands.
A. Streets, highways, and drainageways. Whenever a tract of land to be
subdivided within the jurisdiction of this chapter encompasses all or
any part of an arterial or collector street, drainageway, other public way
or public access to navigable lakes or streams which has been
designated in the adopted regional, county or City Comprehensive Plan
or adopted Comprehensive Plan components or on the Official Street
System Map, such public way shall be made a part of the plat or
certified survey map and dedicated or reserved by the subdivider in the
locations and dimensions indicated on such plan, Comprehensive Plan
component or map and as set forth in § 650-32 of this chapter.
B. Schools, parks, environmental corridors and other open spaces.
Whenever a tract of land to be divided within the City encompasses all
or part of a school site, park site, environmental corridor or other open
space, other than streets, highways, drainageways, other public ways
or public access to navigable lakes or streams which has been
designated on an adopted regional, County or City Comprehensive Plan
or adopted Comprehensive Plan component of the City, such school site,
park site, environmental corridor or other open space shall be made a
part of the plat or certified survey map and dedicated or reserved by the
subdivider in the locations and dimensions indicated on such plan and
in accordance with the procedures in § 650-32I of this chapter.
C. Proposed public lands outside the corporate limits. Proposed public
lands outside of the corporate limits of the City but within the
jurisdictional area of these regulations shall be reserved for acquisition
by the town or county in accordance with the regulations of the affected
jurisdiction.
D. Floodlands and shorelands. Whenever floodlands and shorelands are
contained in a tract of land proposed to be divided into lots, building
sites or parcels of less than five acres in area, all floodlands and those
shorelands designated for park, recreation, environmental corridor or
other open space land use in a Comprehensive Plan or a component of
such a Comprehensive Plan prepared by state, regional, county or
municipal agencies and adopted or acknowledged by the City and lying
§ 650-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-16
1:567
within the below specified distances from the high water elevation
shall, at the discretion of the City Council following recommendation by
the Plan Commission, be dedicated to the public by the subdivider. In
lieu of dedication, all such designated floodlands and shorelands shall
be reserved by the subdivider for a period not to exceed 10 years,
unless extended by mutual agreement, for acquisition by the state,
county or local unit of government at fair market value at the time of
the filing of the final plat or shall be reserved for the recreational use of
the future residents of the land to be divided, with stream or lake bank
maintenance easements given to the unit of government which has
jurisdiction. The lot area should generally not include such shorelands
and floodlands.
E. Proportionate payment in lieu of dedication.
(1) Payment in lieu of park dedication (active and passive)
(a) If the City Council has determined that such dedication is not
feasible or compatible with development of the community, the
developer shall in lieu thereof pay to the City a fee, as from
time to time established by resolution of City Council, to defray
the impact the additional development and residences will
have on City parks, and the preserving of the City's
agricultural, natural and cultural resources within the City's
park system.
(b) Such fees shall be placed in separate nonlapsing funds and
shall be used exclusively for funding the acquisition or initial
improvement of land for public parks as per 2007 Wisconsin
Act 44. The improvement of land for public parks means
grading, landscaping, installation of utilities, construction of
sidewalks, installation of playground equipment, and
construction or installation of rest room facilities on land
intended for public park purposes. Such fees shall be applied
to residential development on the basis of total number of
newly created residential dwelling units, newly created lots,
and per acre of developable land. Such fees shall apply to
units/lots/acres of developable land created by subdivision
platting, condominium platting, certified survey map or
planned unit development.
(2) If the parent parcel on a Certified Survey Map, with an existing
dwelling upon it, remains unchanged (meaning no construction or
grading), the parent parcel will not be assessed the per acre
dedication fee until the time of further division.
(3) Payment shall be in a lump sum and shall be paid prior to City
execution of the final plat, final condominium plat, certified survey
map, or planned development and before the City allows the
recording of the documents stated.
§ 650-16 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-16
1:568
§ 650-17. Improvements. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Before final approval of any plat or certified survey map located within the
jurisdictional limits of this chapter, the subdivider shall install street, utility
and other public improvements as provided below. If such improvements are
not installed as required at the time the final plat or certified survey map
is submitted for approval, the subdivider shall, before recording of the final
plat or certified survey map, enter into a contract with the City agreeing
to install the required improvements and file with such contract a letter of
credit, cash or certified check, or surety bond meeting the approval of the
City Attorney in an amount 120% of the estimated cost of the improvements,
such estimate to be made by the City's Engineering Consultant and the City
Manager, as a guarantee that such improvements will be completed by the
subdivider or his subcontractors not later than two years from the date
of recording of the plat and as a further guarantee that all obligations to
subcontractors for work on the development are satisfied. In addition, the
following requirements apply:
(4) Where a lot or parcel for which payment has once been made is
further divided, payment shall be required for the additional lots or
parcels created.
(5) For the purpose of this chapter, the definition of nondevelopable
land for the per acre dedication fee shall constitute wetlands and/or
preservation/conservation easement areas and shall not be charged
the per acre dedication fee.
(6) The Parks Board, Plan Commission, and City Council will be the
governing bodies for determinations of dedication fee "in lieu of"
situations, where a developer may make land dedications in return
for not having to pay dedication fees. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Contract approvals. Contracts and contract specifications for the
construction of street and utility improvements on dedicated street
rights-of-way, as well as the contractors and subcontractors who are to
be engaged in the construction of street and utility improvements on
dedicated street rights-of-way, shall be subject to review and approval
of the City's Engineering Consultant and approval of the City.
B. Governmental units. Governmental units to which these bonds and
contract provisions apply may file, in lieu of such contract and bond, a
letter from officers authorized to act on their behalf agreeing to comply
with the provisions of this section.
C. Survey monuments. Before final approval of any plat within the
corporate limits of the City or its extraterritorial jurisdictional limits,
the subdivider shall install survey monuments placed in accordance
with § 236.15, Wis. Stats., and as may be required by the City's
Engineering Consultant.
§ 650-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-17
1:569
§ 650-18. Existing substandard lots.
§ 650-19. Special exceptions.
D. Plats outside the corporate limits. Before final approval by the City of
any plat or certified survey map located outside the corporate limits of
the City, but within the plat approval jurisdiction of the City, the
subdivider shall give evidence that he has complied with all street and
utility improvements of the town in which the land being platted is
located.
E. Waiver of monuments. The City Plan Commission may waive the placing
of monuments, required under § 236.15(1)(b), (c) and (d) for a
reasonable time on condition that the subdivider executes a surety bond
to insure the placing of such monuments within the time required.
F. Advance reimbursement. The subdivider shall pay the City in advance
of signing the subdivided agreement for all fees, expenses and
disbursements which are incurred by the City and reimburse the City,
without limitation by reason of enumeration, for design, engineering,
preparation, checking and review of designs, plans and specifications;
supervision and inspection to insure that construction is in compliance
with applicable plans, specifications, regulations and ordinances; and
legal, administrative and fiscal work undertaken to assure and
implement such compliance.
A. Upon and after the effective date of this chapter, no lot shall be created
which does not meet the minimum zoning district area requirements of
each zoning district or the minimum lot area requirements of each
zoning district or which does not meet the lot dimension requirements
of each zoning district.
B. Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the construction of a
permitted building or structure, or the establishment of a permitted use
in the relevant zoning district on a lawfully existing parcel which does
not contain the required minimum area, minimum buildable area, or
minimum lot frontage on a street, but which, as of the date of initial
adoption of these regulations, and continuously thereafter, was owned
separately from an adjoining lot, as evidenced by deed(s) recorded with
the Jefferson County Register of Deeds. A previously existing lot that
does not have frontage on an accepted street must have access to an
accepted street over a permanent right-of-way or easement.
C. Where two or more nonconforming lots are contiguous, and in one
ownership, such parcels may be required to be combined or merged to
create a conforming lot or a more conforming lot to the maximum
extent possible.
A. Hardship from literal enforcement. Where in the judgment of the City
Plan Commission it would be inappropriate to apply literally the
provisions of § 650-32 and where, in the judgment of the City Council, it
§ 650-17 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-19
1:570
§ 650-20. Land suitability.
No land shall be subdivided as a plat or certified survey map which is
determined to be unsuitable for such use by the Plan Commission, upon
the recommendation of the City's Engineering Consultant or any other
agency as determined by the Plan Commission, for reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formations with severe limitations
for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography,
inadequate water supply or sewage disposal capabilities or any other
would be inappropriate to apply literally the provisions of § 650-33 of
this chapter because the proposed subdivision is located outside the
corporate limits of the City or because exceptional or undue hardship
would result, the Plan Commission or City Council may grant a special
exception from any requirement to the extent deemed just and proper.
B. Finding of fact. No special exception to the provisions of this chapter
shall be granted unless the Plan Commission finds all the following facts
and conditions exist and so indicates in the minutes of its proceedings:
(1) Exceptional circumstances. There are exceptional, extraordinary or
unusual circumstances or conditions where a literal enforcement of
the requirements of this chapter would result in severe hardship.
Such hardships should not apply generally to other properties or be
of such a recurrent nature as to suggest that this chapter should be
changed.
(2) Preservation of property rights. Such variance is necessary for
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights
possessed by other properties in the same vicinity.
(3) Absence of detriment. The variance will not create substantial
detriment to adjacent property and will not materially impair or be
contrary to the purpose and spirit of this chapter or the public
interest.
(4) A minimum of five affirmative Plan Commission member votes shall
be required to grant any special exception to this chapter.
(5) The City Council may waive the placing of monuments required
under § 236.15(1)(b), (c), and (d), Wis. Stats., for a reasonable time,
not to exceed one year, on condition that the subdivider execute a
surety bond to insure the placing of such monuments within the
required time limits established by statute. Additional time may be
granted upon show of cause.
C. Public interest. When such relief is granted, it shall be without
detriment to the public good, without impairing the intent and purpose
of this chapter or the desirable general development of the City in
accordance with the adopted City Comprehensive Plan or adopted plan
components. The reasons shall be entered in the Plan Commission
minutes.
§ 650-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-20
1:571
feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of future
residents of the proposed subdivision or the City. In addition:
A. Floodlands.
(1) No lot served by public sanitary sewerage facilities shall have less
than its required lot area, as specified in the zoning district
regulations, below the elevation of the one-hundred-year
recurrence interval flood or, where such data is not available, the
elevation shall be determined by a registered professional engineer
and the sealed documents shall be approved by the City's
engineering consultant.
(2) For planned development projects served by public sanitary
sewerage facilities, no lot shall have less than the average lot area,
as specified by the Plan Commission, below the elevation of the
one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood or, where such data is
not available, the elevation shall be determined by a registered
professional engineer and the sealed documents shall be approved
by the City's engineering consultant.
(3) No lot of one acre or less in area served by an on-site sanitary
sewage disposal (septic tank or mound) system shall include
floodlands. All lots more than one acre in area served by a septic
tank system or mound system shall contain not less than 40,000
square feet of land which is at an elevation above the elevation of
the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood or, where such data
is not available, the elevation shall be determined by a registered
professional engineer and the sealed documents shall be approved
by the City's engineering consultant.
B. Shorelands. Shorelands shall not be divided into building sites which
are to be served by soil absorption waste disposal systems.
C. Fill materials.
(1) Lands made, altered or filled with non-earth materials within the
last 10 years shall not be divided into building sites which are to be
served by soil absorption waste disposal systems.
(2) Lands made, altered or filled with non-earth materials within the
preceding 20 years shall not be divided into building sites which
are to be served by soil absorption waste disposal systems except
where soil tests prepared by a professional soil scientist clearly
show the soils are suited to such use. Soil reports shall include, but
need not be limited to, an evaluation of soil permeability, depth to
groundwater, depth to bedrock, soil-bearing capacity, and soil
compaction. To accomplish this purpose, a minimum of one test per
acre shall be made initially. The City does not guarantee, warrant
or represent that the required samples represent conditions on an
entire property and thereby asserts that there is no liability on the
part of the City Council, its agencies or employees for sanitary
§ 650-20 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-20
1:572
§ 650-21. Wooded areas and natural tree settings.
Heavily wooded areas should be preserved insofar as possible and by
application of reservation and dedication provisions of this chapter and
other applicable ordinances. The subdivider shall not remove trees in
anticipation of a land division until final subdivision approval is received.
Each tree exceeding six inches diameter at 4.5 feet above the ground that is
removed in preparation for development shall be replaced on a one to one
ratio. Replacement trees shall be of species approved by the City Forester
and measure between 1.5 inches and 2.5 inches in trunk diameter at one
foot above ground. If complete tree mitigation is not feasible within the
subject subdivision development, the City may require tree plantings within
parks, conservation lands, street rights-of-way, or other publicly owned
lands or require payment to a reforestation fund at a rate commensurate
with planting said mitigation trees.
§ 650-22. Determination of adequacy of public facilities.
problems or structural damages that may occur as a result of
reliance upon such tests.
D. Steep slopes. Each lot proposed to be served by an on-site soil
absorption sewerage disposal system shall have 50% of its minimum
required lot area or 20,000 square feet, whichever is less, in slopes of
less than 12%.
E. Shallow bedrock. Lands having bedrock within six feet of the natural
undisturbed surface shall not be divided into building sites to be served
by soil absorption sewage disposal systems.
F. Shallow groundwater table. Lands having groundwater within six feet
of the natural undisturbed surface shall not be divided into building
sites to be served by soil absorption sewage disposal systems.
G. Percolation rates. Soils having a percolation rate slower than 60
minutes per inch shall not be divided into building sites to be served by
soil absorption sewage disposal systems.
H. Findings. The Plan Commission, in applying the provisions of this
section, shall in writing recite the particular facts upon which it bases
its conclusion that the land is unsuitable for residential use and afford
the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence in rebuttal to such
finding of unsuitability, if he so desires. Thereafter, the Commission may
affirm, modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
A. Determination required. A preliminary plat, final plat, or certified
survey shall not be approved unless the City Manager determines that
adequate public facilities and public services are available to meet the
needs of the proposed land division and that no public funds, other than
those already provided in an adopted capital or operating budget, are
required.
§ 650-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-22
1:573
B. Submit required data. The applicant shall furnish any data requested by
the City Manager, who shall transmit this information to the
appropriate commission(s), committee(s), or staff for review of the
adequacy of water, sanitary and storm sewers, fire service, police,
parks, open space, recreation, and transportation facilities.
C. Required conditions. Public facilities and public services for a proposed
land division may be found by the City Manager to be adequate when
the following conditions exist:
(1) The proposed land division is located in an urban service area
where adequate sewer service is presently available for extension,
is under construction, or is designated by the City Council for
extension of sewer service within the current capital budget year
and funds are specifically provided for such extension either from
public or private financing. The City Manager shall consider the
recommendations of the City's engineering consultant, Public
Works Director, and the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent on
the capacity of trunk lines and of sewerage treatment facilities and
any other information presented.
(2) The proposed land division is located within the corporate limits of
the City and it is contiguous to an arterial transmission water main
of adequate capacity for the proposed development, or the water
distribution system that is needed is under construction or
scheduled for construction within the current budget year, and
public or private funds are available for the program. The City
Manager shall consider the recommendations of the Public Works
Board, the Public Works Director, and the City's consulting
engineer on line capacities, water sources and storage facilities as
well as any other information presented.
(3) The City Manager verifies that adequate funds, either public or
private, are available to insure the installation of all necessary
stormwater management facilities.
(4) The Director of Public Works can demonstrate to the City Manager
that street maintenance and refuse collection services, either
public or private, are so situated that adequate and timely service
can be provided so as not to involve danger or injury to the health,
safety, or general welfare to the future residents of the proposed
land division or existing City residents.
(5) The Parks and Forestry Director verifies to the City Manager that
the future residents of the proposed land division can be assured
park, recreation and open space facilities and services which meet
the standards of the City's Comprehensive Plan for parks and open
spaces.
(6) The Police Department and Fire Department verify that timely and
adequate service can be provided to the residents.
§ 650-22 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-22
1:574
§ 650-23. Basis for approval.
Approval of the proposed subdivision shall be conditional upon compliance
with:
(7) The proposed land division is accessible by existing or officially
mapped, publicly maintained, all-weather roadway system,
adequate to accommodate both existing traffic and that traffic to be
generated by the proposed land division in accordance with the
Official Map and City standards.
(8) Where the City Manager determines that one or more public
facilities or services are not adequate for the proposed
development, but that a portion of the area could be served
adequately, or that careful phasing of the development could result
in all public facilities and public services being adequate, the City
Manager shall recommend that conditional approval may include
only such portions or may specify phasing of the development.
D. Finding in writing. No land shall be divided which has been officially
mapped as public lands or a stormwater management facility or is
determined by the City Manager, in consultation with the City's
engineering consultant, to be unsuitable for use by reason of flooding,
bad drainage, soil or rock formations with severe limitations for
development, severe erosion potential, or unfavorable topography, or
any other feature likely to be harmful to the quality of the subdivision as
it relates to the health, safety, or welfare of future residents or
landowners in the proposed land division. The City Manager, in
applying the provisions of this subsection, shall recite the particular
facts in writing upon which conclusions that the land is not suitable for
the proposed use are based and shall afford the subdivider an
opportunity to present evidence regarding such unsuitability to the
Plan Commission. Thereafter, the Plan Commission may affirm, modify
or withdraw the determination of unsuitability.
E. Conform to zoning regulations. In the case of any land division, lot sizes
shall conform to the area and width requirements prescribed for the
zoning district in which the property is located.
A. The provisions of Chapter 236, Wis. Stats.
B. All applicable ordinances of the City.
C. The Comprehensive Plan, if consistent with any applicable zoning
ordinances. The Comprehensive Plan shall be deemed consistent even if
it has more restrictive requirements than found in the zoning
ordinance, provided the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan are
not inconsistent with the applicable zoning regulations.
D. The Official Map.
§ 650-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-23
1:575
E. The rules of the State Department of Safety and Professional Services
relating to lot size and lot elevation necessary for proper sanitary
conditions in a subdivision not served by a public sewer where provision
for such service has not been made.
F. The rules of the State Department of Transportation relating to the
provision for the safety of entrance upon and departure from abutting
state trunk highways or connecting highways and for the preservation
of the public interest and investment in such highways.
G. As a further condition of approval, the City Council may require that the
subdivider make and install any public improvements reasonably
necessary, and that the subdivider execute a developer's agreement
with the City and post a surety bond to ensure that the developer will
make those improvements within a reasonable time and manner.
H. As a condition of approval, the City may require prior to accepting the
dedication of public streets, alleys, or other ways, or prior to permitting
private streets, alleys or other public ways to be placed on the Official
Map, that designated facilities shall be provided without cost to the
City, and that they be constructed according to municipal specifications
and under municipal inspection, or that a specified portion of such costs
shall be paid in advance as provided in § 66.0709(2), Wis. Stats. The
designated facilities include, but are not limited because of
enumeration, storm sewer and appurtenances; sanitary sewer mains
and laterals; water mains and laterals; grading and improvement of
streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways; streetlighting; street
trees; parkland; or other facilities designated by the City. No street tree
fees or fees in lieu of parkland or park development fees may be
required as a condition of approval if the preliminary plat or CSM has
initially been filed with the City Clerk after June 14, 2006.
I. As a condition of approval, the City may require that the subdivider be
responsible for making or causing to be made any necessary alterations
to any existing utilities serving the subdivision, which, by virtue of the
subdivision, fall within the public right-of-way, provided a rational
relationship between the alterations and the subdivision is found to
exist by the City Council.
J. As a condition of approval, the City may require that the subdivider
comply with stormwater regulations as set forth in Administrative Rule
02-01, which is incorporated herein by reference.18 In complying with
said stormwater regulations, the subdivider may be required to provide
stormwater management facilities within the subdivision or on other
property owned or controlled by the subdivider outside the subdivision,
provided such facilities directly serve the stormwater management
needs of the subdivision, No fees in lieu of stormwater management
facilities may be required as a condition of approval if the preliminary
18.Editor's Note: Said Administrative Rule 02-01 is on file in the City offices.
§ 650-23 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-23
1:576
plat or CSM has been initially filed with the City Clerk after June 14,
2006.
§ 650-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-23
1:577

ARTICLE IV
Land Division Procedures
§ 650-24. Compliance requirement.
Any subdivider and owner of land (or his agent) who wish to divide such
land shall comply with the general principles of design and minimum layout
requirements as set forth in Article Vof this chapter , and shall in every case
submit the information required in this article.
§ 650-25. Preapplication.
Prior to the filing of an application for the approval of a preliminary plat or
certified survey map, the subdivider shall submit a concept plan for review
and consultation with City staff and all affected utilities in order to obtain
advice and assistance. This consultation is neither formal nor mandatory
but is intended to inform the subdivider of the purpose and objectives
of these regulations, the adopted regional, county or City Comprehensive
Plans or adopted plan components and plan implementation ordinances of
the City and to otherwise assist the subdivider in planning his development.
In so doing, both the subdivider and planning agency may reach mutual
conclusions regarding the general program and objectives of the proposed
development and its possible effects on the neighborhood and City and
the subdivider will gain a better understanding of subsequent required
procedures.
§ 650-26. Preliminary plat.
A. Submission and review. Before submitting a plat for approval, the
subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat, which shall be clearly
marked "preliminary plat," and a letter of application. The subdivider
shall submit the information required under §§ 650-22 and 650-25.
After completing the determination of adequate facilities and the
concept plan review under those sections, the subdivider may prepare a
preliminary plat which shall conform to the provisions set forth in
Article V of this chapter and shall file with the City Clerk an application
in writing for the tentative approval of said plat, accompanied by one
digital copy of the plat in a generally acceptable format and folded
copies as shall be required by the City Clerk to comply with this
chapter. The plat shall be submitted at least 40 calendar days prior to
the meeting of the Plan Commission at which action is desired. In
addition:
(1) Upon filing the preliminary plat with the City Clerk, the owner shall
pay a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the City
Council.
(2) The City Clerk or designee shall, within two work days after filing,
transmit copies to the Wisconsin Department of Administration
(WDOA); two copies to the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation (WDOT), if the subdivision abuts or adjoins a state
§ 650-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-26
1:579
trunk highway or connecting highway, two copies to the
Department of Safety and Professional Services, if the subdivision
is not served by a public sewer and provision for such service has
not been made, two copies to the Department of Natural Resources
(WDNR), if navigable waters, shoreland/wetlands or floodlands are
contained within the proposed subdivision, and four copies to the
Jefferson County planning agency, if required by Jefferson County.
(3) The City Clerk shall transmit seven copies to the City Plan
Commission, five copies to the City Council and one copy each to
the Building Inspector, Public Works Board, Parks Board, Police
Department, City Assessor, Engineering Consultant, Planning
Consultant, and Fire Department for their review and
recommendations concerning matters within their jurisdiction. The
recommendations, if any, of City boards, commissions and
departments shall be transmitted to the City Plan Commission
within 30 days from the date the plat is filed. The preliminary plat
shall then be reviewed by the City Plan Commission for
conformance with this chapter and all ordinances, rules,
regulations, Comprehensive Plans and Comprehensive Plan
components.
(4) The City Clerk shall transmit two copies to the Lake Mills Light and
Water Utility and one copy each to WE Energies, American
Transmission Company, local telecommunications companies, the
cable television franchisee, and the Lake Mills School District for
their review and information concerning matters within their
jurisdiction. Their comments, if any, shall be transmitted to the City
Manager within 20 days from the date the plat is filed.
(5) The City Plan Commission is designated as the recommending
agency with respect to design and layout of the preliminary plat
under §§ 650-32 and 650-33 of this chapter.
(6) The Wisconsin Department of Administration (WDOA), Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services, the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation (WisDOT), and Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) shall hereafter be
referred to as "objecting agencies."
(7) The preliminary plat shall be checked and reviewed as to its
conformity to the Official Map, the Comprehensive Plan, and
Chapter 660, Zoning Regulations, of this Code, and the principal
standards and requirements set forth in this chapter including
§ 650-22, Determination of adequacy of public facilities and
services, and copies of plats shall be referred for review and
recommendations to the Plan Commission, Public Works Board,
and Parks Board.
B. Preliminary plat approval. The objecting agencies shall, within 20 days
of the date of receiving their copies of the preliminary plat, notify the
§ 650-26 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-26
1:580
subdivider and all other approving and objecting agencies of any
objections; except the Department of Administration has 30 days to act.
If there are no objections, they shall so certify on the face of the copy
of the plat and shall return that copy to the City Plan Commission. If an
objecting agency fails to act within 20 days (30 days for the Department
of Administration), it shall be deemed to have no objection to the plat.
In addition: [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(1) The City Plan Commission shall, within 60 days of the date of filing
of a preliminary plat with the City Clerk, examine the preliminary
plat as to its conformance with this chapter; consider review
comments from objecting agencies, City staff and other agencies
required to review and comment on the preliminary plat; and shall
recommend approval, approval with conditions or rejection of the
preliminary plat to the City Council.
(2) After review of the preliminary plat and conferences with the
owner on any changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of
public improvements which will be required, the Plan Commission
shall reject or recommend approval or conditional approval of the
plat. The Plan Commission shall state by resolution any conditions
of approval or reasons for rejection.
(3) If the Plan Commission rejects the plat, it shall return it to the
owner.
(4) If the Plan Commission recommends approval of the preliminary
plat, the City Council shall, within 90 days of the date the plat and
application were filed with the City Clerk, approve conditionally or
reject such plat and shall state in writing any conditions of approval
or reasons for rejection, unless the time is extended by agreement
with the subdivider. Failure of the City Council to act within 90 days
or extension thereof shall constitute an approval of the preliminary
plat. The Clerk shall communicate to the owner the action of the
Council.
(5) Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not
constitute automatic approval of the final plat, except that if the
final plat is submitted within 36 months of preliminary plat
approval and conforms substantially to the preliminary plat layout
as provided under § 236.11(1)(b), Wis. Stats., the final plat shall be
entitled to approval with respect to such layout. If the final plat is
not submitted within 36 months of the last required approval of the
preliminary plat, any approving authority may refuse to approve
the final plat. An approved preliminary plat shall be deemed an
expression of approval or conditional approval of the layout
submitted and used as a guide in the preparation of the final plat,
which will be subject to further consideration by the City Plan
Commission and City Council at the time of its submission.
§ 650-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-26
1:581
(6) If after the approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat
by either the Plan Commission or the City Council, the subdivider
creates a substantial change to the subdivision layout, the City
shall require the resubmittal of a preliminary plat in conformance
with Subsection B(1) above. A professional engineer or planner
shall review all plats to determine whether the final plat conforms
substantially to the preliminary plat. If the change is made at the
request of the City, a substantial change shall not be presumed to
have occurred and the subdivider may proceed with submittal of a
final plat.
C. Preliminary plat technical details.
(1) General. A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions
and shall be based upon a survey by a professional land surveyor
(RLS) and the plat prepared on tracing cloth, reproducible drafting
film or paper of good quality at a preferred sheet size of 22 inches
by 30 inches and shall show correctly on its face the following
information: [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(a) Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate
or be alike in pronunciation of the name of any plat heretofore
recorded in the City unless considered an addition to the
subdivision.
(b) Legal description of property to include section, township, and
range numbers.
(c) Names, phone numbers and addresses of the owner, any agent
having control of the land, subdivider, surveyor, engineer, and
designer of the plan and certification of ownership or owner's
authorization of agent.
(d) Graphic scale and North arrow.
(e) Certification of surveyor certifying to the accuracy of the
survey.
(f) Date of preparation and date of subsequent revisions.
(g) General location sketch showing the location of the subdivision
within the United States Public Lands Survey section.
(h) Where a subdivider owns or controls adjacent lands in addition
to those proposed for development at the time of preliminary
plat submission, s/he shall submit a concept plan for the
development of the adjacent lands showing streets, utilities,
zoning districts and other information as may affect the review
of the preliminary plat in question. The City Manager may
waive these requirements where adjacent development
patterns have already been established.
§ 650-26 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-26
1:582
(2) Plat data. All preliminary plats shall show the following information
in addition to that required by Wis. Stats. Ch. 236, Subchapter III:
(a) Exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the
proposed subdivision referenced to a corner established in the
United States Public Land Survey and total acreage
encompassed thereby.
(b) Locations of all existing property boundary lines, structure and
the first floor elevations thereof, drives, visible and known
wells, streams and watercourses, all wetlands, rock outcrops,
wooded areas, railroad tracks and other similar significant
natural and man-made features within the tract being
subdivided or immediately adjacent thereto, within a distance
of 200 feet.
(c) Location, right-of-way width, and names of existing or
proposed streets, alleys or other public ways, easements,
railroad and utility rights-of-way. Parks and other public lands,
permanent buildings and structures, easements and section
and corporate lines within the preliminary plan and to a
distance 200 feet beyond shall also be indicated.
(d) Approximate radii of all curves.
(e) Location and names of any adjacent subdivisions, parks and
cemeteries and owners of record of abutting unplatted lands.
(f) Minimum front, rear, side, and street yard building setback
lines.
(g) Wetland protection buffer areas as identified in the Zoning
Code.
(h) Type, width and elevation of any existing street pavements
within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately
adjacent thereto, together with any legally established center
line elevations, based on the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929.
(i) Location, size and invert elevation of any existing sanitary or
storm sewers, culverts and drain pipes, location of manholes,
catch basins, hydrants, electric and communication facilities,
whether overhead or underground, and the location and size of
any existing water and gas mains within the exterior
boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto, based
on the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. If no sewers
or water mains are located on or immediately adjacent to the
tract, the nearest sewers or water mains which might be
extended to serve the tract shall be indicated by their direction
and distance from the tract, size and invert elevations.
§ 650-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-26
1:583
(j) Gradients of proposed streets, sewer lines (and water mains, if
required).
(k) An identification system for the consecutive numbering of all
blocks and lots within the subdivision.
(l) Sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers,
churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of singlefamily
dwellings.
(m) Existing zoning classifications for land in and abutting the
subdivision, and the proposed zoning plan for the areas,
including required dimensions.
(n) Potential resubdivision of large lots (over 24,000 square feet).
Potential resubdivision and use of excessively deep (over 200
feet) or oversized lots must be indicated in a satisfactory
manner.
(o) Provisions for surface water management including both minor
and major system components, detention/retention facilities,
including existing and post-development one-hundred-year
flood elevations, etc.
(p) Existing contours to National Map Accuracy Standards at
vertical intervals of not more than two feet. Elevations shall be
marked on such contours based on the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 and be so noted on the face of the
document. At least two permanent bench marks shall be
located in the immediate vicinity of the plat; the location of the
bench marks shall be indicated on the plat, together with their
elevations referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929 and be so noted on the face of the document, and the
monumentation of the bench marks clearly and completely
described.
(q) High-water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages and
wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat or located
within one-hundred-feet referenced to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 and so be noted on the face of the
document.
(r) Water elevations of all streams, ponds, lakes, flowages and
wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat and located
within 100 feet at the date of the survey, referenced to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 and so be noted on
the face of the document.
(s) Floodplain limits of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval
flood, as determined by the federal flood insurance study or
other technical document, or where such data is not available
the elevation shall be determined by a registered professional
§ 650-26 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-26
1:584
engineer and the sealed documents shall be approved by the
City's Engineering Consultant. The contour line lying a vertical
distance of two feet above the elevation of the one-hundredyear
recurrence interval flood or, where such data is not
available, the elevation shall be determined by a registered
professional engineer and the sealed documents shall be
approved by the City's Engineering Consultant, within the
exterior boundaries of the plat or located within 100 feet.
(t) Location and results of soil-boring tests within the exterior
boundaries of the plat made to a depth of six feet, unless
bedrock is at a lesser depth. The number of such tests shall be
adequate to portray the character of the soil and the depth of
bedrock and groundwater from the natural undisturbed
surface. To accomplish this purpose, a minimum of one test per
three acres shall be made initially. The City's Engineering
Consultant may require that additional tests be provided. The
results of such tests shall be submitted along with the
preliminary plat.
(u) Location of soil percolation tests where required by Ch. SPS
385, Wis. Adm. Code, taken at the location and depth in which
the soil absorption waste disposal systems are to be installed.
The number of such tests initially made shall not be less than
one test per three acres or one test per lot, whichever is
greater. The results of such tests shall be submitted along with
the preliminary plat.
(v) Location and approximate dimensions of any sites to be
reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, environmental
corridors, drainageways or other public use or open space or
which are to be used for group housing, shopping centers,
church sites or other private uses not requiring lotting.
(w) Any proposed riparian lake and stream access with a small
drawing clearly indicating the location of the proposed
subdivision in relation to the access.
(x) Any proposed lake and stream improvement or relocation and
notice of application for approval by the Department of Natural
Resources, when applicable.
(y) Delineation of all wetlands and shoreland/wetlands based on a
field-staking by the United States Army Corps of Engineers,
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, or other
agency or firm certified to make such delineation by the federal
government or Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(z) Such other information as may be requested by the Director of
Public Works, City Manager or Plan Commission.
§ 650-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-26
1:585
(3) Street plans and profiles. The Plan Commission, upon the
recommendation of the City's Engineering Consultant, may require
that the subdivider provide street plans and profiles showing
existing ground surface, proposed and established street grades,
including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of
the proposed subdivision when requested. All elevations shall be
based upon mean sea level (1929) datum, and plans and profiles
shall meet the approval of the City's Engineering Consultant.
(4) Testing. The Plan Commission, upon the recommendation of the
City's Engineering Consultant, may require borings and soundings
be made in specified areas to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and
water conditions, including depth to bedrock and depth to
groundwater table. The City does not guarantee, warrant or
represent that those soils tested and shown to be unsuited for
specific uses are the only unsuited soils within the City and thereby
asserts that there is no liability on the part of the City Council, its
agencies or employees for sanitation problems or structural
damage that may occur as a result of reliance upon and
conformance with this chapter. Where the subdivision will not be
served by public sanitary sewer service, Ch. SPS 385, Wis. Adm.
Code, shall be complied with and the appropriate data submitted
with the preliminary plat.
(5) Soil and water conservation. The City Council shall require the
subdivider to provide soil erosion and sedimentation control plans
and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer.
Such plans shall follow the guidelines and standards in the United
States Conservation Service Technical Guide and shall be in
accordance with standards in § 650-34Kof this chapter and
§ 660-133 of the Zoning Regulations of the Municipal Code. In
addition:
(a) Tree cutting and shrubbery clearing shall be so conducted as
to prevent erosion and sedimentation and preserve and
improve scenic qualities.
(b) Paths and trails shall not exceed 10 feet in width and shall be
so designed and constructed as to result in the least removal
and disruption of trees and shrubs and the minimum
impairment of natural beauty.
(c) Earth movements such as grading, topsoil removal, mineral
extraction, watercourse changing, road cutting, waterway
construction or enlargement, removal of streams or lake bed
materials, excavation, channel clearing, ditching, drain tile
laying, dredging and lagooning shall be so conducted as to
prevent erosion and sedimentation and to least disturb the
natural fauna, flora, watercourse, water regimen and
topography.
§ 650-26 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-26
1:586
(d) Review of cutting, clearing and earth movement may be
requested through the Jefferson County Land Conservation
Committee, State District Fish and Game Managers and
Forester by the Plan Commission, as it deems appropriate.
(6) Covenants and condominium or homeowners' association
documents.
(a) The subdivider shall submit a draft of protective covenants,
where a covenant is proposed, whereby the subdivider intends
to regulate land use in the proposed subdivision and otherwise
protect the proposed development. Covenants shall be subject
to review by the City Attorney as to any language applicable to
the City's interests. The City shall not be responsible for
enforcing private covenants.
(b) The subdivider shall submit a draft of any proposed
condominium or homeowners' association declarations,
covenants, or other documents shall accompany the
preliminary plat. The proposed documents shall be subject to
review by the City Attorney as to any language applicable to
the City's interests.
(7) Easements. Easements shall be shown on the preliminary plat and
shall be limited to utility easements, drainage easements,
conservation easements, access easements, scenic easements,
mineral easements, solar access easements, or air rights
easements. Easements shall not be used for the conveyance of
street rights-of-way, pedestrian rights-of-way, park or school lands
or other public lands requiring dedication.
(8) Affidavit. The surveyor preparing the preliminary plat shall certify
on the face of the plat that it is a correct representation of all
existing land divisions and features and that there has been full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(9) A detailed site analysis per the following:
(a) The detailed site analysis required by this section is designed
to provide the clear identification of permanently protected
green space areas on a site which is proposed for development.
The detailed survey work required to identify these areas
accurately on a map is not required prior to the initiation of
development concept plans for an area.
(b) A detailed site analysis shall be performed in conjunction with
required preliminary plat documents for any and all properties
containing:
[1] Permanently protected natural resource areas defined as
required protected areas under state or federal
regulations.
§ 650-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-26
1:587
[2] All environmental corridor components and areas
identified by the adopted Comprehensive Plan and/or by
Jefferson County if lands outside the City's corporate limits
are included.
[3] Any other quality environmental lands as determined by
the City Manager or City Forester.
(c) The detailed site analysis shall be shown on a map of the
subject property which depicts the location of all protected
natural resource areas and environmental corridor
components, as defined by the provisions of this section, and as
located by an on-site property survey. The detailed site analysis
shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Scale. Map information shall be at a scale sufficient to
show required data for detailed site analysis. A minimum
scale may be prescribed by the City Manager or his
designee;
[2] Topography. Topographic information is not required for
any property that does not contain steep slopes. For such
properties, topographic information with a minimum
contour interval of two feet is required.
[3] Specific natural resources areas. All areas subject to the
provisions of § 650-26C(9)(b)shall be accurately outlined
and clearly labeled. Particular care as to clarity shall be
taken in areas where different resource types overlap with
one another.
[4] Development pads. All site disruption (including selective
cutting) proposed to occur within permanently protected
natural resource areas shall be limited to development
pads except as required to remove nonnative or
undesirable species as identified in an approved
management plan for the site. Development pads shall be
depicted on the detailed site analysis map, and preliminary
plat of subdivision.
[5] Tree survey. Where site disruption occurs in forested
areas, a tree survey may be required so that the City
Forester and Planning Commission may adequately make
recommendations to what forest areas must be
permanently protected by easement or dedication. The
tree survey should show the species and size of all trees
affected that are six-inch caliper or larger.
(d) Site disruption activities shall not compact soil covering tree
roots, or otherwise damage trees beyond area from which
trees are to be removed. The use of snow fences and other
barriers to outline development pads during disruption activity
§ 650-26 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-26
1:588
is strongly recommended to limit the extent of inadvertent
compaction or other disturbance of earth, and collision
damage to vegetation intended for protection. Such barriers
should be placed no closer to protected trees than a point
on the ground directly under their outer canopy edge. The
use of on-site temporary construction signage is also highly
recommended.
(e) Tree replacement surety. A surety in a form approved by the
City Attorney may be required to secure the replacement of all
trees with calipers exceeding six inches, whose canopies are
located adjacent to disturbed areas, which die within a period
of five years following site disruption, and to secure the
restoration of all mitigation areas identified on the detailed site
analysis.
(f) All mitigation areas and the areas they buffer, related to the
provisions of this chapter, shall be depicted on the detailed site
analysis map with notations provided which describe the
mitigation techniques employed.
(g) Required procedure for submission and review of detailed site
analysis.
[1] The detailed site analysis map shall be submitted to the
City Clerk for review concurrent with the submission of
the preliminary plat of subdivision. A concept plan of the
proposed development may be submitted prior to the
submission of the detailed site analysis map, however, in
no way does the acceptance and/or general approval of the
concept plan indicate the approval of natural resource
feature locations.
[2] The City Manager shall review the submitted detailed site
analysis map for general compliance with this chapter.
Such review may include data sources, including but not
limited to the following examples:
[a] The Official Zoning Map;
[b] Applicable USGS 7.5 minute topographic maps for the
City of Lake Mills and its environs or other USGS
quads and sources of topographic information;
[c] Air photos of the subject property;
[d] Applicable FEMA and related floodplain maps;
[e] Applicable Federal and State Wetland Inventory Maps;
[f] The City of Lake Mills "Smart Growth" Comprehensive
Plan;
§ 650-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-26
1:589
[g] Official Street System Map; and
[h] Site visits.
(h) Information contained on the detailed site analysis map
relating to the boundaries of permanently protected green
space areas (including natural resource protection areas, other
permanently protected green space areas, and required
mitigation areas) shall be recorded as a deed restriction which
permanently runs with the land. Said areas shall be clearly
depicted on any and all site plans required as a precondition
for application for any development permit which occurs
subsequent to any proposed final plat of subdivision.
(10) Conservation subdivisions shall include the following additional
information:
(a) Inventory and mapping of existing resources including the
following mapped to scale:
[1] Topographic contours at two-foot intervals.
[2] United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resource Conservation Service soil type locations and
identification of soil type characteristics such as
agricultural capability, depth to bedrock and water table,
and suitability for wastewater disposal systems. Type and
stability of bedrock should also be noted, particularly in
karst areas and areas with high potential for groundwater
contamination due to fractured bedrock or the presence of
arsenic and mercury.
[3] Hydrologic characteristics, including surface water
bodies, floodplains, groundwater recharge and discharge
areas, wetlands, natural swales, drainageways, and steep
slopes.
[4] Land cover on the site, according to general cover type
(pasture, woodland, etc.), and standalone trees with a
caliper of more than six inches measured four feet off the
ground. The inventory shall include comments on the
health and condition of the vegetation.
[5] Current and past land use, all buildings and structures on
the land, cultivated areas, brownfields, waste sites, and
history of waste disposal practices, paved areas, and all
encumbrances, such as easements or covenants.
[6] Known critical habitat areas for rare, threatened or
endangered species.
[7] Views of the site, including views onto the site from
surrounding roads, public areas and elevated areas,
§ 650-26 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-26
1:590
including photographs with a map indicating the location
where the photographs were taken.
[8] Unique geological resources, such as rock outcrops and
glacial features.
[9] Cultural resources, including a brief description of historic
character of buildings and structures, historically
important landscapes, and archeological features. This
includes a review of existing inventories, including those
the State Historical Society of Wisconsin maintains for
historic buildings, archaeological sites, and burial sites.
(b) Development yield analysis. The subdivider shall submit a table
showing the maximum number of dwelling units that would be
permitted under the City Zoning Ordinance, consistent with
the required minimum lot size, lot widths, setbacks, and other
provisions of the zoning ordinance and compare it to the
number of dwelling units proposed. Land that is undevelopable
because of other laws and ordinances that prohibit
development in certain areas (e.g., floodplains, wetlands, steep
slopes, and drainageways) shall be excluded from the
development yield analysis; however, some undevelopable
lands can be allowed as easements on lots within the
development yield analysis as long as buildable area is found
on each parcel depicted. The yield analysis shall include:
[1] Natural resources. Inventory and mapping of existing
resources found on the development site. This shall
include an inventory of preserved and disturbed natural
features and prominent views.
[2] Yield plan. Development yield as permitted under existing
ordinances (zoning, etc.) for the site.
[3] Site analysis and concept plan. Using the inventory
provided in Subsection C(10)(a) above, the development
yield analysis provided in Subsection C(10)(b), and
applying the design standards specified in Article V of this
chapter, the subdivider shall submit a concept plan
including at least the following information to scale:
[a] Open space areas. An indication of which open space
areas are to remain undeveloped and trail location.
[b] Open space area management plan. Proposed
methods for ownership and management of open
space. A management plan for the restoration and
long-term care of open space areas.
§ 650-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-26
1:591
§ 650-27. Final plat.
[c] Stormwater management. Proposed methods for
stormwater management (e.g., best management
practices), and sewage treatment.
(11) A digital DXF, DGN file, or DWG file of the preliminary plat shall be
submitted to the City on CD-ROM or USB flash drive concurrent
with the preliminary plat submittal, and all information shall be
tied to and referenced to the Wisconsin County Coordinate System
(WCCS) NAD 83 (2011) or current datum or others approved by the
GIS Coordinator. All digital files shall be submitted in accordance
with the minimum standards as approved by the City Council and
amended from time to time. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Submission and review. The subdivider shall prepare a final plat and
letter of application in accordance with this chapter and file 30 folded
copies of the plat with the City Clerk or designee at least 30 days prior
to the meeting of the Plan Commission at which action is desired. In
addition:
(1) A final plat of subdivided land shall comply with the requirements
of §§ 236.20 and 236.21, Wis. Stats., which are hereby adopted by
reference.
(2) The subdivider shall reimburse the City for actual costs and
expenses incurred in reviewing and approving plats. Such costs
shall include engineering and planning consultant expenses
incident to the review of plats, as well as legal expenses incurred or
the value, at the established market rate, of the time spent by the
City Attorney in reviewing the submissions, preparing a developer's
agreement, review of deed restrictions or any other documents
required by such subdivision.
(3) The subdivider shall reimburse the City for costs and expenses
incurred in inspecting and accepting public improvements required
by the plat and the developer's agreement.
(4) All fees for legal and engineer services incurred by the subdivider
under Subsection A(2) shall be included in the financial guarantee
required under § 650-35 or shall be paid to the City of Lake Mills in
full prior to the City of Lake Mills granting authorization to start
work under § 650-34 and prior to the City granting final plat
approval for any future development or stages of development, if
applicable.
(5) All fees for costs and expenses incurred under Subsection A(3)
shall be paid to the City under the terms of the developer's
agreement and prior to acceptance of public improvements or
§ 650-26 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-27
1:592
release of the financial guarantee or any portion thereof under
§ 650-35H.
(6) The City Clerk or designee shall transmit copies to the Wisconsin
Department of Administration (WDOA); the Wisconsin Department
of Transportation (WDOT), if the subdivision abuts or adjoins a
state trunk highway or connecting highway; the Department of
Safety and Professional Services, if the subdivision is not served by
a public sewer and provision for such service has not been made;
and Department of Natural Resources (WDNR), if navigable
waters, shoreland/wetlands or floodlands are contained within the
proposed subdivision. The Departments of Administration (WDOA),
Transportation, Natural Resources and Department of Safety and
Professional Services shall hereafter be referred to as "objecting
agencies."
(7) The City Clerk shall transmit four copies to the Jefferson County
planning agency, seven copies to the City Plan Commission, seven
copies to the City Council and one copy each to the City Planning
Consultant, Building Inspector, City's Engineering Consultant,
Superintendent of Public Works, Parks and Forestry Director, Police
Chief, City Assessor, and Fire Chief for their review and
recommendations concerning matters within their jurisdiction. The
recommendations, if any, of City boards, commissions and
departments shall be transmitted to the City Manager within 30
days from the date the plat is filed. The final plat shall then be
reviewed by the City Plan Commission for conformance with this
chapter and all ordinances, rules, regulations, Comprehensive
Plans and Comprehensive Plan components.
(8) The Clerk shall transmit copies to the WE Energies, Lake Mills
Light and Water, all telecommunications and cable television
franchisees, and Lake Mills School District for review and
information concerning matters within their jurisdiction. Their
comments, if any, shall be transmitted to the Plan Commission
within 30 days from the date the plat is filed.
(9) The City Plan Commission is designated as the recommending
agency with respect to design and layout of the final plat under the
provisions of § 650-32, and the City Council is designated as the
approving authority with respect to all sections of this chapter.
(10) The Wisconsin Departments of Administration (WDOA),
Transportation (WisDOT), Natural Resources (WDNR) and
Department of Safety and Professional Services shall hereafter be
referred to as "objecting agencies." The Jefferson County Planning
and Zoning Commission is designated as an approving agency
when the plat is located in the extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction of the City and is hereafter referred to as an objecting
agency when the plat is located within the corporate limits of the
City.
§ 650-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-27
1:593
(11) The Plan Commission shall examine the final plat as to its
conformance with the approved preliminary plat; any conditions of
approval of the preliminary plat; this chapter and all ordinances,
rules, regulations, adopted regional, county or City Comprehensive
Plans and adopted components which may affect it. If the plat and
plans and specifications of public improvements are satisfactory to
the Plan Commission, it shall so certify in writing to the City
Council; if they are not satisfactory to the Commission, they shall
be rejected by resolution, stating the reasons for rejection and
returned to the owner.
(12) When the City Council receives the plat and plans and
specifications from the Plan Commission and the recommendation
of the Public Works Board, the Council shall signify its action by
resolution; if rejected, the Clerk shall so notify the owner in
writing; if approved or conditionally approved, the Clerk shall
endorse the plat as required by chapter 236, Wis., Stats., and
return it to the owner for recording.
(13) The approval of the final plat by the City Council shall constitute
acceptance of dedication of any public street, open space or other
public areas shown thereon, but the required public improvements
shall not be deemed accepted until the same shall have been
constructed, inspected, and accepted under the terms of the
developer's agreement.
(14) The City Council shall act to approve, reject, or conditionally
approve the final plat within 60 days of filing with the City Clerk,
unless the plat has already been rejected by the Plan Commission
or unless the subdivider agrees in writing to a time extension.
(15) The approved preliminary plat may be final platted in phases with
each phase encompassing only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record at one
time. However, it is required that each such phase be final platted
and designated as a phase of the approved preliminary plat.
(16) If after approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat by
either the Plan Commission or City Council, the subdivider creates
a substantial change to the subdivision layout, the City shall
require the resubmittal of a preliminary plat in conformance with
§ 650-26A. A professional engineer or planner shall review all plats
to provide the approving authority with conclusions as to whether
the final plat conforms substantially to the preliminary plat, and
with a recommendation on approval of the final plat. If the change
is made at the request of the City, a substantial change shall not be
presumed to have occurred and the subdivider may proceed with
submittal of a final plat.
B. Approval. The objecting agencies shall, within 20 days of the date of
receiving their copies of the final plat, notify the subdivider and all
§ 650-27 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-27
1:594
other approving and objecting agencies of any objections; except the
Department of Administration has 30 days to act. If there are no
objections, they shall so certify on the face of the copy of the plat and
shall return that copy to the City Plan Commission. If an objecting
agency fails to act within 20 days (30 days for the Department of
Administration), it shall be deemed to have no objection to the plat.
In addition: [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(1) Submission. If the final plat is not submitted within 36 months of
the last required approval of the preliminary plat, the City Council
may refuse to approve the final plat.
(2) Plan Commission action. The City Plan Commission shall, within 30
days of the date of filing of the final plat with the City Clerk or
designee, recommend approval, conditional approval or rejection
of the plat and shall transmit the final plat and application along
with its recommendations to the City Council.
(3) Notification. The City Council, after it determines to approve the
plat, shall give at least 10 days' prior written notice of its intention
to the Clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000
feet of any portion of the proposed plat, failure to give such notice
shall not invalidate any such plat.
(4) City Council action. The City Council shall, within 60 days of the
date of filing the original final plat with the City Clerk or designee,
approve or reject such plat unless the time is extended by
agreement with the subdivider. All corrections required by the
objecting and approving agencies shall be made to the final plat
prior to placement on the City Council agenda. If the plat is
rejected, the reasons shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting
and a written statement of the reasons forwarded to the subdivider
and surveyor. The City Council may not inscribe its approval on the
final plat unless the City Clerk certifies on the face of the plat that
the copies were forwarded to the objecting agencies as required
herein, the date thereof and that no objections have been filed
within 20 days or, if filed, have been met.
(5) City Council approval. If the City Council fails to act within 60 days,
time having not been extended, no unsatisfied objections having
been filed and all fees payable by the subdivider having been paid,
the plat shall be deemed approved.
(6) Recordation. After the final plat has been approved by the City
Council and required improvements as shall be required by the
Council either installed or a subdivider's agreement and sureties
insuring their installation filed, the City Clerk shall cause the
certificate inscribed upon the plat attesting to such approval to be
executed, and the City shall cause the plat to be recorded with the
County Register of Deeds. The Register of Deeds shall not record
§ 650-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-27
1:595
the plat unless it is offered within 12 months of the last approval
and 36 months of the first approval.
(7) Copies. The subdivider shall file 11 folded copies of the final plat
with the City Clerk or designee for distribution to the City Assessor
and Engineer and Planning, Building, Public Works, Utility, Fire,
Police and other affected departments and agencies for their files.
(8) Installation of improvements. Upon approval of the final plat from
the Plan Commission or City Council, the subdivider may proceed
with installation of subdivision improvements after approval of the
engineering plans by the City's Engineering Consultant, Public
Works and Public Utility Boards, approval of all other applicable
agencies and submittal to the City of copies of all permits and
letters of approval and/or may submit a final plat for review. The
subdivider shall enter into a contract with the City agreeing to
install the required improvements and file with the contract a letter
of credit, cash or certified check, or surety bond meeting the
approval of the City Attorney in an amount 120% of the estimated
cost of the improvements, such estimate to be made by the City
Manager upon recommendation of the City's Engineering
Consultant, as a guarantee such improvements will be completed
by the subdivider or his subcontractors not later than two years
from the date of recording of the plat and as a further guarantee
that all obligations to subcontractors for work on the development
are satisfied.
(9) If after approval or conditional approval of the final plat by either
the Plan Commission or City Council, the subdivider creates a
substantial change to the subdivision layout, the City shall require
the resubmittal of a final plat in conformance with Subsection A. If
the change is made at the request of the City, a substantial change
shall not be presumed to have occurred.
C. Final plat technical requirements.
(1) General. A final plat prepared by a professional land surveyor shall
be required for all subdivisions. It shall comply in all respects with
the requirements of § 236.20, Wis. Stats. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) Additional information. The plat shall show correctly on its face, in
addition to the information required by § 236.20, Wis. Stats., the
following:
(a) Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for all lines, angles,
and curvatures used to describe boundaries, streets, alleys,
easements, areas to be reserved for public use. Dimensions of
lot lines shall be shown in feet and hundredths; no ditto marks
shall be permitted. When lot lines are not at right angles to the
street right-of-way line, the width of the lot shall be indicated
§ 650-27 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-27
1:596
at the building setback line in addition to the width of the lot
at the street right-of-way line.
(b) A numbered identification system for all lots and blocks.
(c) A boundary line survey including the measured distances and
angles and the true distance and bearing between a known
point on the boundary and the nearest official monument which
shall be accurately described on the plat.
(d) Municipal, township, county, or section lines accurately tied to
the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
(e) Radii internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings,
and lengths of all arcs.
(f) Name and location of the subdivision.
(g) Accurate location of all monuments.
(h) Graphic scale and north arrow.
(i) Certifications by attached information showing that all taxes
and special assessments currently due on the property to be
subdivided have been paid in full.
(j) The subdivider shall cause to be set upon the final plat: arrows
indicating the directions of drainage flows for each property
line not fronting on a street on all parcels, and along each
street, as will result from the grading of the site, the
construction of the required public improvements, or which
are existing drainage flows and will remain. The arrows
indicating the directions of flows shall be appropriately
weighted so as to differentiate between the minor and major
(one-hundred-year event) drainage components. The arrows
shall be accompanied on the plat with the following note:
"Arrows indicate the direction of drainage flows in various
components resulting from site grading and the construction of
required public improvements. The drainage flow components
located in easements shall be maintained and preserved by
the property owner unless approved by the Director of Public
Works."
(k) Groundwater table.
[1] Where the groundwater table is equal to or less than nine
feet from the proposed street center line elevation the
subdivider shall place the following note on the plat:
"Subsoil information indicates the presence of ground
water conditions that may require basement elevations
on Lot(s)_____ to be at elevation _____ or higher, or that
§ 650-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-27
1:597
a modified structural plan of the structure's foundation
shall be submitted to the Building Inspector for approval
with the application for a building permit as required
information."
[2] The elevation of the basement as described in the
subsection to be placed on the plat shall be a minimum of
two feet higher than the elevation of the groundwater
table as determined by the City's engineer consultant from
the soils information.
(l) Notarized certification by owner and by any mortgage holder
of record of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of
streets and other public areas.
(m) Setbacks or building lines required by Chapter 660, Zoning,
under the guidelines in § 650-32F of this chapter.
(n) Easements shall be shown on the preliminary plat and limited
to utility, drainage, conservation, access, scenic, mineral or air
rights. Easements shall not be used for conveyance of street
rights-of-way, pedestrian rights-of-way, park, school or other
public lands requiring dedication.
(o) All lands reserved for future public acquisition or reserved for
the common use of property owners within the plat. If property
reserved for common use is located within the subdivision,
provisions and plans for its use and maintenance shall be
submitted with the plat. A note shall be placed on the face of
the plat noting ownership and maintenance of all common use
areas and that deed restrictions are on file at the County
Register of Deeds.
(p) A note on the face of the plat noting ownership and
maintenance obligations of all drainage swales, easements,
retention and detention ponds or other facilities.
(q) Special restrictions required by the Plan Commission and any
other approving or objecting agency relating to access control
along public ways, provision of planting strips, solar access
restrictions, preservation of wetlands, more restrictive yard
requirements or special restrictions for environmentally
significant lands.
(r) Location, area, depth and type of soil absorption waste
disposal system for each building site, if applicable.
(s) Floodplain limits of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval
flood as determined by the federal flood insurance study or
other technical document, or where such data is available, the
elevation shall be determined by a registered professional
engineer and sealed documents shall be approved by the City's
§ 650-27 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-27
1:598
Engineering Consultant. The contour line lying a vertical
distance of two feet above the elevation of the one-hundredyear
recurrence interval flood where such data is not available,
the elevation shall be determined by a registered professional
engineer and the sealed documents approved by the City's
Engineering Consultant within exterior boundaries of the plat
or located within 100 feet.
(t) Where the City Council, Plan Commission, or City's
Engineering Consultant finds that additional information
relative to a particular problem presented by a proposed
development is required to review the final plat, it shall have
the authority to request in writing such information from the
subdivider.
(u) Delineation of all wetlands and shoreland/wetlands based on a
field staking by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, or other agency
or firm certified to make such delineation by the Federal
Government or Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(v) Location of soil boring tests. The number of such tests shall be
adequate portray the character of the soil and depths of
bedrock and groundwater from the natural undisturbed
surface. To accomplish this purpose, a minimum of one test per
three acres shall be made initially. The results of such tests
shall be submitted along with the certified survey map.
(w) Location of soil percolation tests where required by Ch. SPS
385, Wis. Adm. Code, taken at the location and depth in which
soil absorption waste disposal systems are to be installed. The
number of such tests initially made shall not be less than one
test per three acres or one test per lot, whichever is greater.
The results of such tests shall be submitted along with the
certified survey map.
(x) Location of all conservation easements, permanent open
spaces, and special restrictions including but not limited to
deed restrictions, use limitations, and maintenance
agreements as depicted on the detailed site analysis as
approved concurrent with the preliminary plat.
(y) Show the wetland protection buffer areas, as identified in the
Zoning Code.
(3) Survey accuracy. The City's Engineering Consultant shall examine
all final plats within the City and may make, or cause to be made by
a professional land surveyor under the direction of the City's
Engineering Consultant, such field checks as the City's
Engineering Consultant may deem necessary or desirable for the
accuracy and closure of survey, the proper kind and location of
§ 650-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-27
1:599
monuments and legibility and completeness of the drawing.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(a) The maximum error of closure before adjustment of the survey
of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision shall not exceed
that which is permitted by state statute.
(b) All street, block and lot dimensions shall be computed as
closed geometric figures based upon the control provided by
the closed exterior boundary survey.
(c) Where the plat is located within a United States Public Land
Survey quarter-section, the comers of which have been
relocated, monumented and coordinated by the City or
Jefferson County, the tie required by § 236.20(3)(b), Wis. Stats.,
shall be expressed in terms of grid bearing and distance; and
the material and Wisconsin County Coordinate System
coordinates of the monument marking the relocated section or
quarter corner to which the plat is tied shall be indicated on
the plat. The grid bearing and distance of the tie shall be
determined by a closed survey meeting the error of closure
herein specified for the survey of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision and the street, block and lot dimensions shall
comply with the requirements of § 236.15, Wis. Stats.
(d) The City Council shall receive the results of the City's
Engineering Consultant's examination prior to approving the
final plat.
(4) Surveying and monumenting. Final plats shall meet all the
surveying and monumenting requirements of § 236.15, Wis. Stats.
(5) Wisconsin County Coordinate System. Where the plat is located
within a United States Public Land Survey quarter section the
corners of which have been relocated, monumented and placed on
the Wisconsin County Coordinate System by Jefferson County or
the City, the plat shall be tied directly to two or more of the section
or quarter corners so relocated, monumented and coordinated. The
exact grid bearing and distance of such tie shall be determined by
field measurements and the type of monument and Wisconsin
County Coordinate System of the monument marking the relocated
section or quarter corners to which the plat is tied shall be
indicated on the plat. All distances and bearings shall be
referenced to the Wisconsin County Coordinate System NAD 83
(2011) or current datum. The grid bearing and distance of the tie
shall be determined by a closed survey meeting the error of closure
herein specified for the survey of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision and as adjusted to the City's control survey. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 650-27 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-27
1:600
§ 650-28. Minor land division.
(6) Certificates. All final plats shall provide all the certificates required
by § 236.21, Wis. Stats. In addition, the surveyor shall certify that
he has fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter.
(7) Plat recording. The final plat shall be recorded with the Jefferson
County Register of Deeds only after the certificates of the
Wisconsin Department of Administration, the City Council, the
surveyor and those required by § 236.21, Wis. Stats., are placed on
the face of the plat. The plat shall be recorded by the City Clerk
within six months of the date of the last resolution of approval and
not later than 24 months following the date of the first resolution of
approval. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(8) Recording condominium instruments. Prior to being recorded, all
condominium plats are to be reviewed using the procedures
applicable to Certified Survey Maps, provided such review shall be
completed within 10 working days after submission, and provided
rejection may only be based on the applicable requirements of this
chapter and those provisions listed under § 703.115(1)(b), Wis.
Stats.
(9) Duplicate plat required. The subdivider shall provide a duplicate
reproducible copy of the final plat on dimensionally stable polyester
film to the City, with 11 folded copies.
(10) A digital DXF, DGN file, or DWG file of the final plat must be
submitted to the City on CD-ROM or USB flash drive prior to City
signatures being placed on the final plat, and all information shall
be tied to and referenced to the Wisconsin County Coordinate
System (WCCS) NAD 83 (2011) or current datum or others
approved by the GIS Coordinator. All digital files shall be submitted
in accordance with the minimum standards as approved by the City
Council and amended from time to time. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Certified survey map applicability. A certified survey map, prepared and
recorded in accordance with § 236.34, Wis. Stats., and the
requirements of this article, and having been approved by the City
Manager, may be used in lieu of a subdivision plat to divide or
consolidate lands, or dedicate lands, provided that one of the following
conditions is met:
(1) The division or consolidation is of any lot, outlot, parcel, or other
lands previously approved by the City and recorded with the
Jefferson County Register of Deeds as a subdivision plat, certified
survey, or assessor's plat, of any size, which results in not more
than four lots, outlots, parcels, or mortgage descriptions, being
created by any division or successive division, regardless of any
§ 650-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-28
1:601
changes in ownership, within any five-year period. Certified survey
maps may not be utilized to create conservation subdivisions as
defined by this chapter.
(2) The division or consolidation is of any lot, outlot, parcel, or other
lands that lie outside the boundaries of the City and that have been
previously recorded with the Jefferson County Register of Deeds,
including those recorded by a metes and bounds description,
provided any of the resulting parcels are not less than 35 acres in
size and provided the certified survey map results in not more than
four lots, outlots, parcels, or mortgage descriptions, being created
by any division or successive division, regardless of changes of
ownership, within any five-year period.
(3) In the event a proposed land division does not meet the above
requirements, the proposed land division shall be pursued as a
subdivision plat, commencing with § 650-24 of this chapter.
(4) Waiver of survey requirement. When the parcels to be created by a
land division are 20 acres or more in area and are not intended for
development, the Plan Commission may waive the requirement of a
certified survey map.
B. Application requirements.
(1) Preapplication conference. A preapplication conference similar to
the consultation suggested in § 650-13 of this chapter is
recommended prior to submitting the sketch or preliminary map
for approval. Prior to submitting a certified survey map or plat of
survey for approval, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary map
or sketch to the City Manager for approval, which shall be
sufficient in detail to determine whether the final certified survey
map will meet the requirements of this chapter and all ordinances,
rules, regulations, adopted regional, county and City
Comprehensive Plans or adopted plan components which affect it.
At a minimum, all sketches shall be submitted using the City
Cadastral Map as the base map.
(2) Application for approval. After approval of the preliminary map or
sketch, the subdivider shall file 12 acceptable reproductions of a
certified survey map and a written application requesting approval
with the Clerk, along with plans and specifications for any
applicable public improvements and public lands in accordance
with Article V of this chapter.
C. Certified survey map submittal requirements.
(1) General.
(a) A certified survey map prepared by a professional land
surveyor shall be required for all minor land division. It shall
comply in all respects with the requirements of § 236.34, Wis.
§ 650-28 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-28
1:602
Stats. The minor land division shall comply with the design
standards in § 650-32 of this chapter and the improvement
requirements in § 650-33 of this chapter. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
(b) A preliminary map or sketch shall be submitted to the City
Manager for all tracts of land proposed to be divided in
accordance with § 650-28 of this chapter.
(2) Required information. The map shall show correctly on its face, in
addition to the information required by § 236.34, Wis. Stats., the
following:
(a) Date of the map.
(b) Insert showing map of area with property location.
(c) Graphic scale and North arrow.
(d) Name and address and the owner, subdivider and surveyor.
(e) The certified survey map shall include the entire original
parcels of land owned or controlled by the subdivider and
which is proposed for division or consolidation to ensure that
the remaining parcel meets all required lot, layout, access and
other applicable standards.
(f) All existing structures, including square footage and horizontal
offset to existing and/or proposed property lines, and the first
floor elevation thereof, visible and known wells, watercourses,
drainage ditches, existing property lines of abutting property
and other features pertinent to proper division.
(g) Name of adjoining streets, highways, parks, cemeteries,
subdivisions, ponds, streams, lakes, flowages, and wetlands.
(h) Location of the area on the lot where a structure may be built
to afford solar access to the rooftop and south wall.
(i) Additional setbacks or building lines required by the City
Manager which are more restrictive than the regulations of the
zoning district in which the plat is located or which are
proposed by the subdivider and are to be included in recorded
protective covenants.
(j) Additional setbacks or offsets proposed by the subdivider
which are more restrictive than the regulations of the zoning
district in which the plat is located. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(k) Floodplain limits of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval
flood as determined by the federal flood insurance study or
§ 650-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-28
1:603
other technical document or where such data is not available,
the elevation shall be determined by a registered professional
engineer and the sealed documents shall be approved by the
City's Engineering Consultant. The contour line lying a vertical
distance of two feet above the elevation of the one-hundredyear
recurrence interval flood or where such data is not
available, the elevation shall be determined by a registered
professional engineer and the sealed documents shall be
approved by the City's Engineering Consultant within the
exterior boundaries of the plat.
(l) Easements shall be shown on the certified survey map and
shall be limited to utility easements, drainage easements,
conservation easements, access easements, scenic easements,
mineral easements, or air rights easements. Easements shall
not be used for the conveyance of street rights-of-way,
pedestrian rights-of-way, park or school lands or other public
lands requiring dedication.
(m) Exact length and bearing of the center line of all streets.
(n) Exact street width along the line of any obliquely intersecting
street.
(o) Railroad rights-of-way within and abutting the plat.
(p) A drainage and grading plan for all lots on the map bearing a
statement concerning the relation of all drainage swales,
ponds or other facilities.
(q) Special restrictions required by the City Manager and any
other approving or objecting agency relating to access control
along public ways, the provision of planting strips, solar access
restrictions, to preservation of wetlands, to more restrictive
yard requirements or to special restrictions for
environmentally significant lands.
(r) Location, area, depth and type of soil absorption waste
disposal system for each building site, if applicable.
(s) Delineation of all wetlands and shoreland/wetlands based on a
field staking by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, or other agency
or firm certified to make such delineation by the Federal
Government or Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(t) Grading plan for the proposed land division extending 150 feet
from the proposed property lines.
(u) Show the wetland protection buffer areas, as identified in the
Zoning Code.
§ 650-28 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-28
1:604
(v) All lands reserved for future public acquisition. [Added at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
(3) Additional information. The City Manager may require that the
following additional information be provided when necessary for
proper review and consideration of the map:
(a) Existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet
where the slope of the ground surface is less 10% and of not
more than five feet where the slopes of the ground surface is
10% or more. Elevations shall be marked on such contours
based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988
(mean sea level). The requirement to provide topographic data
may be waived if the parcels created are fully developed.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(b) Soil type, slope and boundaries as shown on the detailed
operational soil survey maps prepared by the United States
Soil Conservation Service.
(c) Setbacks or building lines required by the City Manager in
accordance with the guidelines in § 650-28E of this chapter.
(d) Location of soil boring tests. The number of such tests shall be
adequate to portray the character of the soil and depths of
bedrock and groundwater from the natural undisturbed
surface. To accomplish this purpose, a minimum of one test per
three acres shall be made initially. Results of such tests shall be
submitted along with the certified survey map.
(e) Location of soil percolation tests, where required by Ch. SPS
385, Wis. Adm. Code, taken at the location and depth in which
soil absorption waste disposal systems are to be installed. The
number of such tests initially made shall not be less than one
test per three acres or one test per lot, whichever is greater.
Results of such tests shall be submitted along with the certified
survey map.
(f) The City Manager may waive the requirement that the entire
area contiguous to the land outlined in the proposed certified
survey owned or controlled by the subdivider be included on
the certified survey map even though only a portion of such
area is proposed for immediate development. However, this
waiver may only occur when the parcels to be created by a land
division are 20 acres or more in area and are not intended for
development.
(g) A detailed site analysis as described in § 650-26C(9).
§ 650-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-28
1:605
(4) Wisconsin County Coordinate System. Where the map is located
within a United States Public Land Survey quarter section the
corners of which have been relocated, monumented and placed on
the Wisconsin County Coordinate System by Jefferson County or
the City, the map shall be tied directly to two or more of the section
or quarter corners so relocated, monumented and coordinated. The
exact grid bearing and distance of such tie shall be determined by
field measurements and the type of monument, and Wisconsin
County Coordinate System coordinates of the monument marking
the relocated section or quarter corner to which the map is tied
shall be indicated on the map. All distances and bearings shall be
referenced to the Wisconsin County Coordinate System. The grid
bearing and distance of the tie shall be determined by a closed
survey meeting the error of closure herein specified for the survey
of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(5) Certificates. The surveyor shall certify on the face of the map that
he has fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter. A
certification of the approval of the certified survey map by the City
Manager and, in the extraterritorial area, an owner's certificate
noting that the map shall be submitted to the City of Lake Mills as a
required approving authority, shall be inscribed legibly on the face
of the map.
(a) When a certified survey map includes the dedication of streets
and other public areas, an owner's certificate in substantially
the same form as required by § 236.21(2)(a), Wis. Stats., shall
be required.
(b) All certified survey maps shall provide all the certificates
required by § 236.21, Wis. Stats.
(6) Recordation. The certified survey map shall be recorded with the
county register of deeds only after the certificates of the City
Council, Plan Commission, surveyor and owner are placed on the
face of the map. The map shall be recorded by the City Clerk or
designee within 12 months of its last approval by the City Council
and 36 months of the first approval or reapproval will be required.
The City shall not permit the applicant, title company or any other
entity to record the certified survey map.
(7) A digital DXF, DGN, or DWG file of the certified survey map must be
submitted to the City on CD-ROM or USB flash drive prior to City
signatures being placed on the final plat, and all information shall
be tied to and referenced to the Wisconsin County Coordinate
System or others approved by the City. All digital files shall be
submitted in accordance with the minimum standards as approved
by the City Council and amended from time to time. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
§ 650-28 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-28
1:606
(8) Plat notations. A certificate of the City Treasurer stating that there
are no unpaid special assessments or taxes on the lands shall be
included on the certified survey map for lands located within the
corporate boundaries of the City. Any additional notes required by
the City shall be placed on the face of the certified survey map prior
to recording by the City. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
D. Staff review. The City Manager shall transmit copies of the map and
plans to the City Staff, who shall review it for conformance with the
provisions of this chapter, and any applicable Comprehensive Plan,
ordinances, official maps, statutes, rules, or regulations. No map may
be approved unless such map conforms to the provisions of this chapter,
and any applicable Comprehensive Plan, ordinances, official maps,
statutes, rules and regulations.
E. Approval. The City Manager shall then approve, conditionally approve,
or reject the map and plans. One copy of the map shall be returned to
the subdivider with the date and action endorsed thereon; and if
approved conditionally or rejected, the conditions of approval or
reasons for rejection shall be endorsed thereon or attached thereto.
Unless the time is extended in writing by the subdivider, failure to
complete the action required herein within 60 days of application shall
constitute an automatic denial of the map. If the land division is located
within the corporate limits of the City or within the areas outside the
City that are served by the City's sanitary sewer or water, if applicable,
and public improvements are to be constructed by the subdivider, the
approval shall contain a condition that the subdivider shall enter into a
developer's agreement and submit a financial guarantee that meets the
requirements of this chapter and any applicable provisions of the
developer's agreement prior to recording the map.
F. Recording. After the certified survey map has been approved by the
City Manager, the City Clerk shall cause the certificate to be inscribed
upon the map attesting to such approval and the City shall record the
map together with the approving resolution with the Jefferson County
Register of Deeds at the subdivider's expense. The Register of Deeds
shall not record the map unless it is offered within 12 months of its last
approval by the City Council and 36 months of the first approval. The
City shall not permit the applicant. Title Company or any other entity to
record the certified survey map. All recording fees shall be paid by the
subdivider. No building permits shall be issued and no improvements
shall be made until the certified survey is recorded and a copy of the
map showing the recording information is filed with the City Clerk and
Building Inspector. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
G. Distribution of copies. The City Clerk shall distribute 10 copies of the
certified survey map to the subdivider, City Assessor, City Treasurer,
City's Engineering Consultant, City Building Inspector, City Attorney,
§ 650-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-28
1:607
§ 650-29. Extraterritorial plats and certified survey maps.
When the land to be subdivided lies within 1.5 miles of the corporate limits
of the City, the subdivider shall proceed as specified in §§ 650-24 through
650-26, except:
§ 650-30. Replat.
and other affected departments for their files. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
H. Design standards. All minor land divisions shall adhere to the design
standards, required improvements, and construction standards for
conventional subdivisions, as found in Article V of this chapter, unless a
variance has been granted pursuant to § 650-19 of this chapter.
A. Sketch or map not required. A sketch or preliminary map for a certified
survey map is not required to be approved by the Plan Commission
prior to filing a certified survey map.
B. Transmittal responsibility. The town or county clerk or county planning
agency to whom the plat or certified survey map is first submitted shall
be responsible for transmitting copies of the plat or map to designated
objecting agencies and the subdivider shall indicate which one in his
application.
C. Approval agencies. Approval agencies include the City Council, town
board and Jefferson County Zoning and Planning Committee or the
County Board, and the subdivider shall comply with the land division
ordinances of these agencies.
D. Installation of improvements. The subdivider may proceed with the
installation of such improvements and under such regulations as the
town board of the town within whose limits the plat lies may require.
Wherever connection to any City utility is desired, permission for such
connection shall be approved by the City Manager.
E. Improvement requirements. All improvement requirements specified by
the town board or any special improvement district in matters over
which they have jurisdiction, shall be met before filing of the final plat.
A. Vacate existing plat. When it is proposed to replat a recorded
subdivision or part thereof, so as to change the boundaries of a
recorded subdivision or part thereof, the subdivider or person wishing
to replat shall vacate or alter the recorded plat as provided in §§ 236.40
through 236.44, Wis. Stats. The subdivider or person wishing to replat
shall then proceed as specified in §§ 650-24 through 650-26B.
B. Public hearing. The City Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before
the City Plan Commission when a preliminary plat or a replat of lands
within the City or its extraterritorial jurisdictional limits is filed and
shall cause notices of the proposed replat public hearing to be mailed to
§ 650-28 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-30
1:608
§ 650-31. Condominium plats.
A condominium plat prepared under § 703.11, Wis. Stats., shall be reviewed
in the same manner as a subdivision plat under §§ 650-24 through 650-26 of
this chapter.
the owners of all properties within the limits of the exterior boundaries
of the proposed replat and to the owners of all properties within 200
feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed replat.
§ 650-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-31
1:609

ARTICLE V
Conventional Development
§ 650-32. Design standards.
A. Streets.
(1) Arrangement. In any new subdivision the street, block and lot
layouts shall conform to the arrangement, width and location
indicated on the City Official Map, County jurisdictional highway
system plan, Comprehensive Plan or plan component or
neighborhood development plan, if any, of the City, town or county
and shall be so designated as to: be within the capability of the land
and water resources; least disturb the existing terrain, flora, fauna
and water regimen; and meet all the use, site, sanitary, floodland
and shoreland regulations contained in the City Zoning Code and
the Jefferson County Code when applicable. In areas for which such
plans have not been completed, the street layout shall recognize
the functional classification of the various types of streets and shall
be developed and located in proper relation to existing and
proposed streets, to the topography, to such natural features as
streams and tree growth, to public convenience and safety, to the
proposed use of the land to be served by such streets and to the
most advantageous development of adjoining areas. The
subdivision shall be designed so as to provide each lot with
satisfactory solar access and access to a public street.
(a) Arterial streets, as defined in § 650-7, shall be arranged so as
to provide ready access to centers of employment, centers of
governmental activity, community shopping areas, community
recreation and points beyond the boundaries of the community.
Arterial streets shall also be properly integrated with and
related to the existing and proposed area-wide system of
arterial streets and highways and shall be, insofar as
practicable, continuous and in alignment with existing or
planned streets with which they are to connect.
(b) Collector streets, as defined in § 650-7, shall be arranged so as
to provide ready collection of traffic from residential areas and
conveyance of this traffic to the arterial street and highway
system and shall be properly related to the mass transportation
system, to special traffic generators such as schools, churches
and shopping centers and other concentrations of population
and to the arterial streets into which they connect.
(c) Minor streets, as defined in § 650-7, shall be arranged to
conform to the topography, discourage use by through traffic,
permit the design of efficient storm and sanitary sewerage
systems and require the minimum street area necessary to
provide safe and convenient access to abutting property.
§ 650-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-32
1:611
(d) Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract
being subdivided unless prevented by topography or other
physical conditions or unless the City Plan Commission finds
that such extension is not necessary or desirable for the
coordination of the layout of the subdivision or for the
advantageous development of the adjacent tracts.
(e) Arterial street and highway protection. Whenever the
proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to an arterial
street or highway, adequate protection of residential
properties, limitation of access and separation of through and
local traffic shall be provided by reversed frontage with screen
planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear
property line or by the use of frontage streets consistent with
Subsection A(2)(a) of this section.
(f) Public access shall be provided to all navigable stream or lake
shores. Such access shall be at least 60 feet in width platted to
the low water mark at intervals of not more than 1/2 mile as
required by § 236.16(3), Wis. Stats., unless greater intervals
and wider access is agreed upon by the City Plan Commission,
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the
Department of Administration. All platted public access shall
front on a public street, highway, parkway or other public way.
(g) Reserve strips shall not be provided on any plat to control
access to streets or alleys, except where control of such strips
is placed with the City under conditions approved by the Plan
Commission.
(h) Street names shall not duplicate or be similar to existing street
names, and existing street names shall be projected wherever
possible. Final approval of street names rests with the City
Council, upon recommendation of the Plan Commission, Public
Works Board and Police Department.
(i) Access shall be provided in commercial and industrial areas for
off-street loading and service areas unless otherwise required
by the Plan Commission.
(2) Limited access highway and railroad right-of-way treatment.
Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a
limited access highway, arterial or railroad right-of-way, the design
shall provide the following treatment:
(a) When lots within the proposed subdivision back upon the rightof-
way of an existing or proposed limited access highway,
arterial or a railroad, a planting strip at least 30 feet in depth
shall be provided adjacent to the highway or railroad in
addition to the normal lot depth. This strip shall be part of the
platted lots but shall have the following restriction lettered on
the face of the plat: "This strip reserved for the planting of
§ 650-32 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-32
1:612
trees and shrubs and the building of all structures excepting
public or private utility structures hereon is prohibited."
(b) Where commercial and industrial districts are involved there
shall be provided, on each side of the limited access highway or
railroad, streets approximately parallel to and at a suitable
distance from such highway or railroad for the appropriate use
of the land between such streets and highway or railroad, but
shall not be less than 150 feet from the right-of-way of the
limited access highway or railroad.
(c) If a proposed street is to parallel a limited access highway or
railroad right-of-way (not to include bicycle or recreation
trails), and if the proposed street intersects an arterial or
collector street that crosses a railroad or highway, then the
proposed street shall be located at least 250 feet from the
limited access highway or railroad right-of-way to which it is
parallel. See Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Recommended Right-of-Way Separation
Parallel to a Highway or Railroad
(d) Minor streets immediately adjacent and parallel to railroad
rights-of-way shall be avoided and location of minor streets
immediately adjacent to arterial streets and highways and
railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided in residential areas.
(3) Street and pedestrianway design standards.
(a) Minimum standards. The minimum right-of-way, construction
standards and roadway width of all proposed streets and alleys
shall be as specified by the City's standard specifications,
Comprehensive Plan, Official Map or neighborhood
development plan or county jurisdictional highway system plan
§ 650-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-32
1:613
or, if no width is specified therein, the minimum width shall be
as shown on Table 5.1 below, unless otherwise specified in the
Long-Range Transportation Plan.
Table 5.1: Right-of-Way Width
Street Type
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Arterial 100
Collector 80
Local residential 66
Pedestrianways 10
(b) Cul-de-sac streets. Unless otherwise waived by the City
Council, streets designed to have one end permanently closed
shall not exceed 300 feet in length, shall be paved with a
minimum thirty-four-foot-wide pavement, finished with
standard curb and gutter which shall be smoothly connected to
the main street, and shall have a minimum right-of-way radius
of 60 feet and a minimum outside curb radius of 48 feet.
(c) Street grades. Street grades shall be established wherever
practicable so as to avoid excessive grading, the indiscriminate
removal of ground cover and tree growth, and general leveling
of the topography. All changes in street grades shall be
connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent in
feet to 15 times the algebraic difference in the rates of grade
for arterial streets and 1/2 this minimum for all other streets.
Unless necessitated by exceptional topography, subject to the
approval of the City Council, the maximum center line grade of
any street or public shall comply with Table 5.2. In no case
shall the grade of any street exceed 12% or be less than 1/2 of
1%.
Table 5.2: Maximum Permitted Grade
Street Type Maximum Permitted Grade
Arterial streets 6%
Collector streets 8%
Minor streets, alleys and
frontage streets
10%
Pedestrianways 12%, unless steps of
acceptable design are
provided
(d) Half streets. Where an existing dedicated or platted half street
is adjacent to the tract being subdivided, the other half of the
§ 650-32 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-32
1:614
street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. The platting of new
half streets shall not be permitted.
(e) Roadway elevations through floodlands. Elevations of
roadways passing through floodland areas shall be designed in
the following manner:
[1] At least two feet above the one-hundred-year recurrence
interval flood elevation for arterial streets.
[2] At least two feet above the ten-year recurrence interval
flood elevation for minor streets.
[3] At no less than the one-hundred-year recurrence interval
flood elevation for collector streets.
(f) New and replacement bridges and culverts. All new and
replacement bridges and culverts over perennial waterways,
including pedestrian and other minor bridges, in addition to
meeting other applicable requirements, shall be designed so as
to accommodate the one-hundred-year recurrence interval
flood event without raising the peak stage, either upstream or
downstream, more than 0.01 foot above the peak stage for the
one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood, as established in
the applicable federal flood insurance study or other technical
study. Larger permissible flood stage increases may be
acceptable for reaches having topographic land use conditions
which could accommodate the increased stage without
creating additional flood damage potential upstream or
downstream of the proposed structure providing that flood
easements or other appropriate legal measures have been
secured from all property owners affected by the excess stage
increases. Such bridges and culverts shall be so designed and
constructed as to facilitate the passage of ice floes and other
debris. All new and replacement bridges shall be constructed
in accordance with all applicable state statutes and codes and
plans shall be submitted to the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) to assure compliance therewith.
(g) Radii of curvature.
[1] When a continuous street center line deflects at any one
point by more than 10 degrees, a circular curve shall be
introduced having a radius of curvature on the center line
of not less than the following:
§ 650-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-32
1:615
Table 5.3: Radii of Curvature
Street Type
Radii of Curvature
(feet)
Arterial streets and highways 500
Collector streets 300
Minor streets 100
[2] Where the Wisconsin Department of Transportation
Facilities Development Manual (FDM 11-10-5)
recommends a greater radii of curvature, the FDM shall
govern. The length of tangent shall be at least 100 feet
between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
(h) Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced
between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
(i) Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely
placed in the City under conditions approved by the Plan
Commission.
B. Street intersections.
(1) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles as
topography and other limiting factors of good design permit, and
not more than two streets shall intersect at one point unless
approved by the Plan Commission,
(2) The number of intersections along arterial streets and highways
shall be held to a minimum. Wherever practicable, the distance
between such intersections shall not be less than 1,200 feet.
(3) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius
of 25 feet or of a greater radius where the Plan Commission
considers it necessary, or shall be cut off by a straight line through
the points of tangency of any arc having a radius of 45 feet.
(4) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided. Minor streets shall not necessarily continue across
arterial or collector streets, but if the center line of such minor
streets approach the collector or arterial streets from opposite
sides within 300 feet of each other, measured along the center line
of such arterial or collector streets, then the location of such minor
streets shall be adjusted so that the adjoinment across the arterial
or collector streets is continuous and a jog is avoided.
(5) On all streets where sidewalks are required, ramps or openings to
accommodate handicapped individuals or vehicles shall be
provided in accordance with § 66.0909, Wis. Stats.
§ 650-32 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-32
1:616
C. Alleys.
(1) Alleys shall be provided in all commercial and industrial districts,
except that the Plan Commission may waive this requirement
where other definite and assured provision is made for service
access such as off-street loading and parking consistent with and
adequate for the uses proposed.
(2) Alleys shall not be approved in residential areas unless necessary
because of topography or other exceptional circumstances.
(3) The width of alleys shall be not less than 25 feet.
(4) Dead-end alleys are prohibited except under very unusual
circumstances, and crooked and "T" alleys shall be discouraged.
Where dead-end alleys are unavoidable, alleys shall be provided
with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end.
D. Blocks. The widths, lengths and shapes of blocks shall be suited to the
planned use of the land; zoning requirements; need for convenient
access, control and safety of street traffic; topography and solar access.
(1) The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development
contemplated but block lengths in residential areas shall not
exceed 1,500 feet nor be less than 300 feet between street lines.
(2) Pedestrianways of not more than 10 feet in width may be required
where deemed necessary by the City Plan Commission to provide
safe and convenient pedestrian circulation between the individual
lots, streams, lakeshores, parklands or other public areas or may be
required near the center and entirely across any block where
deemed essential by the City Plan Commission to provide adequate
pedestrian circulation or access to schools, shopping centers,
churches, parks, open spaces, or transportation facilities. The final
plat shall contain a special restriction addressing by whom
midblock pedestrianways will be maintained.
(3) The width of blocks shall be wide enough to provide for two tiers of
lots of appropriate depth except where otherwise required to
separate residential development from through traffic. Width of
lots or parcels reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial use
shall be adequate to provide for off-street service and parking
required by the use contemplated and the area zoning restrictions
for such use.
(4) Utility easements shall, where practical, be placed on midblock
easements along rear lot lines.
E. Lots. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated. The lots should be designed to provide an aesthetically
§ 650-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-32
1:617
pleasing building site and a proper architectural setting and for solar
access for the building contemplated. In addition:
(1) Lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles of
radial street lines.
(2) Municipal boundaries. Lots shall follow municipal boundary lines
whenever practicable, rather than cross them.
(3) Shape. The shape of lots shall generally be rectangular, with lots
platted on culs-de-sac generally narrower at the street line than at
the rear lot line.
(4) Lots at right angles. Lots at right angles to each other should be
avoided whenever possible, especially in residential areas.
(5) Large lots. In case a tract is subdivided into parcels containing one
or more acres, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the resubdivision
of any parcels into normal lots in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(6) Double frontage and reverse frontage. Double frontage and
reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to
provide separation of residential development from through traffic
or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation. Where double frontage and reverse frontage lots are
permitted, an extra lot depth of 30 feet or landscaped buffering
shall be provided, unless a greater depth is specified herein.
Landscape buffering shall be to a minimum depth of 15 feet.
(7) Access to public street. Every lot shall front or abut on a public
street for a distance of at least 30 feet and be at least 45 feet on all
proposed culs-de-sac. Lots with an access only to private drives or
streets shall be permitted only with the Plan Commission approval.
(8) Area. Area of all lots shall conform to the requirements of the City
Zoning Code or zoning ordinance of the jurisdiction where the land
division occurs.
(9) Depth. Depth of lots shall be a minimum of 100 feet. Excessive
depth in relation to width shall be avoided and a proportion of two
to one shall be considered a desirable ratio under normal
conditions. Residential lots, fronting on major streets and
highways, should be platted with extra depth to permit generous
distances between the buildings and such trafficways. Depth and
width of lots or parcels reserved or laid out for commercial or
industrial use shall be adequate to provide for off-street service and
parking and outdoor storage required by the use contemplated and
the zoning restrictions for such use.
(10)Water's edge. Lands lying between the meander line and the
water's edge and any otherwise unplattable lands which lie
§ 650-32 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-32
1:618
between a proposed subdivision and the water's edge shall be
included as part of lots, outlots or public dedications in any plat
abutting a stream or lake.
(11)Width. Width of lots shall conform to the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance or other applicable ordinance.
(12) Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use should have extra width
to permit full building setback of at least 30 feet from both streets
or as required by the zoning regulations of the City.
F. Building setback lines.
(1) Building setback lines, appropriate to the location and type of
development contemplated, which are more or less restrictive than
the regulations of the zoning district in which the plat is located,
may be required by the Plan Commission, if under planned
development. Building setback lines appropriate to the location and
type of development contemplated which are more restrictive than
the regulation of the zoning district in which the plat is located,
may be required by the Plan Commission and shall be shown on the
final plat or certified survey map. Examples of the application of
this provision include requiring greater setbacks on cul-de-sac lots
to achieve the necessary lot width at the setback line, requiring
greater setbacks to conform to setbacks of existing adjacent
development or setting special yard requirements to protect
natural resource elements.
(2) Shoreland/wetland and isolated wetland setbacks, in addition to
those required by the City Zoning Code, may be required by the
Plan Commission. See the Zoning Code for more details regarding
the specific wetland protection buffer areas.
G. Special restrictions. Special restrictions which are appropriate to the
location or design of the land division may be required by the Plan
Commission and shall be shown on the final plat or certified survey
map. Examples of the application of this provision include access
control along public ways, required planting and buffering strips, and
prohibition of structures and vegetative clearing in environmentally
significant lands.
H. Easements.
(1) Utility. The Plan Commission or Public Works Board may require
utility easements of widths deemed adequate for the intended
purpose on each side of all rear lot lines and on each side of all side
lot lines or across lots where necessary or advisable for electric
power and communication facilities, storm and sanitary sewers;
street trees, gas, water, streetlights and other utility lines and solar
access. All easements shall be noted on the final plat followed by
reference to the use or uses for which they are intended.
§ 650-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-32
1:619
(2) Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway channel or stream, an adequate
easement shall be provided. The location, width, alignment, and
improvement of such drainageway or easement shall be subject to
the approval of the City's Engineering Consultant; and parallel
streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
Where necessary, stormwater drainage shall be maintained by
landscaped open channels of adequate size and grade to
hydraulically accommodate maximum potential volumes of flow,
subject to review and approval by the City's Engineering
Consultant. All easements shall be noted on the final plat followed
by reference to the use or uses for which they are intended.
I. Public sites, parks, and open spaces.
(1) Purpose. The requirements of this section are established to insure
that adequate parks, open spaces and sites for other public uses
are properly located and preserved as the City grows. It has also
been established to insure that the cost of providing the park and
recreation sites and facilities necessary to serve the additional
people brought into the community by land development may be
equitably apportioned on the basis of the additional needs created
by the development. The requirements shall apply to all lands
proposed for all residential development.
(2) Design. In the design of a subdivision, land division, planned unit
development or development project, provision shall be made for
suitable sites or adequate areas for future schools, parks,
playgrounds, open spaces, drainageways and other public
purposes. Such sites, as are shown on the Official Map,
Comprehensive Plan, Comprehensive Plan component,
comprehensive outdoor recreation plan, Official Map or
component, neighborhood development plan, or that are deemed
appropriate and necessary by the Plan Commission, shall be made
a part of the design. Consideration shall be given to the
preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of trees, marshes,
lakes, ponds, streams, watercourses, watersheds, ravines, and
woodland, prairie and wetland plant and animal communities. The
park shall be improved with the necessary public improvements
required in § 650-33F.
(3) Dedication, reservation, payment-in-lieu-of. Accordingly, each
subdivider of land in the City shall, at the discretion and direction
of the Plan Commission, either dedicate open space lands
designated on the City Comprehensive Plan or plan component or
reserve such open space lands and pay a fee or, where no open
space lands are directly involved, pay a fee. The Plan Commission
shall, at the time of reviewing the preliminary plat, condominium
plat, or certified survey map, select one of the following options and
record its selection in the minutes of the meeting at which the
§ 650-32 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-32
1:620
preliminary plat, condominium plat, or certified survey map is
presented for approval:
(a) Dedication option. Whenever a proposed playground, park,
recreation, or other public open space land designated on the
City's Comprehensive Plan, neighborhood unit development
plan or other Comprehensive Plan component is encompassed,
all or in part, within a tract of land to be subdivided by plat or
certified survey map, the public lands shall be made a part of
the plat and be dedicated to the public by the subdivider. A
minimum of 1,740 square feet of land area shall be dedicated
for each proposed dwelling unit.
(b) Reservation option. Whenever a proposed playground, park or
other public open space land designated on the City's
Comprehensive Plan, neighborhood unit development plan or
other Comprehensive Plan component is encompassed, all or in
part, within a tract of land to be subdivided by plat or certified
survey map, the proposed public open space lands shall be
made a part of the plat or certified survey map and reserved at
the time of final plat or certified survey map approval for a
period not to exceed three years, unless extended by mutual
agreement, for acquisition at undeveloped land prices by the
public agency having jurisdiction and the subdivider shall pay
a fee at the time of the signing and recording of a certified
survey map, or final plat of the subdivision, or part thereof at
the rate and according to the procedures in Subsection I(3)(c)
below. Land not acquired within the three-year time period will
be released to the owner.
(c) Park fee option. If the proposed land division does not
encompass a proposed public park, parkway, open space
conservation site or other open space lands, or if the City Plan
Commission requires the reservation of land under Subsection
I(3)(b) above, park dedication fees shall be required.
(d) A park dedication fee shall apply to both residential and
nonresidential properties and shall be paid to the City
Treasurer at the time of the signing and recording of a certified
survey map, final condominium plat, or final plat of the
subdivision, or part thereof in an amount as from time to time
established by resolution of the City Council to defray the
impact the additional development and residences will have on
City parks, the City trail system, and the preserving of the
City's agricultural, natural and cultural resources within the
City's park system. The amount of the fee shall be set by
resolution from year to year and shall be applied on the basis of
the total number of newly created residential dwelling units,
newly created lots, and per acre of developable land. Such fees
collected by the City Treasurer under the provisions of this
section shall be placed in separate nonlapsing special funds for
§ 650-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-32
1:621
park improvement purposes as allowed by Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0617. The funds shall be separated as established by
resolution of City Council to defray that cost of City park
system expansion and opportunities resulting from additional
development and new residences. The funds shall be separate
from the City general fund and such special funds shall be used
exclusively for funding the acquisition or initial improvement
of land for public parks as per Wisconsin Statutes. The
improvement of land for public parks means grading,
landscaping, installation of utilities, construction of sidewalks,
installation of playground equipment, and construction, or
installation of restroom facilities on land intended for public
park purposes.
J. Private common areas or improvements.
(1) If any commonly owned areas or improvements are to be part of the
subdivision, such privately owned portions of the subdivision shall
have an approved conservation easement or deed restriction that
makes provisions acceptable to the City for maintenance of said
common areas or improvements.
(2) The City shall require assurances that a homeowners' association,
nonprofit land trust, appropriate government agency, or other
responsible party will maintain the common area or improvements
in perpetuity.
(3) If the common area or improvements are to be managed by a
homeowners' association, it shall be a nonprofit membership
corporation whose purpose will be to maintain, improve, and
preserve certain properties within the project.
(a) To that extent, Wis. Stats. § 779.70 provides for the imposition
of a maintenance lien on all properties in the development and
the homeowners' association may impose liens upon each lot
for the cost of maintenance of common areas and
improvements. The liens may be enforced by foreclosure or
direct action against property owners to collect the amounts at
law.
(b) The City of Lake Mills shall be named as a third-party
beneficiary of any such lien. The declaration of covenants shall
set forth the provisions of the maintenance lien outlined above
and also provide for the right of the City to enforce these rights
as a third party beneficiary. The enforcement shall be preceded
by a thirty-day written notice allowing the homeowners'
association to perform the required maintenance.
(c) In the event no performance is made, the City may directly
make the repairs or maintenance and charge the costs as
assessments to individual lot owners.
§ 650-32 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-32
1:622
§ 650-33. Required improvements.
(d) The declarant for itself and its assigns shall waive notice and
protest of tax or assessments that may be levied by the City for
the maintenance or repairs performed by the City. Such
assessment of the pro rata share shall be a lien upon all the lots
subject to the covenants and such assessment shall be included
in the tax bill for each lot.
(e) In addition, the declarant shall post a surety bond in the
amount of $15,000 for a period of five years from the date the
association is incorporated that will ensure performance of the
obligations of the homeowners' association hereunder.
Thereafter, the homeowners' association shall maintain a fund
in a minimum amount of $5,000 for the purpose of reimbursing
expenses related to the operation of the association.
(f) The homeowners' association may not amend its bylaws in any
material respect that would adversely affect the interests of
the City of Lake Mills nor will it dissolve without the advance
written consent of the City of Lake Mills.
(4) If the common area or improvements are to be managed through an
entity other than a homeowners' association, such entity shall post
a surety bond or make other acceptable assurances that the
payment of the costs of the management of the common areas or
improvements will be adequately made in perpetuity.
A. General. All required improvements shall be constructed in accordance
with plans and standard specifications approved by the City Public
Works Board, City's engineering consultant, and WDNR, as may be
appropriate. Such plans and standard specifications shall be submitted,
reviewed and approved in accordance with § 650-34Gof this chapter.
(1) The improving of a dedicated roadway to City specifications must
follow the following guidelines: All land divisions which create new
public ROW shall be required to improve, within said ROW, a public
road to City of Lake Mills' specifications and detail drawings.
Should the road end with a permanent cul-de-sac, land must be
dedicated per City standards and the road constructed to City of
Lake Mills specifications. Should the road end with a future
possible road extension, a temporary cul-de-sac may be
constructed with a temporary easement; however, the size must be
the same as a permanent cul-de-sac. City of Lake Mills stormwater
management requirements must be met should the improvements
add more than 1/2 of an acre of impervious surface. All roadway,
grading, storm sewer, and stormwater plans must be reviewed by
the City of Lake Mills as required by the municipal code. The
following requirements vary by the size of the parcels being
divided:
§ 650-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-33
1:623
(a) Should a land division create parcels with an average size of
less than or equal to 40,000 square feet, the road shall be built
to City specifications that include curb and gutter and storm
sewer.
(b) Should a land division create parcels with an average size of
greater than 40,000 square feet, the developer may choose to
request a Public Works Board decision regarding the type of
improvements required. The only option Public Works Board
will consider other than curb and gutter section is ditch section
construction per City of Lake Mills specifications. Should this
option be permitted, the ditch sections shall be maintained by
the developer initially and ultimately the homeowners'
association. Furthermore, these restrictions outlining the
responsibility of this maintenance shall be recorded in a
developer's agreement approved by the City's City Council
concurrent with the final land division document.
(c) Private driveways within newly created public ROW are not
allowed under any circumstance.
(2) Improvements to be extended to farthest limit of parcel or lot. Any
and all improvements, streets, or utility services required by this
chapter, for the subdivision, certified survey map, or condominium
plat shall be extended to the farthest limit of the parcel or lot as set
forth on the plans and specifications approved by the City. If
determined by the Plan Commission, based on the information of
engineering staff, that a resulting development will cause
increased impacts on existing infrastructure, the cost of all
reasonably necessary improvements on the exterior of a
development, such as expanded roadways, intersections, and/or
utility extensions shall be paid by the developer/owner.
(3) Improvements to be extended to farthest affected area. Any and all
improvements, streets, or utility services required by this chapter,
for the subdivision, certified survey map, or condominium plat shall
be extended to the farthest affected area. If determined by the
Public Works Board, Public Utilities Committee, or Planning
Commission, based on the information of engineering staff, that a
resulting development will cause increased affects on
infrastructure, the cost of all improvements on the exterior of a
development, such as expanded roadways, intersections, and/or
utility extensions shall be paid by the developer/owner.
B. Survey monuments. The subdivider shall install survey monuments
placed in accordance with the requirements of § 236.15, Wis. Stats.,
and as may be required by the City's engineering consultant.
C. Grading.
(1) Cut-and-filled lands shall be graded in accordance with the
approved plans or the soil's angle of repose, whichever is the lesser,
§ 650-33 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-33
1:624
and an approved cover shall be established within 30 days
following completion of grading operations or such additional time
period as may be approved by the City's engineering consultant.
(2) The subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of all
streets proposed to be dedicated in accordance with plans and
standard specifications approved by the City Public Works Board,
and any agency having jurisdiction, including the WDNR, upon the
recommendation of the City's engineering consultant. The
subdivider shall grade the roadbeds in the street rights-of-way to
subgrade.
(3) Where electric and communication facilities are to be installed
underground, the utility easements shall be graded to within six
feet of final grade by the subdivider prior to the installation of such
facilities and earth fill, piles or mounds of dirt or construction
materials shall not be stored on such easement areas.
D. Surfacing. After the installation of all utility and stormwater drainage
improvements, the subdivider shall surface all roadways in streets
proposed to be dedicated to the widths prescribed by these regulations
and the adopted Comprehensive Plans or adopted plan components.
Such surfacing shall be done in accordance with plans and standard
specifications approved by the City Public Works Board, Public Utilities
Committee, upon the recommendation of the City's Engineering
Consultant and adopted by the City Council or its authorized agents.
The second lift of asphalt shall be installed in accordance with policies
established from time to time by the Public Works Board.
E. Curb and gutter. The City Council may require the subdivider to
construct concrete curb and gutters in accordance with plans and
standard specifications approved by the City Public Works Board,
Public Utilities Committee, upon the recommendation of the City's
engineering consultant and adopted by the City Council or its
authorized agents. Mountable curbs shall generally be constructed.
Wherever possible, provision shall be made at the time of construction
for driveway access curb cuts. The cost of installation of all inside curbs
and gutters for dual roadway pavements on the established arterial
street and highway system for the City shall be determined based upon
policies established from time to time by the Public Works Board.
F. Public lands and open spaces.
(1) Grading, topsoil, and restoration. When park land or other lands
are dedicated to the public, the subdivider is required to bring the
dedicated land up to the contours established in the approved
street and utility plans, topsoil with a minimum of four inches of
quality topsoil, seeded and mulched as specified by the Parks and
Forestry Director, and fertilized with 16-6-6 fertilizer at the rate of
seven pounds per 1,000 square feet. The topsoil furnished for the
site shall consist of the natural loam, sandy loam, silt loam, silty
§ 650-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-33
1:625
clay loam or clay loam humus-bearing soils adapted to the
sustenance of plant life, and such topsoil shall be neither
excessively acid nor excessively alkaline. Fine grading and seeding
must occur within one year following issuance of the first building
permit within that land division unless otherwise authorized by the
Parks and Forestry Director. The improved park area shall not be
deemed officially accepted until a uniform grass cover to a twoinch
height has been established. It shall be the responsibility
of the subdivider to maintain the area until the City accepts the
dedication. It shall be the responsibility of the City to maintain the
dedicated area upon its dedication and acceptance by the City.
(2) Water service. All park areas shall be provided by the developer
with a minimum six-inch water service and at least one four-inch
sanitary sewer lateral, all located at the street property line.
(3) Costs. The subdivider shall pay all costs of public improvements in
the public streets adjacent to or within all public and/or park lands.
G. Recreation trails and pedestrianways.
(1) Sidewalks, including curb and gutter, shall be installed in all
residential and commercial land divisions and may be required by
the Plan Commission in industrial land divisions. The construction
of all sidewalks or off-road paths shall be in accordance with plans
and standard specifications adopted by the City Council.
(2) Wider-than-standard sidewalks or off-road paths may be required
by the Plan Commission and City Council in the vicinity of schools,
commercial areas and other places of public assemblage where the
potential pedestrian density may warrant and the Council may
require the construction of sidewalks in locations other than
required under the preceding provisions of this chapter, if such
walks are necessary in their opinion for safe and adequate
pedestrian circulation.
(3) Depending on applicability, the City Manager or City Council, in
approving a subdivision plat or certified survey map, shall
determine the timetable for installation of sidewalk, curb and
gutter as to those lots created by the subdivision plat or depicted in
the certified survey map. The City Manager or City Council also
may require that the sidewalks, curb and gutter be installed at such
time as 50% of the lots created by the plat or depicted in the
certified survey map are improved, or at such other time as may be
determined; provided, however, that in no event may the time for
completion of the sidewalks, curb and gutter be extended for more
than two years after final approval of the plat or certified survey
map is given by the City.
H. Sewage disposal facilities. When public sanitary sewer facilities are
available to the subdivision plat or certified survey map, the subdivider
shall construct sanitary sewerage facilities in such a manner as to make
§ 650-33 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-33
1:626
adequate sanitary sewerage service available to each lot within the
subdivision. In addition:
(1) All subdivisions and minor land divisions within the adopted
sanitary sewer service area shall be provided with public sanitary
sewer facilities, unless a waiver is granted in accordance with the
procedures of Chapter 623, Article II, of the Code.
(2) The subdivider shall install sewer laterals to the street lot line for
all lots.
(3) The size, type and installation of all sanitary sewers and sanitary
sewer laterals proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance
with plans and standard specifications adopted by the City Council.
(4) The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all sanitary
sewers, sewer laterals and sewer appurtenance within the
proposed subdivision, except for the added cost of installing sewers
greater than eight inches in diameter which are necessary to serve
tributary drainage areas lying outside of the proposed subdivision,
unless the oversizing is required to serve vacant lands owned or
controlled by the subdivider or adjacent landowner. In addition, the
subdivider shall pay to the City a sanitary sewer trunk line
connection fee based on the added cost of installing larger sewers
in the total tributary drainage area which shall be prorated in
proportion to the ratio which the total area of the proposed plat is
to the total drainage area to be served by such larger sewers.
I. Stormwater drainage facilities.
(1) The subdivider shall construct stormwater drainage facilities,
adequate to serve the subdivision which shall include, but not be
limited to, curbs and gutters, catch basins and inlets, storm sewers,
road ditches, open channels, water retention structures, water
detention structures, temporary sedimentation basins, and settling
basins. All such facilities shall be of adequate size and grade to
hydraulically accommodate the maximum potential volumes of flow
and shall be so designed as to prevent and control soil erosion and
sedimentation and to present no hazard to life or property. All
stormwater drainage facilities shall be constructed in accordance
with Administrative Rule 02-01 of the Municipal Code, which is
incorporated herein by reference.19
(2) The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all storm sewers
within the proposed subdivision or minor land division, except for
the added cost of installing storm sewers greater than those which
are necessary to serve tributary drainage areas lying outside of the
proposed subdivision. In addition, the subdivider shall pay to the
City a storm sewer trunk line connection fee based on the added
cost of installing larger sewers in the total tributary drainage area
19.Editor's Note: Said Administrative Rule 02-01 is on file in the City offices.
§ 650-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-33
1:627
which shall be prorated in proportion to the ratio which the total
area of the proposed plat is to the total drainage area to be served
by such larger sewers. Copies of all WDNR and USACE permits
shall be submitted to the City prior to any construction or
disturbances of land.
J. Water supply facilities. When public water supply and distribution
facilities are available to the subdivision plat, the subdivider shall cause
such water supply and distribution facilities to be installed in such a
manner as to make adequate water service available to each lot within
the subdivision in accordance with Chapter 623of the Municipal Code.
The subdivider shall make provision for adequate private water systems
as required by the Lake Mills Water Utility in accordance with the
standards of the WDNR and Wisconsin Department of Health Services.
In addition:
(1) All subdivisions and minor land divisions within the water supply
service area of the City shall be provided public water supply and
distribution facilities or community well facilities, unless a waiver
is granted by the Public Utilities Committee.
(2) Where a community well is approved by the City Council as a water
distribution system for the subdivision, the developer shall require
the installation of water meters in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the City and the State Plumbing Code. The meter
water usage shall be the basis for establishing water rates in the
subdivision.
(3) The size, type and installation of all public or private water mains
proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and
standard specifications approved by the Lake Mills Water Utility.
(4) The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all water mains,
water laterals and water system appurtenances within the
proposed subdivision, unless otherwise determined by the City
Council.
K. Other utilities.
(1) The subdivider shall cause gas, electrical power, cable television
and telephone facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make
adequate service available to each lot in the subdivision or minor
land division. No such electrical, telephone or cable television
service shall be located on overhead poles. In addition, plans
indicating the proposed location of all such utilities shall be
approved by the City's engineering consultant.
(2) All new electric or communication lines from which lots are
individually served shall be installed underground within all newly
platted subdivisions or minor land divisions unless the Plan
Commission shall find that the lots to be served by such facilities
can be served directly from existing overhead facilities. Associated
§ 650-33 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-33
1:628
equipment and facilities which are pertinent to underground
electric and communications systems, including but not limited
to substations, pad-mounted transformers, pad-mounted
sectionalizing switches and pedestal-mounted terminal boxes may
be located above ground. Any landscape screening plan required
for such aboveground equipment shall be submitted to the affected
utilities for approval.
L. Street lamps, signs, and trees.
(1) Street lamps and poles. The subdivider shall pay to the City the cost
to install street lamps and lamp poles of a design approved by the
City's Engineering Consultant, at each subdivision street which
intersects an arterial or collector and at such interior block spacing
as may be required by the City Council.
(2) Signs. The subdivider shall pay to the City the costs for installing
street signs of a design approved by the Director of Public Works at
the intersection of all streets proposed to be dedicated, which signs
shall be provided and installed by the City.
(3) Trees.
(a) Planting and location. On all streets in the City of Lake Mills,
street trees shall be planted in accordance with Chapter 594,
Trees, of this Code, unless found to be unfeasible by the Public
Works Board and the City Forester. If terrace trees are found to
be unfeasible, then street trees shall be located within an
easement dedicated for street tree purposes, located outside of
the City street right-of-way on private property. Street tree
easements are dependent on the location of utilities proposed
in the terrace of the street cross-section. The location of
utilities in the right-of-way is variable and dependent on a
number of factors including but not limited to: right-of-way
width; size and depth of the utility facility; soil type and
conditions; construction, maintenance and repair techniques;
surface infrastructure material and location; traffic control
during construction and maintenance; and reduction in service
life of surface infrastructure. All trees located in a required
easement shall otherwise conform to all regulations outlined in
Chapter 594.
(b) Species. All species shall comply with the Master Tree Plan
maintained by the City Forester as outlined in §§ 594-5A and
594-9 of the Lake Mills Municipal Code.
(c) Maintenance. The City shall be responsible for all street tree
maintenance as outlined in Chapter 594, Trees, of the Code.
(d) Cost. Subdivider shall pay a special charge for purchasing,
planting, and maintaining street trees as outlined in § 594-9H
of the Municipal Code.
§ 650-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-33
1:629
§ 650-34. Construction standards.
M. Improvement of existing half-streets. Where a subdivision or minor land
division abuts an existing street or half-street and lots within the
subdivision or minor land division access the existing street or halfstreet,
the subdivider shall be responsible for installing and paying for
half the improvements in the existing street or half-street right-of-way.
The City shall be responsible for paying the remaining half of the
improvements. The City's responsibility may include conducting special
assessments for the benefited properties.
A. Plans required. Simultaneously with the filing of the final plat or
certified survey map with the City Clerk, copies of the construction
plans and specifications shall be furnished for the following public
improvements, if applicable to the land division:
(1) Street grading and surfacing.
(2) Sanitary sewerage and laterals.
(3) Water mains and laterals.
(4) Curb, gutters and sidewalks.
(5) Underground gas, electric and telephone systems, including
streetlighting laterals.
(6) Street signs and lights.
(7) Street trees.
(8) Stormwater management facilities.
(9) Parkland improvements.
B. Approval of plans. The City's engineering consultant shall review or
cause to be reviewed the plans and specifications for conformance with
the requirements of this chapter and the City's construction standards,
which are called "Standard Specifications for Utility and Street
Construction" and which are incorporated herein by reference, and for
conformance with the requirements of Administrative Rule 02-01.20 If
the consultant rejects the plans or specifications, s/he shall notify the
applicant and the City Manager in writing. When the plans and
specifications are corrected, the City's engineering consultant shall
approve them in writing and so notify the City Manager so that the
Public Works Board may review and approve the plans and
specifications for transmittal to the City Council.
C. Commencement. No construction or installation of improvements shall
commence in a proposed subdivision until the preliminary plat or
certified survey map has been approved by the City Council and
20.Editor's Note: Said Administrative Rule 02-01 is on file in the City offices.
§ 650-33 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-34
1:630
approving authorities having jurisdiction have given written
authorization. No preconstruction meeting shall be scheduled or held
until all permits required by the WDNR, USACE, or other such agency
has been received by the City and City's Engineering Consultant.
Inspection fees shall be required to be filed as specified in § 650-12 of
this chapter.
D. Contractors. Contractors providing services for improvements to any
plat as approved by the City Council shall be selected on the basis of
performance standards and shall be prequalified to perform the
required work. Full time inspection shall be required for all
infrastructure and improvements required under this section in
accordance with the terms of the developer's agreement. All such
services shall be fully reimbursed by the developer.
E. Building permits.
(1) Permits required. No building shall be constructed prior to the
issuance of the necessary zoning, building and sanitary permits. No
building, zoning, sanitary or other permits shall be issued for
erection of a structure on any lot not of record until all the
requirements of this chapter have been met.
(2) Inspections. City staff shall have access to premises and structures
during reasonable hours to make those inspections deemed
necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. If, however, he is
refused entry after presentation of identification, he shall procure a
special inspection warrant under § 963.10, Wis. Stats., except in
cases of emergency, when he shall have the immediate right of
entry.
F. Time frame for completion. Construction of all improvements required
by this chapter shall be completed within two years from the date of the
approval of the final plat or certified survey map, unless good cause can
be shown for granting an extension of time by the Public Works Board
and City Council.
G. Improvement plan approval procedure. The following procedure shall
be followed for all subdivision construction/improvement plans and
submittal of revised plans:
(1) Fifteen copies of each required construction plan outlined in
Subsection A shall be submitted to the City Clerk for distribution to
the City's Engineering Consultant, Public Works Department, Lake
Mills Light and Water, and City Planning Consultant. The site
grading and erosion control plan shall be forwarded to the Building
Inspector for soil erosion control. The deadline for submittal shall
be established from time to time by policy of the Public Works
Board. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) In no case will plans be accepted without a developer's deposit.
§ 650-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-34
1:631
(3) In no case will plans be accepted or reviewed by the City's
Engineering Consultant, Public Works Department, Lake Mills
Light and Water, Building Inspector, or any City committee without
first being processed through the City Manager.
(4) In no case will plans be accepted unless all improvement plans are
included with the submittal. Plans will not be reviewed on a
piecemeal basis. The submittal shall include: grading plans,
drainage plan, public improvement plans (including streets,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water and other utilities), landscape
plan and erosion control plan. An individual plan may be submitted
if it is one of the total set of plans and is being submitted as a
revised plan wherein the remaining plans have been previously
approved.
(5) Any preliminary meeting between the City's Engineering
Consultant and the developer shall have prior authorization of the
City and there may be a fee for such meeting, depending on the
scope and length of the meeting.
(6) There will no longer be a review of so-called "pre-final" or
"preliminary" construction plans for review by only the City's
Engineering Consultant. Preliminary plan submittal shall be
transmitted via the City Manager to all City reviewers for their
comments in accordance with the above. These preliminary
comments shall be sent to the City Manager prior to transmittal to
the applicant. Multiple reviews may be necessary and all comments
from the reviewers shall be forwarded to the City Manager with
copies to the applicant. The City Manager shall be the coordinator
of plan review.
(7) Each copy of the plans shall have a drawing and/or revision date in
order for it to be accepted and routed for review.
(8) The City Manager will transmit the full set of "final" construction/
improvement plans to the City's Engineering Consultant. The City's
Engineering Consultant will transmit to the outside approving
agencies. Once the review is complete, the City Manager will
schedule the plans for review by the appropriate committee
(Utilities, Public Works, Finance) when a letter of approval by the
City's engineering consultant is received.
(9) It will be the applicant's responsibility to contact the City, to
confirm the date, time and location of the respective committee
meeting.
(10) Once the City committees and outside approving agencies provide
written approval, the applicant may schedule a preconstruction
meeting through the City Manager.
H. Required plans. The following plans and accompanying construction
specifications shall be provided by the subdivider and reviewed and
§ 650-34 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-34
1:632
approved by the Public Works Board, Public Utility Board, Department
of Natural Resources, Lake Mills Light and Water, and the City's
Engineering Consultant before construction or installation of
improvements is authorized: [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(1) Street plans and profiles showing existing and proposed grades,
elevations and cross sections of required improvements.
(2) Sanitary sewer plans and profiles showing the locations, grades,
sizes, elevations and materials of required facilities.
(3) Stormwater management plans, calculations and profiles showing
the locations, grades, sizes, cross sections, elevations and
materials of required facilities.
(4) Water main plans and profiles showing the locations, sizes,
elevations and materials of required facilities.
(5) Erosion and sedimentation control plans showing those structures
required to retard the rate of runoff water and those grading and
excavating practices that will prevent erosion and sedimentation.
The time span soil will be exposed and plans to protect existing
vegetation (fences, tree wells, etc.) shall be prepared and such
plans shall generally follow the guidelines and standards set forth
in the publication, United States Soil Conservation Service
Technical Guide, adopted by the Jefferson County Land
Conservation Committee, as amended.
(6) Master site grading plan showing the finished grades of each lot in
the subdivision.
(7) Planting plans showing the locations, age, caliper and species of
any required grasses, vines, shrubs and trees.
(8) Additional special plans or information as required.
I. Inspection.
(1) The subdivider, prior to commencing any work within the
subdivision, shall make arrangements for a preconstruction
meeting conducted by the City's Engineering Consultant where all
details regarding the installation of the required improvements
shall be presented and reviewed and shall include provisions for
engineering inspection services.
(2) During the course of construction, the Public Works Director or the
City's engineering consultant shall make such inspections as they
deem necessary to insure compliance with the plans and
specifications as approved. The owner shall pay the actual cost
incurred by the City for such inspections. This fee shall be the
actual cost to the City of inspectors, engineers and other parties
§ 650-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-34
1:633
necessary to insure satisfactory work as set forth in the developer's
agreement.
(3) All inspection fees incurred by the subdivider shall be paid to the
City in full prior to release or termination of the developer's
financial guarantee and prior to the City granting approvals for any
future development or stages of development, if applicable.
J. As-built plans required.
(1) Within 30 days following the completion of all public improvements
and prior to final acceptance of said improvements, the subdivider
shall make or cause to be made a map showing the actual location
of all valves, manholes, stubs, sewer and water mains and such
other facilities as the Public Works Director shall require. This map
shall be in black ink on tracing cloth and shall bear the signature
and seal of a professional engineer registered in Wisconsin. The
presentation of the map shall be a condition of final acceptance of
the improvements and release of the surety bond assuring their
completion.
(2) The subdivider shall also submit the aforementioned "as-built"
plans in a digital DXF, DGN, or DWG file, which shall also show the
final plat or certified survey map. Such submission shall be tied to
and referenced to the State Plane NAD 83/91 HARN Wisconsin
South Zone.
K. Erosion control.
(1) Required. The subdivider shall cause all grading, excavations, open
cuts, side slopes and other land surface disturbances to be so
mulched, seeded, sodded or otherwise protected that erosion,
siltation, sedimentation and washing are prevented in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by the Soil Erosion Control
Inspector under § 660-133of the Zoning Chapter of the Municipal
Code.
(2) Shoreland planting and sediment control. The subdivider shall
plant those grasses, trees, shrubs and vines of a species and size
native to Wisconsin and specified by the City Council necessary to
prevent soil erosion and protect stream and lake banks. In addition:
(a) The Soil Erosion Control Inspector may require the subdivider
to provide or install certain protection and rehabilitation
measures, such as fencing, sloping, seeding, riprap,
revetments, jetties, clearing, dredging, snagging, drop
structures, brush mats, willow poles and grade stabilization
structures.
(b) Tree cutting and shrubbery clearing shall not exceed 50% of
the lot or tract and shall be so conducted as to prevent erosion
and sedimentation; preserve and improve scenic qualities; and,
§ 650-34 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-34
1:634
§ 650-35. Performance guarantee and surety for public
improvements.
during foliation, substantially screen any development from
stream or lake users. [See Subsection K(1) of this section.]
(c) Paths and trails in wooded and wetland areas shall not exceed
10 feet in width unless otherwise approved by the City Plan
Commission, and shall be so designed and constructed as to
result in the least removal and disruption of trees and shrubs.
If a gravel path is warranted, it shall be covered and
maintained with a wood chip surface.
(d) Earthmoving, such as grading, topsoil removal, mineral
extraction, stream course changing, road cutting, waterway
construction or enlargement, removal of stream or lake bed
materials, excavation, channel, clearing, ditching, drain tile
laying, dredging, and lagooning, shall be so conducted as to
prevent erosion and sedimentation and to least disturb the
natural fauna, flora, watercourse, water regimen, and
topography. [See § 650-34J and K(1).]
(e) Review of the conduct of such cutting, clearing and moving
may be requested of the Jefferson County Land Conservation
Committee, the State District Fish and Game Managers and
the State District Forester by the City's Erosion Control
Inspector or City Plan Commission as they deem appropriate.
(3) Existing features. The subdivider shall make every effort to protect
and retain all existing trees, shrubbery, vines and grasses not
actually lying in public roadways, drainageways, building
foundation sites, private driveways, soil absorption waste disposal
areas, paths and trails. Trees are to be protected and preserved
during construction in accord with sound conservation practices,
including preservation of trees by well islands, temporary fencing
or retaining walls whenever abutting grades are altered. In
addition:
(a) Temporary vegetation and mulching shall be used to protect
critical areas and permanent vegetation shall be installed as
soon as practical.
(b) Construction at any given time shall be confined to the smallest
practical area and for the shortest practical period of time.
(c) Sediment basins shall be installed and maintained at all
drainageways to trap, remove and prevent sediment and debris
from being washed outside the area being developed.
A. Developer's agreement and performance guarantee and surety. In lieu
of requiring special assessment of all public improvements prior to the
approval and recording of the final plat or certified survey map, the City
§ 650-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-35
1:635
Council may, at its discretion, permit the execution of a developer's
agreement, as negotiated and approved by the City Manager and
drafted by the City Attorney, and the filing of a performance guarantee
and surety with the City of Lake Mills, which shall be in one of the
following forms:
(1) Surety bond, approved as to form by the City Attorney;
(2) Certificate of deposit, approved as to form by the City Attorney;
(3) Cash; or
(4) Irrevocable letter of credit, approved as to form by the City
Attorney.
B. Hold harmless. The performance guarantee and surety shall hold the
City harmless from the cost of construction, repairing, replacing or
completing any required improvements, and from any other costs
associated with the performance of any other requirements in the
developer's agreement.
C. Amount. The amount of the performance guarantee and surety shall be
based, in part, on the estimated value of the public improvements at the
time of approval of the subdivision. The development may be
constructed in phases as outlined on the preliminary plat, and the
surety amount can be based upon the estimated amount necessary to
construct a particular phase. The amount shall also insure the City of
adequate coverage to secure the satisfactory construction, installation,
and dedication of any uncompleted or improperly constructed portions
of the required improvements, as well as the satisfactory performance
of any other requirements under the developer's agreement.
D. Time period. The amount of the performance guarantee and surety shall
run to the City, shall be for such period of time as determined necessary
by the City to guarantee satisfactory completion of all improvements,
and shall be in an amount equal to 110% of the City's engineering
consultant's estimate for the cost of all required public improvements
and the amount required for complete performance or payment of any
required fees under the developer's agreement.
E. Form. The form of the performance guarantee and surety shall be as
indicated by the City and shall be subject to the approval of the City
Attorney, who may not approve said guarantee unless and until the City
Manager has recommended approval of the amount of the guarantee.
F. Reduction. The procedure and requirements for the request for a
reduction in the letter of credit shall be as determined in the executed
Developers Agreement. The reduction amount shall be based on the
following:
(1) Upon completion and acceptance of more than 40% and less than
75% of the required public improvements and payment of any
§ 650-35 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-35
1:636
required fees, the performance guarantee and surety may be
reduced to 125% of the remaining improvements and any yet
unpaid fees, as documented by the developer's engineer and as
verified by the City's consulting engineer, but in no case may the
performance guarantee and surety be reduced to less than 15% of
the total cost of all required improvements and any unpaid fees.
(2) Upon completion and acceptance of 75% or more of the required
public improvements and payment of any required fees, the
performance guarantee and surety may be reduced to 200% of the
remaining improvements along with the amount of any yet unpaid
fees, as documented by the developer's engineer and as verified by
the City's consulting engineer and the City Treasurer, but in no
case may the performance guarantee and surety be reduced to less
than 15% of the total cost of all required improvements and any
unpaid fees. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
G. Resolution required. No performance guarantee and surety may be
reduced, or released in its entirety, unless the dedication of the
improvements are accepted by resolution of the City Council and the
guarantee and surety are also expressly reduced or released by
resolution of the Council.
H. Attorney approval. The developer's agreement shall be as drafted by
the City Attorney, upon consultation with the City Manager, Public
Works Director, and the City's consulting engineer, and upon final
negotiations between the City Manager and developer. The form of the
performance guarantee and surety, in the case of bonds or letters of
credit, or assignments of certificates of deposit, shall be as drafted from
time to time by the City Attorney, upon consultation with the City
Manager. All surety bonds and letters of credit shall be issued by
companies or financial institutions authorized and licensed to do
business in the State of Wisconsin.
I. Compliance for plat or CSM approval required. No plat or certified
survey map shall be deemed approved by the City without it also being
conditionally approved to include compliance by the developer with this
section.
§ 650-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-35
1:637

ARTICLE VI
Conservation Development
§ 650-36. Design standards.
A. Land suitability. No land shall be developed which is held to be
unsuitable for any proposed use if identified as being environmentally
sensitive. Areas identified as being environmentally sensitive include,
but are not limited to:
(1) All areas mapped as floodplain by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), WDNR, or other public or private
entity.
(2) All wetlands as defined in § NR 103.02(5) of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, including the wetland protection buffer areas
identified in the Zoning Code to serve as a protection buffer.
(3) All areas within 75 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of
navigable streams and lakes, as identified by the City Planning
Consultant.
(4) All areas having slopes greater than 12%.
(5) Areas that are known to provide habitat for rare, threatened or
endangered species.
(6) Burial sites and Indian mounds.
(7) Drainageways that contain running water during spring runoff,
during storm events or when it rains. A twenty-five-foot buffer from
the edge of the drainage way shall be included. Areas determined
to be environmentally sensitive may be included as common open
space in a conservation subdivision but shall not be included in the
development yield analysis. These lands shall be identified as an
outlot or other designation that indicates the land is not available
for development.
B. Development yield.
(1) The number of residential units for a parcel shall be determined in
accordance with the following:
(a) The development yield analysis in § 650-26C(9) shall establish
the base development yield for the parcel.
(b) The base development density may be increased if the
development complies with one or more of the following
standards. Each standard provides a development yield bonus
of the greater of one parcel or 5% of the base development
yield:
§ 650-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-36
1:639
[1] Providing for access by the general public to trails, parks
or other recreational facilities.
[2] Reusing existing buildings and structures which
incorporate rural or agrarian themes, including but not
limited to those sites inventoried by the State Historical
Society of Wisconsin.
[3] Preservation of Environmental features.
[4] Restores native prairie and provides a management plan
for perpetual maintenance.
[5] Improves water quality through stormwater management
standards and practices, that exceed the minimum
standards of Article IV of Chapter 660, Zoning, of the
Municipal Code, and, as approved by the City's
Engineering Consultant and the Public Works Committee.
[6] Provides a minimum seventy-five-foot setback and natural
buffer from all environmental features.
[7] Restores or enhances the functional classification of
wetlands using techniques approved by the USDA-NRCS
and the WDNR.
[8] Provides 70% or more of the gross acreage as open space
in the development. Rights-of-way, stormwater outlots, and
platted private property shall not count towards open
space requirements.
(2) For parent parcels less than 80 acres in area, the maximum bonus
permitted is the greater of three parcels or 15% of the base
development density. For parent parcels 80 acres or greater in
area, the maximum bonus permitted is the greater of four parcels
or 20% of the base development density. All development yield
bonuses shall be calculated to the nearest tenth. In cases where the
total combined development yield bonus results in a fraction, all
such fractions shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
C. Performance standards.
(1) General consideration. Conservation subdivisions must identify a
conservation theme or themes. This theme shall be identified at the
time of the initial application. Conservation themes may include,
but are not limited to, forest stewardship, water quality
preservation, farmland preservation, natural habitat restoration,
viewshed preservation, or archaeological and historic properties
preservation. The Plan Commission and City Forester shall have
the ability to specify which areas shall be preserved.
(2) Agricultural use. If agricultural uses are proposed to be
maintained, lots shall be configured in a manner that maximizes the
§ 650-36 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-36
1:640
usable area remaining for such agricultural uses, with appropriate
buffers between agricultural uses and residential structures.
(3) Residential lot requirements. Residential parcels located within
conservation subdivisions shall conform to the PDD Planned
Development District zoning regulations and the following:
(a) Lots shall be in conformance with the design standards
identified in § 650-32E(1), (6), (7) and (12).
(b) All lots and dwellings shall be grouped into clusters of no more
than 20 dwelling units. Said clusters shall:
[1] Be located to minimize negative impacts on the natural,
scenic, and cultural resources of the site, and minimize
conflicts between incompatible uses.
[2] Avoid encroaching on rare plant communities, high-quality
environmental resources, or endangered resources as may
be identified by the WDNR.
(c) Lots shall be configured to minimize the amount of road length
required for the subdivision.
(d) All lots shall abut open space on at least one side. A minor
street may separate lots from said open space.
(e) Lots shall be oriented around one or more of the following:
[1] A central green or open space.
[2] A physical amenity such as a meadow, stand of trees, or
other natural or restored feature.
(4) Open space standards. Open space shall be designated as part of
the development.
(a) The minimum required open space is 60% of the gross acreage
less lands granted for density bonuses as stated in Subsection
B of this section. Rights-of-way, stormwater outlots, and platted
private property shall not count towards open space
requirements.
(b) All open space shall be owned and maintained under one of the
alternatives listed in Subsection C(6) below, and as approved
by the City.
(c) The uses within the open space shall be accessible to the
residents of the development. These uses may also be available
to the general public providing the proper approvals are
received. The required open space shall be undivided and
restricted in perpetuity from future development, as specified
in Subsection C(5) below.
§ 650-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-36
1:641
(d) That portion of open space designed to provide plant and
animal habitat shall be kept as intact as possible. Trails shall
be designed to avoid fragmenting these areas.
(e) Accessible open space in upland areas shall be available for
recreational uses such as trails, play fields, or community
gardens but should be designed in a manner that avoids
adversely impacting archeological sites.
(f) A pathway system connecting open space areas accessible to
neighborhood residents, and connecting these areas to
neighborhood streets and to planned or developed trails on
adjacent parcels shall be identified in the plan.
(g) The following areas or structures may be located within the
open space area and shall be counted toward the overall open
space percentage required:
[1] Parking areas for access to and use of the open space
developed at a scale limited to the potential users of the
open space.
[2] Privately held buildings or structures, provided they are
accessory to the use of the open space.
[3] Shared septic systems and shared water systems.
(5) Ownership and maintenance of common areas. The designated
common open space and common facilities may be owned and
managed by one or a combination of the following:
(a) An incorporated homeowners' association. Membership in the
association is mandatory for all purchasers of homes in the
development and their successors. The homeowners'
association bylaws, guaranteeing continuing maintenance of
the open space and other common facilities, and the
declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions of the
homeowners' association shall be submitted for approval to the
City as part of the information required for the preliminary
plat.
(b) A condominium association established in accordance with the
Condominium Ownership Act, Chapter 703 of the Wisconsin
Statutes. If the common open space and facilities is to be held
under the Condominium Ownership Act, Chapter 703 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, the condominium instruments shall
identify the restrictions placed upon the use and enjoyment of
the common open space. All common open space shall be held
as a "common element" as defined in § 703.02 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
§ 650-36 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-36
1:642
§ 650-37. Required improvements.
(c) A nonprofit conservation organization. If the common open
space is to be held by a nonprofit conservation organization,
the organization must be acceptable to the City of Lake Mills.
The conveyance to the nonprofit conservation organization
must contain appropriate provisions for reversion in the event
that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to uphold
the terms of the conveyance.
(d) The City of Lake Mills or another governmental body
empowered to hold an interest in real property. The City may
accept the common open space, provided the common open
space is accessible to the public and provided the City agrees
to and has access to maintain the common open space.
(e) An individual who will use the land for open space purposes as
provided by a conservation easement.
(6) Streets. Right-of-way widths and design standards shall be in
conformance with design standards identified in Subsection C(3)
and (4).
A. General. In accordance with § 650-33A A.
B. Survey monuments. In accordance with § 650-33B.
C. Grading. In accordance with § 650-33C.
D. Surfacing. In accordance with § 650-33B.
E. Curb and gutter. In accordance with § 650-33E.
F. Recreation trails and pedestrian-ways. In accordance with § 650-33G.
G. Sewage disposal facilities. When private sanitary sewer facilities are
proposed to serve a conservation subdivision, such facilities may be
located on the individual parcel serviced by the facility, or may be
located within common open space areas subject to recording proper
easements for use and maintenance. When public sanitary sewer
facilities are available to the conservation subdivision, the subdivider
shall construct sanitary sewerage facilities in accordance with
§ 650-33H.
H. Stormwater drainage facilities. In accordance with § 650-33I.
I. Water supply facilities. In accordance with § 650-33J.
J. Other utilities. In accordance with § 650-33K.
K. Street lamps, signs, and trees. In accordance with S§ 650-33L.
L. Improvement to Existing Half-Streets. In accordance with § 650-33M.
§ 650-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-38
1:643
§ 650-38. Construction standards.
All construction and/or installation of improvements shall commence in a
proposed Conservation Subdivision in accordance with the standards as
outlined in § 650-33 of this chapter.
§ 650-39. Performance guarantee and surety for public
improvements.
A developer's agreement and performance guarantee and surety may be
required in lieu of requiring special assessment of all public improvements
prior to the approval and recording of the final plat or certified survey map
for a conservation subdivision in accordance with § 650-35 of this chapter.
§ 650-38 LAKE MILLS CODE § 650-39
1:644
Chapter 660
ZONING REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plan Commission — See Ch. 27, Art. III.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 27, Art.
IV.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 271.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 286.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 362.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 470.
Nuisances — See Ch. 479.
Public market — See Ch. 512.
Sidewalk cafes — See Ch. 548.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 565.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 650.
§ 650-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-39
1:645

ARTICLE I
Introduction and Definitions
§ 660-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the "City of Lake Mills
Zoning Ordinance" except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as
"this chapter."
§ 660-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by §§ 62.23(7),
62.231, 87.30 and 281.31of the State of Wisconsin Statutes. The references
to specific statutes provided within the body of this chapter are solely a
means of assisting the reader. Such references are not to be considered
as all inclusive and shall in no manner be construed so as to limit the
application or interpretation of this chapter.
§ 660-3. Purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, morals and
the general welfare of the people of the City of Lake Mills. The provisions
hereof shall be liberally construed in favor of the City and as minimum
requirements for the purposes stated. Among other purposes, such
provisions are intended, in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, to:
A. Lessen congestion in the streets;
B. Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
C. Promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare;
D. Provide adequate standards of light, air, solar access, privacy, and open
space;
E. Avoid undue concentration of population;
F. Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks, and other public requirements;
G. Foster a more rational pattern of relationship between residential,
business, commercial, and manufacturing uses for the mutual benefit of
all;
H. Promote the development and redevelopment of land and structures in
the City of Lake Mills;
I. Prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by
regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land
surrounding them;
§ 660-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-3
1:647
§ 660-4. Separability and nonliability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Lake Mills City Council that
the several provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance with the
following:
§ 660-5. Abrogation.
It is not intended that this chapter abrogate or interfere with any
constitutionally protected vested right. It is also not intended that this
chapter abrogate, repeal, annul, impair or interfere with any existing
easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or
permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
§ 660-6. Rules of interpretation.
J. Protect the character and the stability of the residential, business and
manufacturing areas within the City and promote the orderly and
beneficial development of such areas;
K. Regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the area of
open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light
and air, and to protect the public health;
L. Apply reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform therein; and
M. Define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers
and bodies as provided in this chapter.
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions of this chapter not specifically included in said judgment.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any portion of this chapter to a particular property, water,
building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of
said provision to any other property, water, building, or structure not
specifically included in said judgment.
C. If any requirement or limitation attached to an authorization given
under this chapter is found invalid, it shall be presumed that the
authorization would not have been granted without the requirement or
limitation and, therefore, said authorization shall also be invalid.
D. The City does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas
designated as floodlands will be subject to periodic inundation and
hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the City, its
officers, employees, agents, or representatives for any flood damages,
sanitation problems, or structural damages.
§ 660-3 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-6
1:648
§ 660-7. Jurisdiction.
This chapter is applicable to all territory located within the corporate
limits of the City of Lake Mills, those properties governed by an executed
boundary agreement, or which are included in areas subject to
extraterritorial zoning.
§ 660-8. Scope.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements adopted to promote the health, safety, morals, and
general welfare of the City. The provisions shall be liberally interpreted
in favor of the City and shall not be construed to be a limitation or
repeal of any other power now possessed by the City of Lake Mills.
B. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter, upon the
use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings, are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by
any other provision of this chapter or of any other law, ordinance,
resolution, rule, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are
more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements
shall govern.
C. No structure, land, water or air shall hereafter be used and no structure
or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered
without a zoning permit, except structures not requiring a building or
zoning permit (swing set, clothesline, etc.), and without full compliance
with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable local, county
and state regulations.
D. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant, or any other private agreement, provided that
where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants, or
other private agreements, the requirements of this chapter shall
govern.
E. No building, structure, or use which was not lawfully existing at the
time of the adoption of this chapter shall become or be made lawful
solely by reason of the adoption of this chapter; and to the extent that,
and in any manner that, said unlawful building, structure, or use is in
conflict with the requirements of this chapter, said building, structure,
or use remains unlawful hereunder.
F. Except as provided in this chapter, under provisions for § 660-60,
Nonconforming uses, § 660-58, Substandard lots, and § 660-59,
Nonconforming structures, no building, structure, development or
premises shall be hereinafter used or occupied and no applicable
permit granted that does not conform to the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 660-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-8
1:649
§ 660-9. Reenactment and repeal.
§ 660-10. When effective.
All plans approved under previous zoning regulations shall be valid and
may be used to obtain permits for a period of not more than six months
after the effective date of this chapter, except where subject to developer's
agreement provisions. This chapter shall become effective upon passage
and publication according to law.
§ 660-11. Word usage.
Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
includes the plural number and the plural number includes the singular
number; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall"
is mandatory and not directory. Any words not herein defined shall be
construed as defined in the state and City building codes.
A. All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established
hereafter, and all structural alterations or relocation of existing
buildings or changes of existing uses occurring hereafter shall be
subject to all regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the
zoning districts in which such buildings, uses, or land shall be located.
B. Where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in
accordance with law prior to the effective date of this chapter, and
provided that construction is begun within six months of such effective
date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or structure
may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis
of which the building permit has been issued, and further, may upon
completion be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for
which originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of
§ 660-58, Substandard lots, and § 660-59, Nonconforming structures.
A. This chapter, in part, carries forward by reenactment some of the
provisions of the regulations governing zoning and related matters,
being previously known collectively as the "Zoning Code," Title 10 of
the Code of Ordinances for the City of Lake Mills, adopted prior to the
effective date of this chapter. It is not the intention of this chapter to
repeal, but rather to reenact and continue in force such existing
provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued there under
are preserved and may be enforced, unless explicitly surrendered by
specific provisions of this chapter or altered by the Official Zoning Map.
B. All provisions of Title 10 of the City of Lake Mills Code of Ordinances
which are not reenacted herein are hereby repealed.
C. The adoption of this chapter shall not adversely affect the City's right to
prosecute any violation of the predecessor zoning ordinance, provided
the violation occurred while that ordinance was in effect.
§ 660-8 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:650
§ 660-12. Definitions.
A. Abbreviations and symbols. The following abbreviations are used in this
chapter and are intended to have the following meanings:
Abbreviation Definition
AC/ac Acre(s)
ADT Average daily traffic
APF Adequate public facilities
CAPF Certificate of adequate public facilities
dB Decibel
DBH Diameter at breast height, used in measuring
tree size
d.u. Dwelling unit
FAR Floor area ratio
FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency
FT/ft Foot or feet
g.d. gross density
GFAR Gross floor area ratio
GSR Greenspace ratio
GSA Gross site area
ISR Impervious surface ratio
LBS or lbs Pounds
LEQ Equivalent A-weighted sound level
LSR Landscape surface ratio
MGD Maximum gross density
n.d. Net density
NFAR Net floor area ratio
OHWM Ordinary high water mark
OSR Open space ratio
ROW Right-of-way
SF/sf Square foot or square feet
TND Traditional neighborhood development
TOT Time of travel
UDC State of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code
USACE United States Army Corps of Engineers
USHUD United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development
WisDOT Wisconsin Department of Transportation
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:651
Abbreviation Definition
WDOA Wisconsin Department of Administration
WDNR Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
= Equal
< Is less than
< Is less than or equal to
> Is greater than
> Is greater than or equal to
B. Specific words and phrases. Certain words used to explain land use
regulations require special usage. Other words and terms must be
defined as to the manner in which they relate to zoning and land use.
Words not defined in this section shall be construed in the generally
acceptable meaning as defined in the most recent edition of Webster's
Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary. The following words, terms and
phrases, wherever they occur in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them by this section. Definitions provided by this section
include:
A ZONES — Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map
which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be
numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A zones may or may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a
given area.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level in decibels
as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The
level to read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL UNIT (GRANNY FLAT) — An accessory
dwelling unit established in conjunction with, and clearly subordinate
to, the principal dwelling unit on a single-family zoned lot. Accessory
residential units are typically located at the rear of a lot, and are
typically located above an attached or detached garage that serves the
primary resident, but may be located within the single-family dwelling.
Such units may contain a separate kitchen, dining area, bathroom,
living area, sleeping area, laundry facilities, and recreation areas,
including exterior porches, patios, decks and parking areas. Separate
outdoor access to the unit is required; however, external stairs serving
as the primary access are prohibited. In addition, separate access to
the garage or an internal physical connection to the principal dwelling
unit may be provided. A residence with an accessory dwelling unit may
not be used in the same manner as a duplex. An accessory dwelling unit
shall only be permitted by conditional use within specified residential
zoning districts.21
21.Editor's Note: The original definition of "accessory structure or use," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:652
ACRE, GROSS — The total area of a parcel of land. One acre equals
43,560 square feet.
ACRE, NET — A measure of developable land area after excluding
dedicated rights-of-way, waterways, wetlands, and other undevelopable
natural features.
ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES — Utilities, roads and other
infrastructure required by the Municipal Code and adopted policies of
the City Council which are in place, or planned for within 24 months
of a petition, to serve the most suitable ultimate development of a
property as depicted in the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT — In accordance with the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), "affordable" is
housing that costs no more than 30% of a household's monthly income.
That means rent and utilities in an apartment or the monthly mortgage
payment and housing expenses for a homeowner should be less than
30% of a household's monthly income to be considered affordable.
AGRICULTURE AND RELATED ACTIVITIES — The use of land for
agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, grazing land, animal
and poultry husbandry, greenhouses, nurseries, livestock and poultry
confinement, and including the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating, storing, and shipping of farm products. The use of the word
"farm" shall have the same meaning as the word "agriculture."
AH ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
ALLEY — A public or private right-of-way usually of reduced width
that affords only secondary access to a lot, block, or parcel of land.
[§ 236.02(1), Wis. Stats.]
ALTER — Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior
architectural features of a structure, including but not limited to the
erection, construction, addition, demolition or removal of any structure
or part of a structure. Normal maintenance of existing exterior features
or materials, including cleaning and painting, shall not fall under this
definition of "alter."
ALTERATION — An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change
or modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to
electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other
systems within a structure.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members
of a building or any substantial change in the roof structure or in the
exterior walls.
ALTERATION, WETLAND — Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging,
ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization
measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area.
ANIMAL UNIT — A measure which represents a common denominator
for the purpose of defining a husbandry or intensive agricultural land
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:653
use. The animal unit measure relates to the maximum carrying capacity
of one acre of land and is related to the amount of feed various species
consume, and the amount of waste they produce. The following table
indicates the number of common farm species and their corresponding
animal unit value.
Table 1.1: Animal Unit
Livestock Type Animal Unit
Dairy cattle Milking and dry cows 1.4
Heifers (800 pounds to 1,200
pounds)
1.1
Heifers (400 pounds to 800
pounds)
0.6
Calves (< 400 pounds) 0.2
Beef Steer or cows (>600 pounds) 1.0
Calves (<600 pounds) 0.5
Bulls (each) 1.4
Swine Pigs 0.4
Sows 0.4
Boars 0.5
Poultry Layers 0.033
Fryers 0.033
Ducks 0.2
Turkeys 0.2
Other Sheep/lamb 0.1
Goats 0.1
Horse 1.0
AO ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
APARTMENT — A part of a building consisting of a room or rooms
designed for residential occupancy by a single family or an individual.
The name apartment implies the ability to rent or lease the unit for a
specified amount of time.[Amended 6-6-2006 by Ord. 979]
AREA OF SHADOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/
AH, or VO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
with a 1% or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
BASE FLOOD — Means the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS
and depicted on a FIRM.
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:654
BASEMENT — A space having 1/2 or more of its floor-to-ceiling height
above the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-toceiling
height of not less than 6 1/2 feet.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A lodging establishment
that has rooms for rent, is the owner's personal residence, is occupied
by the owner at the time of rental, and in which the only meal served to
guests is breakfast.
BOARDING, LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE — A building other than
a hotel or motel or bed-and-breakfast establishment wherein sleeping
accommodations and other services may be provided for transients or
nontransients not members of the family occupying the dwelling unit.
BOATHOUSE — As defined in § 30.01(1d), Wis. Stats., means a
structure with one or more walls or sides that has been used for one
or more years for the storage of watercraft and associated materials,
regardless of the current use of the structure.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
BUFFERYARD — Any permitted combination of distance, vegetation,
fencing and berming which results in a reduction of visual and other
interaction with an adjoining property.
BUILDING — See "structure."
BUILDING COVERAGE — The total horizontal area or footprint of
all covered principal and accessory structures on a site, measured
from the outside dimensions of the exterior walls. Accessory structures
included in the calculation of building coverage shall include covered
garages, guest houses, carports, greenhouses, bath houses, equipment/
tool shed, and enclosed patios such as gazebos. The calculation of
building coverage shall exclude the following: projections such as
cornices, eaves, uncovered entrance steps, at-grade walkways, patios,
driveways, uncovered parking areas, uncovered and unenclosed
swimming pools, walls, fences, and covered but unenclosed
patios.[Amended 11-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1197A]
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The volume of space for building or
construction as defined by the minimum setbacks and the maximum
allowable building height.
BUILDING FRONT — That exterior wall of a building which faces the
front lot line of the lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — See "height, building."
BUILDING LINE — A line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or
public or private road right-of-way line, located a sufficient distance
from either to provide the minimum yards required by this chapter.
The building line determines the area in which buildings are permitted
subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter. This is also referred
to as a "setback."
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:655
BUILDING SEPARATION — The narrowest distance between two
buildings. See "minimum building separation."
BUILDING SIZE — The total gross floor area of a building. See
"maximum building size."
BULK — The combination of building height, size, and location on a lot.
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
WDNR pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and which allows limited filling
between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark,
except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this
chapter.
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
WDNR pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11., and which allows limited filling
between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark,
except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this
chapter.
BUSINESS, CONVENIENT CASH — A business licensed pursuant to
Wis. Stats. § 218.05 or 138.09, engaged in the "payday loan business,"
"title loan business," "currency exchange business" (also known as
"check cashing"), or any other substantially similar business.
Convenient cash businesses do not include financial institutions as
defined below. For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions
apply:
BUSINESS, CURRENCY EXCHANGE — In accordance with § 218.05,
Wis. Stats., any business except banks incorporated under the laws
of this state and national banks organized pursuant to the laws of
the United States and any credit union operating under Ch. 186, Wis.
Stats., pursuant to a certificate of authority from the Wisconsin
Commissioner of credit unions, engaged in the business of and
providing facilities for cashing checks, drafts, money orders and all
other evidences of money acceptable to such community currency
exchange for a fee, service charge or other consideration. This term
does not include any person engaged in the business of transporting
for hire bullion, currency, securities, negotiable or nonnegotiable
documents, jewels or other property of great monetary value nor any
person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at
retail nor any person licensed to practice a profession or licensed to
engage in any business in this state, who in the course of such business
or profession and, as an incident thereto, cashes checks, drafts, money
orders or other evidences of money.
BUSINESS, PAYDAY LOAN — A business that provides unsecured loans
with an initial term of 91 days or less in which the amount borrowed
does not exceed $2,000 and is usually for a period from the time of
the loan until the borrowers next payday for which the lender charges
either fees or interest for the loan.
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:656
BUSINESS, TITLE LOAN — Any business providing loans to individuals
in exchange for receiving title to the borrower's motor vehicle as
collateral.
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent
overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or
represented as a camping area.
CAMPING UNIT — See "recreational vehicle."
CERTIFICATE OF ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES (CAPF) — Written
determination by the Zoning Administrator that the requirements of
this chapter pertaining to adequate public facilities are achieved.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification that the construction
and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor
of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and
banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
COMMERCIAL INDOOR LODGING — Commercial indoor lodging
facilities include land uses which provide overnight or other shortterm
housing to transients in individual rooms or suites of rooms in
exchange for compensation. Such land uses may provide in-room or
in-suite kitchens, private bathrooms, or indoor recreational facilities
for the exclusive use of their customers. Such land uses may also be
considered tourist rooming houses.
COMMUNICATION TOWER — Self-supporting, telescoping, monopole,
or guyed communication antenna towers systems and accessories for
telecommunications.
COMMUNITY CHARACTER — The impression which an area makes in
regard to the type, intensity, density, quality, appearance, and age of
development.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — An extensively developed plan, map, or
other document pertaining to planning and adopted by the City Council
or the Plan Commission in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.1001 which
may pertain to the division of lands, including the Comprehensive
Development Plan, the Official Map, comprehensive utility plans, and
other planning documents Including proposals for future land use,
transportation, urban redevelopment and public facilities. Devices for
the implementation of these plans, such as ordinances pertaining to
zoning, Official Map, land division, and building development and
capital improvement plans shall be considered as planning documents
within this definition.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of property ownership providing for
individual ownership of a unit within a structure where the land, other
parts of the structure, and other facilities are held in common with
other owners pursuant to Chapter 703, Wis. Stats.
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:657
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a
building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to
plumbing and electrical utilities.
DAMAGE, SUBSTANTIAL — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized
assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A licensed facility where a person, other than
a relative or guardian, provides, for compensation or consideration, or
both, care and supervision of four or more children under seven years
of age, for less than 24 hours a day.
DAY-CARE CENTER, ADULT — A daytime community-based program
for functionally impaired adults that provides a variety of health, social
and related support services in a protective setting.
DAY-CARE CENTER, FAMILY — Provides care for four through eight
children.
DAY-CARE CENTER, GROUP — Provides care for nine or more children.
DECIBEL (DB) — A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to
20 times the logarithm to the base of 10 of the ratio of the pressure
of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20
micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but
has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DECORATIVE WATER FEATURE — Any man-made stream, fountain,
waterfall, or other such water feature that contains water that flows or
is sprayed into the air, constructed for decorative, scenic, or landscape
purposes.
DEMOLISH — Any act or process which destroys or removes in part or
whole a landmark or structure within a historic district or any landmark
or structure designated as a historic structure or historic site.
DENSITY — A term used to describe the number of dwelling units per
acre.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures;
the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the
deposition of extraction of earthen materials.
DISPLAY, MERCHANDISE — See "display, outdoor" and the regulations
as outlined in §§ 660-22 and 660-84.
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:658
DISPLAY, OUTDOOR — Outdoor display consists of the display of
merchandise or equipment offered for sale or rent on the property. See
regulations outlined in §§ 660-22 and 660-84.
DRIPLINE — Outer perimeter edge of a tree canopy as transferred
perpendicularly to ground level.
DRY LAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the
regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the
floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface
above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and
relief vehicles.
DWELLING — A residential building or part thereof, occupied or
intended to be occupied for nontransient residence purposes, but not
including habitations provided in nonresidential uses such as boarding,
lodging or rooming houses.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms, providing or intended
to provide permanent living quarters for not more than one family.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY — See "accessory residential unit."
DWELLING UNIT, UPPER-STORY — Dwelling units which are located
above the ground or lower floor of a building used for an office,
commercial or institutional land use.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A dwelling that is joined to another dwelling
at one or more sides by a shared wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A detached building on a single lot without
a common wall between dwelling units.
DWELLING, DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY HOME — A detached
building designed for or occupied by not more than one family and
having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any other dwelling unit.
This dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached single-family
residence which is located on an individual lot or within a group
development. The dwelling unit must be a site built, structure built in
compliance with the State of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC)
or may be a manufactured dwelling (modular home) as permitted by
the UDC or a manufactured home as permitted by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) code. For any
of these dwelling units, the use of a permanent, continuous UDC
foundation is required. This dwelling unit type may not be split into two
or more residences, but includes modular, mobile, and manufactured
homes, subject to § 660-75.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — These dwelling unit types consist of a singlefamily
dwelling which is attached on one side to another single-family
residence or upper unit and lower unit. The two residences are located
on the same lot. These dwelling unit types may not be split into
additional residences.
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:659
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — This dwelling unit type consists
of an attached, multifamily residence which has a private, individual
exterior entrance. These dwelling typically contain no less than three
dwelling units in an individual structure.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family. One-family dwellings include
manufactured homes and mobile homes.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — This dwelling unit type consists of
attached, single-family residences, each having a private, individual
access. This dwelling unit type is located on its own lot or within a
group development and may not be split into additional residences.
DWELLING, TWIN HOME — These dwelling unit types consist of a
single-family dwelling which is attached on one side to another singlefamily
residence. The two residences are located on separate lots, but
connected by a common or party wall, and the separate lots may also
be referred to as zero lot line lots. The twin-home is distinguished from
the duplex by having each unit located on an individual lot or within
a group development. These dwelling unit types may not be split into
additional residences.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A structure on a single lot containing two
dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an
unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling
and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a
common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
DWELLING, TWO-FLAT — This dwelling unit type consists of a singlefamily
residence, which is in complete compliance with the State of
Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC), and which has been
converted into a two-family residence. The two residences are both
located on the same lot or within the same group development. This
dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
EASEMENT — An area of land set aside, or over or through which
liberty, privilege, or advantage in land, distinct from ownership of the
land, is granted by the owner to the public or some particular person or
part of the public, or utility.
ENCROACHMENT, FLOODWAY — Any fill, structure, equipment, use or
development in the floodway.
EQUIVALENT A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL (LEQ) — The equivalent
steady-state sound level, which in a stated period of time contains the
same acoustic energy as the time-varying sound level during the same
period. For purposes of measuring or predicting noise levels, a receptor
is assumed to be at ear height, located five feet above ground surface.
"Leq(h)" means the hourly value of Leq.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil, sediment, or rock
fragments by water, ice, or wind.
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:660
EXISTING NOISE LEVEL — The highest hourly noise level caused by
existing conditions in a particular area.
EXTRATERRITORIAL AREA — The area outside of the City Limits in
which the City of Lake Mills may exercise extraterritorial powers of
planning, land division, and/or zoning review.
FAMILY — [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS — Any business authorized to do business
under state or federal laws relating to financial institutions, including,
without limitation, banks and trust companies, savings banks, building
and loan associations, savings and loan associations and credit unions.
This term does not include a currency exchange, payday loan business
or a title loan business.
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence which
is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular
flood event is usually expressed as occurring on the average once in a
specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any
given year.
One or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit as
a traditional family or the functional equivalent of a traditional
family. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that four or more
persons living together in a single dwelling unit who are not related
by blood, adoption or marriage do not constitute the functional
equivalent of a traditional family. In determining the functional
equivalent of a traditional family, the following criteria shall be
present:
(a) The group shares the entire dwelling unit.
The group lives and cooks together as a single housekeeping
unit.
(b)
The group shares expenses for food, rent, utilities or other
household expenses.
(c)
The group is permanent and stable and not transient or
temporary in nature.
(d)
Any other factor reasonably related to whether the group is the
functional equivalent of a family.
(e)
(1)
This definition is not intended to prohibit group homes or
community living arrangements that are determined to be
protected by the Federal Fair Housing Law, provided that such
facilities are licensed and permitted under the authority of the
State Department of Health Services or the State Department of
Children and Families or other state department or agency.
(2)
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:661
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map designating approximate
flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered
A Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations.
This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects
of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a
Flood Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
floodplain and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It
provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood
and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations
and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated
as numbered and unnumbered A-Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps
that accompany the Flood Insurance Study form the basis for both the
regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the
following conditions.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the
floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and
associated with standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOODPLAIN — Land which has been or may be covered by flood water
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the flood fringe,
and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory
purposes.
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the
regional flood.
(1) The overflow or rise of inland waters;
The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source;
(2)
The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Rock Lake; or
(3)
The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
(4)
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:662
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to insure wise
use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation,
education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain
regulations.
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations
of land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions,
changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and
sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the
purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation of two feet of
freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the
regional flood. Also see "freeboard."
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of
floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the
regional flood discharge.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements
and attached accessory buildings, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators,
unenclosed porches, detached accessory buildings utilized as dead
storage, heating and utility rooms, inside off-street parking or loading
space (decks are not included in this measurement). Measurements
shall be made from the inside of the exterior walls and to the center of
interior walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area of all buildings on a
lot divided by the lot area.
FLOOR AREA RATIO, NET — Net floor area ratio (NFAR) includes
the sum of the gross horizontal area of a floor or several floors of a
building or structure measured from the interior face of exterior walls
or the center line of a wall separating two buildings or structures,
not including uninhabitable/unusable attics or basements, underground
parking, uncovered steps, unused decks or exterior balconies,
mechanical rooms, elevator shafts, permanent accessory storage,
internal loading areas, and other areas as determined by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
FLOOR AREA, LIVABLE — The total habitable floor area of all heated
floor space above finished grade measured from the outside dimensions
of the exterior wall and excluding all non-dwelling areas such as attic,
storage, carport, and garage, and other unheated areas.
FLY — A fly is a piece of fabric, which moves or floats in the air and is
supported by cables or ropes attached to buildings or support posts.
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:663
FREEBOARD — A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified
number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates
for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated,
including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of
bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization,
loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the
riverbed or streambed.
FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot line.
FUTURE NOISE LEVEL — The highest hourly traffic noise level based
on estimated traffic volumes within a twenty-year period after the
completion of construction of the new highway facility.
GARAGE, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — A structure which is accessory to
a residential building and which is used for the parking and storage of
vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof, and which is not
a separate commercial enterprise available to the general public.
GREEN SPACE RATIO (GSR) — The percentage of the gross site area
which is preserved as permanently protected green space. Green space
ratio is calculated by dividing the area of permanently protected green
space by the gross site area. See "minimum green space ratio."
GROSS DENSITY — The result of dividing the number of dwelling units
located on a site by the gross site area. See "maximum gross density."
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total floor area on all levels of a building.
GROSS SITE AREA (GSA) — The total area of a site available for
inclusion in calculations of the maximum permitted density or intensity
of development.
GUEST HOUSE — Living quarters for guests or servants, on a property
with a principal residence, in an accessory structure or attached to the
principal residence.[Added 11-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1197A]
HARDSHIP, UNNECESSARY — Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict
conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height
or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the
purposes of the chapter.
HEARING NOTICE — Publication or posting meeting the requirements
of Wis. Stats. Ch. 985.
HEIGHT, BUILDING — The vertical distance from the average elevation
of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of
the building or structure to the highest point of a flat roof, or to the
deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height between the eave
and the highest point of a gambrel, hip or pitch roof. Also applies to
sheds and other similar structures.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:664
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant
economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area designated by the City Council on
recommendation of the Plan Commission, acting as the designated
Historic Preservation Commission, that contains two or more
contiguous historic sites or sites occupied by historic
structures.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
HISTORIC PRESERVATION PLAN — A comprehensive document that
includes a cultural and architectural analysis supporting the historic
significance of the area, the specific guidelines for development in the
area, and a specific statement of preservation objectives for the area.
HISTORIC SITE — Any parcel of land of historic significance due to
its substantial value in tracing the history or prehistory of humanity,
or upon which a historic event has occurred, and which has been
designated as a historic site under this section, or an improved parcel,
or part thereof, on which is situated a historic structure and any
abutting improved parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting part
of the premises on which the historic structure is situated.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any improvement which has a special
character or special historic interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, state or
nation and which has been designated as a historic structure pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter.
HOME OCCUPATION — A use customarily carried on in a business
establishment that is permitted to be carried on in a residence. Said
use is incidental to the primary residential purpose, thus the residential
character of the property is not changed.
HOME, MANUFACTURED — A structure certified and labeled as a
manufactured home under 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 through 5426, which,
when placed on a site, is set on an enclosed foundation in accordance
with Wis. Stats. Chapter 101, Subchapter V.
HOME, MOBILE — This dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached,
single-family residence, which has not received a federal manufactured
housing certificate and which is located on an individual lot or within a
group development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into two or
more residences.
HOME, TWIN — See "dwelling, twin home."
HOTEL — See "commercial indoor lodging."
HOUSEBOAT, FIXED — As defined in § 30.01(1r), Wis. Stats., means
a structure not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the
ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway and is retained in
place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spud poles
attached to the bed of the waterway.
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:665
HYDRONIC HEATERS — Outdoor wood heaters or outdoor wood-fired
boilers typically located outside the buildings they heat with short
smokestacks. Typically, they burn wood to heat liquid (water or waterantifreeze)
that is piped to provide heat and hot water to occupied
buildings such as homes or outbuildings. Hydronic heaters may also be
located indoors and they may use other biomass as fuel (such as corn
or wood pellets).
IMPERMISSIBLE INTERFERENCE — A blockage of solar energy from
a collector surface or a proposed collector surface for which a permit
has been granted under § 660-167 of this chapter during a collector use
period.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Areas designed and installed to prohibit
infiltration of stormwater. Homes, buildings, and other structures, as
well as concrete, brick, asphalt, and similar paved surfaces are
considered impervious. Gravel areas and areas with "landscaped
pavers" and "permeable pavement" which are intended for vehicular
traffic are considered to be impervious.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA RATIO (ISR) — The percentage of the
gross site area or lot area which contains impervious surface.
IMPROVEMENT — Any building, structure, place, work of art or other
object constituting a physical addition to real property, or any part of
such addition, including but not limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks,
curbs, lighting fixtures, and signs.
IN-FAMILY SUITE — An area within a dwelling unit that may contain
separate kitchen, dining, bathroom, laundry, living, sleeping, and
recreation areas, including exterior porches, patios, and decks. In
addition to the required internal physical connection, separate outdoor
access or separate access to the garage may be provided.
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward
rise in the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on
a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions, which
is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not
attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as
roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and
discharge.
INTENSITY — A term used to describe the amount of gross floor area
or landscaped area on a lot or site, compared to the gross area of the
lot or site.
JUNK — Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether
or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing,
salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition. Junk
includes vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal,
glass, building materials, household appliances, brush, wood and
lumber.
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:666
JUNKYARD — Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part
thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale
or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or
discarded goods, materials, machinery or two or more unregistered,
inoperable motor vehicles or other types of junk.
LAKE SHORE — Those lands lying within the following distances from
the ordinary high water mark of navigable waters; 1,000 feet from a
lake, pond, or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream; or to a
landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is the greater. Lake
shores shall not include those lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches
where: (a) such lands are not adjacent to a navigable stream or river;
(b) those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not
navigable streams before ditching or had no previous stream history;
and (c) such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
LAND-DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
change of the land surface including removing vegetation cover,
excavating, filling and grading but not including agricultural land uses
such as planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops; growing
and tending of gardens, harvesting of trees; and landscaping
modifications.
LANDOWNER — See "owner."
LAND USE — The type of development and/or activity occurring on a
piece of property.
LAND USE, COMMERCIAL — Use of land for the retail or wholesale
sale of goods or services.
LAND USE, INDUSTRIAL — Use of land for manufacturing or assembly
of raw materials into products.
LAND USE, INSTITUTIONAL — Use of land for public or quasi-public
uses, including schools, churches, civic, park, and utility operations or
activities.
LANDSCAPE SURFACE AREA RATIO (LSR) — The percentage of the
gross site area or lot area which is preserved as permanently protected
landscaped area.
LANDSCAPED AREA — The area of a site which is planted and
continually maintained in vegetation, including grasses, flowers, herbs,
garden plants, native or introduced ground covers, shrubs, bushes, and
trees. Landscaped area includes the area located within planted and
continually maintained landscaped planters.
LIGHT SOURCE — A single artificial point source of luminescence.
LIVING QUARTERS — Living quarters, when applied to accessory
structures; shall be defined as including toilet or kitchen facilities.
LOT — A parcel of land that:
(1) Is undivided by any street or private road;
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:667
LOT AREA — The total area in a horizontal plane within the peripheral
boundaries of a lot.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance of a parcel measured from
the rear lot line to the front lot line along each side yard setback.
LOT FRONTAGE — Lot width measured at the street lot line. When a lot
has more than one street lot line, lot width shall be measured, and the
minimum lot width required by this chapter shall be provided at each
such line.
LOT INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE — A lot line is the property line (including the vertical plane
established by the line and the ground) bounding a lot except that
where any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a
proposed public right-of-way, the line of such public right-of-way shall
be the lot line for applying this chapter.
LOT LINE, FRONT — A lot line which abuts a public or private street
right-of-way. In the case of a lot which has two of more street frontages,
the lot line along the street from which the house is addressed shall be
the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR — In the case of rectangular or most trapezoidalshaped
lots, that lot line which is parallel to and most distant from
the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular, triangular or
gore-shaped lot, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel
to and at the maximum possible distance from the front line shall
be considered to be the rear lot line. In the case of lots which have
frontage on more than one road or street, the rear lot line shall be
selected by the property owner.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line, a
street side lot line, or a rear lot line.
LOT LINE, STREET SIDE — Any lot line which abuts a public or private
street right-of-way which is not the front lot line.
LOT OF RECORD — A platted lot or lot described in a certified survey
map or in a metes and bounds description which has been approved by
the City or by Jefferson County; and has been recorded in the office of
the Register of Deeds.
LOT WIDTH — The shortest distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured at the midpoint of the building line.
Is occupied by, or designated to be developed for occupancy by
a use permitted in this chapter, including one principal building
or use, together with any accessory buildings, open spaces, and
parking spaces required by this chapter; and
(2)
(3) Has its frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place.
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:668
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more
streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street
forming an interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — See "lot, substandard."
LOT, SUBSTANDARD — A lot of record which lawfully existed prior to
this chapter, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if
the lot were to be created under the current provisions of this chapter.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on more
than one street. Double-frontage lots shall normally be deemed to have
two front yards and two side yards and no rear yard.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE — Elevation of the lowest ground surface
that touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44
CFR 60.3.
LUMINAIRE — A complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps,
together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and
protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply.
LUMINAIRE, CUTOFF — Any luminary that does not emit light at an
angle greater than 90° from vertical and has less than 10% of maximum
candlepower above 75°.
MAINTENANCE — The act or process of restoring to original
soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs,
or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with
equivalent fixtures, systems or structures.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to
be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile
home but does not include a recreational vehicle.
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The largest amount of floor
area permitted on a lot. See "floor area ratio."
MAXIMUM GROSS DENSITY (MGD) — The maximum number of
dwelling units permitted per acre.
MINIMUM BUILDING SEPARATION — The narrowest permitted
building separation.
MINIMUM DWELLING UNIT SEPARATION — The narrowest permitted
dwelling unit separation.
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:669
MINIMUM SETBACK — The narrowest distance permitted from a
street, side, or rear property line to a structure.
MIXED USE — Some combination of residential, commercial,
industrial, office, institutional, or other land uses within a district or
development.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel
(or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING
— A parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots is completed before the effective date of this chapter. At a
minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING
— The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed.
This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE — A hydraulic engineering model
that corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model,
adds any additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or
incorporates more detailed topographic information than that used in
the current effective model.
MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE — A copy of the hydraulic analysis
used in the effective FIS and referred to as the "effective model."
MODEL, EFFECTIVE — The hydraulic engineering model that was used
to produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT) — A modification of the duplicate
effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any man-made
modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of
the effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which
the revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since
the date of the effective model, then this model would be identical to
the corrected effective model or duplicate effective model.
MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) — A modification of the existing
or pre-project conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected
effective model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
MOTEL — See "commercial indoor lodging."
NAVD or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:670
NAVIGABLE WATERS —
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning
regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood
insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial
FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NOISE BARRIER — Any device which reduces the transmissions of
highway traffic noise from a highway to an adjacent receptor, including
but not limited to, earth berms, walls made from timber, metal,
concrete, or any combination.
NOISE LEVELS — The sound level obtained through use of A-weighting
characteristics. The unit of measure is the decibel (dB), commonly
referred to as dBA when A-weighting is used.
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters such that this development, alone or
Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within
Wisconsin, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other
waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the
Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under
the laws of this state. Under § 281.31(2m)(a), Wis. Stats.,
notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule
promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under
§ 62.231, Wis. Stats., and Chapter NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, do not
apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches, if:
Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or
river;
(a)
Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands
were not navigable streams before ditching; and
(b)
(c) Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
(1)
Wisconsin's Supreme Court has declared navigable bodies of water
that have a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and levels or
flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the
shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis [Muench v. Public
Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952) and DeGaynor and Co.,
Inc., v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975)].
For example, a stream which is navigable by skiff or canoe during
normal spring high water is navigable, in fact, under the laws of
this state, though it may be dry during other seasons.
(2)
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:671
together with any future development, will cause an increase in
regional flood height.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map indicating the location, width, and extent
of existing and proposed streets, highways, drainageways, parks,
playgrounds, and other facilities, as adopted by the City Council
pursuant to § 62.23, Wis. Stats.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK (OHWM) — The point on the bank
or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is
so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion,
destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of
aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
OUTDOOR LIVING AREA — Spaces that are associated with residential
land uses typically used for passive recreational activities or other
noise-sensitive uses. Such spaces include patio areas, barbecue areas,
residential play areas; outdoor patient recovery or resting area
associated with hospitals, convalescent hospitals, or rest homes;
outdoor school facilities routinely used for educational purposes which
may be adversely impacted by noise. Outdoor areas usually not
included in this definition are: front yard areas, driveways, greenbelts,
maintenance areas, and storage areas associated with residential land
uses; exterior areas at hospitals that are not used for patient activities;
outdoor areas associated with places of worship and principally used
for short-term social gatherings; and outdoor areas associated with
school facilities that are not typically associated with educational uses
prone to adverse noise impacts (for example, school play yard areas).
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILERS — See "hydronic heaters."
OWNER — The owner of record of fee simple title to any lot that
is a part of properties, including contract sellers and vendees, but
excluding those having such interest merely as security for the
performance of an obligation, and excluding those who have a lien upon
the property by provision or operation of law.
PERSON — An individual, or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, municipality or state agency.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field
located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative
sewage system approved by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption
field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a
system located on a different parcel than the structure.[Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and
storm sewer.
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:672
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Base floodwaters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the
floodplain and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will
not damage existing or proposed buildings.
RECHARGE AREA — Area in which water reaches the zone of
saturation by surface infiltration and encompasses all areas or features
that supply groundwater recharge to a well.
RECREATIONAL PURPOSE — A temporary structure is intended for the
relaxation and enjoyment of the owner and not used for any commercial
purpose.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) — The term "motor home" is often
used interchangeably with "RV." A motor home, however, is an informal
phrase, used to describe a variety of recreational vehicles (RVs), while
recreational vehicle (or RV) is a technical and legal term. The United
States Department of Transportation categorizes RVs by class. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term "recreational vehicle" or "RV" will
include the following vehicle types and units:
Class A RVs. Class A RVs are motor homes, regardless of the type
of chassis beneath them and whether or not the vehicle contains
"slide-outs" (additional living spaces that slide out when the vehicle
is stopped for camping). Class A also includes commercial
passenger and school buses that are converted into RVs (these
are often the largest mobile homes available). Class A RVs are
generally luxurious mobile homes with a solid body, a panoramic
front window, berths that convert from living room or dinette areas,
and bathroom facilities.
(1)
Class B RVs. Class B RVs are camper vans or conventional vans
with raised roofs (either "pop-up" or "fixed"). They often have small
kitchens with refrigerators and gas grills. Larger models may have
a water heater, heat and air conditioning, a portable toilet, or an
internal shower. Smaller models usually have a portable toilet and
an external shower, which can be used with an awning to ensure
privacy.
(2)
Class C RVs. Unlike a Class A mobile home, which is built on a
single chassis, a Class C vehicle is attached to a truck and hauled
behind. Class C RVs are characterized by a distinctive alcove which
fits over the truck cab, providing either a double berth for sleeping
or, sometimes, an "entertainment" section, with a TV and video
games.
(3)
Other RV Types. Other types of RVs or motor homes include:
Truck campers. Similar to the C-class vehicles described
above, these are smaller RVs, carried in the beds of pickup
truck.
(a)
(4)
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:673
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood
with a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and
if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
RESIDENCE, FARM — A farm residence is a single-family detached
dwelling unit located on the same property as any of the principal
agricultural land uses.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, ULTIMATE — The required future right-of-way for a
street, highway, alley, or other public way as illustrated in the adopted
Comprehensive Plan or the adopted Official Map for the City of Lake
Mills.
RIPARIAN — Of or relating to or located on the banks of a navigable
lake, river, or stream.
ROOM — A space used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking, or
combinations thereof, but not including bathrooms, toilet
compartments, closets, halls, storage rooms, laundry and utility rooms,
basement recreation rooms and similar spaces.
SCALE — The relationship between the mass of a building and its
surroundings, including the width of street, open space, and mass of
surrounding buildings. Mass is determined by the three-dimensional
bulk of a structure: height, width, and depth.
SETBACK — The shortest distance between the exterior of a building
or structure and the nearest point on the referenced lot line.
SETBACK BASE AREA — The land lying between the edge of the
existing street right-of-way line and the setback base line.
SETBACK BASE LINE — The line from which all required setbacks are
measured, which line corresponds to the established ultimate street
right-of-way line.
SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING DISTRICT — A zoning district,
created as a part of this chapter, comprised of shorelands that are
designated as wetlands on final wetland inventory maps prepared by
the WDNR, with the exception of those wetlands described in § NR
117.05(1)(b)2, Wis. Adm. Code.
SHORELANDS — Defined in § 59.692(1)(b), Wis. Stats., to mean the
area within the following distances from the ordinary high-water mark
of navigable waters, as defined in § 281.31(1)(d), Wis. Stats.
Pop-up campers. Collapsible campers with pull-out berths and
tent walls, towed in a compact unit behind a vehicle.
(b)
Travel trailers (or caravans). Noncollapsible, lightweight trailers
with simple amenities, towed behind a vehicle.
(5)
One thousand feet from a lake, pond or flowage. If the navigable
water is a glacial pothole lake, this distance shall be measured from
the high-water mark of the lake.
(1)
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:674
SIGN — Any object, device, display, structure, or part thereof, situated
or visible from outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display,
direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including
words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination,
or projected images. Signs do not include the flag or emblem of any
nation, organization of nations, state, city, religious, fraternal, or civic
organization; also merchandise and pictures or models of products or
services incorporated in a window display, works of art which in no
way identify a product, or scoreboards located on athletic fields are not
included in the definition of a sign. Definitions of particular functional,
locational and structural types of signs are listed in this chapter. Traffic
control and public agency signs located within a right-of-way, public art
approved by the Plan Commission and legal holiday displays are not
included within this definition and are not regulated by the provisions
of this chapter.
SIGN, ABANDONED — A sign that no longer correctly directs or
exhorts any person, advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner,
product, activity conducted, or product available on the premises where
such a sign is displayed.
SIGN, AUXILIARY — A sign that provides special information such
as price, hours of operation, or warning and that does not include
brand names, or information regarding product lines or services. It
may contain a business logo if the logo is less than one square foot in
area. Examples of such signs include directories of tenants in buildings,
no trespassing signs, menu boards, and signs that list only prices of
gasoline.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, offered, or
manufactured upon the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, CANOPY — A sign that is mounted, painted, or attached to an
awning, canopy, or marquee that is otherwise permitted by ordinance.
Canopy signs are considered to be wall signs for purposes of
determining the maximum sign area.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION — A sign indicating the name of the
contractors, engineers, architect, financiers and related companies or
products being used in construction on the lot.
SIGN, DECORATIVE FLAG — A sign displayed by a land use that
is not the official flag of a government, religious, fraternal or civic
organization. Decorative flags shall be regulated as a freestanding
sign, and shall count toward the total sign area and sign number
requirements of a business, and must be displayed only during business
hours in a location approved by the Zoning Administrator.
Three hundred feet from a river or a stream or to a landward side
of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
(2)
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:675
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign which indicates only the name,
direction, address, logo and/or distance of a business or activity.
Directional signs may be located off-premises if erected by a
government agency, nonresidential land use, or as a special event sign.
Only those directional signs erected by a government agency may be
located in a public right-of-way.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL, ON-PREMISES — A sign that indicates only the
name or direction of a pedestrian or traffic facility, or a particular
building within a complex of structures, on the property on which said
facility or building is located.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE UNIT — A sign the message of which
may be changed by electronic process, including such messages as
copy, art, graphics, time, date, temperature, weather or information
concerning civic or charitable events or the advertising of products
or services for sale on the premises. This also includes traveling or
segmented message displays.
SIGN, EXEMPT — A sign that does not require a permit application or
fee.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A self-supporting sign resting on or
supported by means of poles, standards, or any other type of base
on the ground. This type of sign includes monument signs and pylon
signs. The base or support(s) of any and all freestanding signs shall
be securely anchored to a concrete base or footing. The footing and
related supporting structure of a freestanding sign, including bolts,
flanges, brackets, etc., shall be concealed by the sign exterior, masonry
covering, earth and permanent ground cover, or through the use of
evergreen shrubs.
SIGN, GROUND — See "sign, monument."
SIGN, GROUP — A sign displaying the collective name of a group of
uses such as the title of a shopping center, office park, or industrial
park and its tenants. No sales or price information shall be permitted.
Portions of the sign containing names of individual tenants shall be
considered as part of the area of a group sign. A group sign shall be
considered a single sign structure.
SIGN, ICONIC DISPLAY — An iconic display sign is a physical
representation of the products for sale or operations of a business.
The display is typically three-dimensional and does not have "sides."
Flat (less than twelve-inches in depth) and two-sided is considered a
projecting sign. The iconic display is not considered a wall or projecting
sign as it contains no words or text. The iconic display is attached
to and projects more than one foot, generally perpendicular, from a
structure or building face. Examples of iconic displays include (but are
not limited to) a loaf of bread or cupcake for a bakery, a martini glass
for a cocktail bar, a steer for a butcher shop, grapes for wine sales, or
hammer for a hardware store.
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:676
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign indicating the name and/or address
of the multifamily development and of the manager of the multifamily
property located upon the residential premises where the sign is
displayed.
SIGN, INTEGRAL BUILDING — A sign bearing the name of a building,
dates of construction, commemorative tablets and the like, which is an
integral part of the building or structure.
SIGN, MARQUEE — An overhanging sign providing a canopy of a
theater, auditorium, fairground, museum or other use, which advertises
present and scheduled events.
SIGN, MOBILE OR PORTABLE — A sign mounted on a frame or chassis
designed to be easily relocated, including vehicles and/or trailers whose
principal commercial use is for signage.
SIGN, MONUMENT — A freestanding sign whose bottom edge is
located within one foot of a ground-mounted pedestal and whose top
edge is located no more than eight feet from ground level. The base or
support(s) of any and all monument signs shall be securely anchored
to a concrete base or footing. The sign shall not be erected so that
it impedes visibility for safe pedestrian and/or vehicular circulation.
The footing and related supporting structure of a freestanding sign,
including bolts, flanges, brackets, etc., shall be concealed by the sign
exterior, masonry covering, earth and permanent ground cover, or
through the use of evergreen shrubs.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING — A sign that does not conform to the
regulations of this chapter.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING — A sign that directs attention
to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or
offered elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is displayed.
Advertising signs include billboards.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign which advocates the outcome
of any election or referendum, or which announces the existence of a
particular candidate, issue, or subject of any election or referendum, or
any vote of a governmental body.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign, other than a wall sign, that is attached
to and projects more than one foot, generally perpendicular, from a
structure or building face.
SIGN, PYLON — A freestanding sign erected upon one or more pylons
or posts so that the bottom edge of the sign face is seven feet or more
above grade.
SIGN, SIDEWALK (SANDWICH-BOARD, MOVABLE SIGNAGE BOARD)
— A sign designed to be self-supporting and displayed on sidewalk
during normal business hours.
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:677
SIGN STRUCTURE — Supports or materials capable of supporting any
sign as defined in this chapter. A sign structure may be a single pole or
may or may not be an integral part of the building.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or
advertising display not permanently attached to the ground or a
structure, and intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only.
SIGN, WALL — A sign mounted parallel to a building facade or other
vertical building surface. Wall signs shall not extend beyond the edge
of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted, nor shall they
project more than 18 inches from the wall or surface. The top of the
sign shall be no higher than the portion of the building to which it is
mounted.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign installed inside a window for purposes of
viewing from outside the premises. This does not include merchandise
located in a window or temporary window advertising by retailers for
the purpose of informing the public of a sale or temporary offer. Window
signs are considered to be wall signs for the purpose of determining the
maximum sign area.
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land-disturbing or land development activity is proposed in
the permit application.
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A device, structure or part of a device or
structure a substantial purpose of which is to transform solar energy
into thermal, mechanical, chemical or electrical energy.
SOLAR COLLECTOR SURFACE — Any part of a solar collector that
absorbs solar energy for use in the collector's energy transformation
process. Collector surface does not include frames, support and
mounting hardware.
SOLAR COLLECTOR USE PERIOD — From 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
standard time daily.
SOLAR ENERGY — Direct radiant energy received from the sun. An
oscillation in pressure, partial displacement, particle velocity or other
physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause
compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound
may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration,
intensity and frequency.
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the
use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such
as A, B, or C as specified in American National Standards Institute
specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1, 4-197, or the latest
approved revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not
indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time average, output meter, and
weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels.
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:678
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration,
the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STEEP SLOPE — Steep slopes are areas which contain a gradient of
12% or greater (equivalent to a ten-foot elevation change in a distance
of 83 feet or less), as shown on Environmental Corridor Map or from
more accurate on-site survey.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of a
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. A
basement or cellar having 1/2 or more of its height above grade shall
be deemed a story for purposes of height measurement.
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the
floor level, and in which space the possible floor area with head room of
five feet or less occupies at least 40% of the total floor area of the story
directly beneath.
STREET — Unless specifically designated otherwise by the City, any
public or private way that is dedicated or permanently open to
pedestrian and vehicular use, which is 21 feet or more in width if it
exists at the time of enactment of this chapter or any such public rightof-
way 50 feet or more in width when established after the effective
date of this chapter, or otherwise by approved plat.
STREET, ARTERIAL — A street that provides for the movement of
relatively heavy volumes of traffic to, from, or within the City. It has a
secondary function of providing access to collector and minor streets
and tertiary function of providing access to abutting properties; in Lake
Mills: IH 94, STH 89, CTHs A, B, and V.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street that collects and distributes internal
traffic within a distinct urban area such as a residential neighborhood,
between the arterial street and local streets. It has a secondary function
of providing access to abutting properties; in Lake Mills: Lake Shore
Drive, Ferry Drive, Water Street, Owen Street, and Sandy Beach Road.
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:679
STREET LINE — The lines that form the boundaries of a right-of-way.
STREET, LOCAL — A street of minimum continuity designed for low
speeds and volumes and to provide access to low-traffic-generating
property and leading into collector and arterial street systems.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR — A collector street serving
primarily residential land uses which primarily serves to connect local
residential streets to collector or arterial streets.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object with form, shape and utility,
either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into
the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed
and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and
culverts.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — A detached subordinate structure or a
use which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection
with, the principal structure or use to which it is related and which is
located on the same lot as that of the principal structure or use.
STRUCTURE, HABITABLE — Any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — Any building, or other structure,
which was lawfully existing under ordinances or regulations preceding
this chapter, but which would not conform to this chapter if the building
or structure were to be erected under the current provisions of this
chapter.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted, or in
which is intended to be conducted, the main or principal use of the lot
on which it is located.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — A structure without any foundation or
footings and which is removed when the designated time period,
activity or use for which the temporary structure was erected has
ceased. Any building, shed, fence, tent or other membrane structure
erected for a period of less than 180 days. Structures intended for use
longer than 180 days shall comply with the Wisconsin Building Code as
adopted by the City of Lake Mills.
SUBDIVISION — The subdivision of a lot, parcel or tract of land by
the owner thereof or the owner's agent for the purpose of sale or of
building development, where the act of division creates five or more
parcels or building sites of 1 1/2 acres each or less in area; or five or
more parcels or building sites of 1 1/2 acres each or less in area are
created by successive divisions within a period of five years.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized
assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:680
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
SURFACE, HARD — A dustless, all-weather material capable of
carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds (normally, a machine-laid twoinch
blacktop on a four-inch base or five inches of portland cement will
meet this requirement.
TENT — Any membrane structure, enclosure or shelter which is
constructed of canvas or any other pliable material supported in any
manner except by air or the contents it protects and used only for
recreational purposes.
TIME OF TRAVEL (TOT), FIVE-YEAR — The five-year TOT is a portion
of the recharge area, the outer boundary of which it is determined or
estimated, that groundwater and potential contaminants will take five
years to reach a pumping well.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT (TND) — A
development that exhibits several of the following characteristics:
alleys, streets laid out in a grid system, buildings oriented to the street,
front porches on houses, pedestrian orientation, mixed land uses, and
village squares or greens.
TRANSIENT PERSON — Any visitor or person who owns, rents, or uses
a lodging or dwelling unit, or portion thereof, for less than 30 days
and whose permanent address for legal purposes is not the lodging or
dwelling unit being occupied.22
Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement
of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds
50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the
improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained
substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial
improvement regardless of the work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
Any project to improve a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(a)
Any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving
preservation by the Wisconsin State Historical Society, or
listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
(b)
(1)
Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural
repairs, modifications or additions. Such ordinary maintenance
repairs include internal and external painting, decorating,
paneling, and the replacement of doors, windows, and other
nonstructural components. (For purposes of this definition,
"substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of
the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure.)
(2)
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:681
USE, ACCESSORY — A detached subordinate structure or a use which
is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, the
principal structure or use to which it is related and which is located on
the same lot as that of the principal structure or use.
USE, CONDITIONAL — A use which is permitted by this section
provided that certain conditions specified in the ordinance are met and
that a permit is granted by the City Council.
USE, CONFORMING — A use or activity on a property that conforms to
the present requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which
fails, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to
the present requirements of the zoning district.
USE, PRINCIPAL — Any and all of the primary uses of a property,
treated as a use permitted by right or as a conditional use (rather than
as an accessory use or a temporary use).
VARIANCE — Permission by the Zoning Board of Appeals to depart
from the literal requirements of this chapter granted pursuant to
§ 660-176.
VISION CLEARANCE — An unoccupied triangular space at the corner
of a corner which is bounded by the street lines and a setback line
connecting points determined by measurement from the corner of each
street line.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along
a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile
of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water
to a watercourse or body of water.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods to obtain groundwater, regardless of
its intended use.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREAS — Those zones of influence or TOT
at each municipal well that lie within the City of Lake Mills corporate
limits.
WETLAND — Defined in § 23.32(1), Wis. Stats., to mean an area where
water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to be capable
of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation in which have soils
indicative of wet conditions.
22.Editor's Note: The original definition of "unnecessary hardship," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 660-12 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-12
1:682
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, COMMERCIAL — A wind energy conversion
system consisting of more than one wind turbine and tower, a wind
energy conversion system which will be used primarily for off-site
consumption of power or a wind energy system in excess of 60 kWh.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine, a tower and associated control or
conversion electronics which will be used primarily to reduce on-site
consumption of utility power. A small wind energy system shall not
exceed a rated capacity of 60 kW.
YARD — A required open space that lies between the principal building
and the nearest lot line.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending along the full width of the front lot
line between side lot lines and extending from the front street right-ofway
line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in
which the lot is located.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line
between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot line for a
depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which the
lot is located.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along the side lot line between the
front and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations
for the district in which the lot is located.
YARD, SIDE STREET — The area extending between the front lot line
and the rear lot line and extending from the side street right-of-way to
a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which the lot
is located.
ZERO-LOT-LINE STRUCTURE — A structure that is built on the
property line such as a twin house or townhouse.
ZONING DISTRICT, OVERLAY — A zoning district which imposes
uniform restrictions on all properties within its area which are in
addition to the restrictions specific to the standard zoning districts.
ZONING DISTRICT, STANDARD — Zoning districts which primarily
regulate the use of land and intensity or density of such use.
§ 660-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:683

ARTICLE II
General Regulations
§ 660-13. Accessory structures.
A. General.
(1) Any accessory use or structure shall conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located except as
specifically otherwise provided.
(2) No accessory use or structure shall be permitted that by reason of
noise, dust, odor, appearance, or other objectionable factor creates
a nuisance or substantial adverse effect on the property value or
reasonable enjoyment of the surrounding properties.
(3) Accessory structures shall reflect or compliment the character or
materials of the primary structure.
(4) In all districts, any permanent roofed structure serving an
accessory use if attached to the principal building shall be
considered as part of such principal building for all regulatory
purposes. If such structure is a building and is not attached to the
principal building, it shall conform to the building location, height,
and open space requirements of the district in which such building
is located.
(5) Time of construction. No accessory building or structure shall be
constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the
principal building to which it is accessory, unless expressly
permitted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(6) Use of accessory buildings or structures: No accessory building or
structure may be used for living quarters except as approved as a
guest house under § 660-68. [Amended 11-6-2018 by Ord. No.
1197A]
(7) Notwithstanding Subsection E, no accessory building may be
erected in or encroach upon the required side yard of a corner lot
which is adjacent to the street, nor upon the required side yard of a
reversed corner lot which is adjacent to the street.
B. Residential districts. Detached accessory structures located on parcels
in a residence district where the principal use is present, including
guest houses and excepting boat houses, shall be permitted subject to
the following: [Amended 11-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1197A]
(1) Placement of accessory buildings or structures. Accessory
buildings or structures shall be situated in the rear or interior side
yard, and they may not have a setback from the front lot line that is
less than the setback of the principal building.
§ 660-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-13
1:685
§ 660-14. Fences.
(2) Percentage of rear yard occupied. In residential districts, the
cumulative area of all accessory buildings or structures shall not
exceed 30% of the rear yard.
(3) Maximum size of accessory buildings and structures. In all
residential districts the maximum size of an accessory building or
structure on a property may not exceed 1,200 square feet, nor shall
the cumulative aggregate square footage of all accessory
structures on a property exceed 1,200 square feet, unless such
accessory building or structure is part of an approved site plan for
a multifamily residential use or a boat house as approved under
§ 660-33.
(4) Height of accessory buildings and structures. No detached
accessory building or structure shall exceed the height of the
principal building or structure.
(5) Number. The total number of accessory structures permitted on a
lot shall not be limited, except that the aggregate square footage of
the accessory structures shall not exceed the regulations outlined
in Subsection B(3) above.
(6) Use restricted. No private garage in a residence district shall be
used for operation of any metalworking, woodworking, masonry,
carpentry, contracting, or repair business except as a permitted
accessory use or home occupation.
C. Boathouses. Properties within the LRO, Lakeshore Residence Overlay
District, are permitted one boathouse, as an accessory structure,
subject to provisions contained in § 660-33.
D. Agricultural districts and uses. Detached accessory structures located
on parcels in the RD District, where said parcels are equal or greater
than five acres in area, are subject to the regulations of the district
pursuant to Article III.
E. Business and industrial districts. Detached accessory structures
located on parcels in any Business or Industrial Zoning District where
the principal use is present shall conform to the bulk requirements of
the zoning district.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the materials,
location, height and maintenance of fencing, landscaping walls and
decorative posts (such as entry pillars, bollards, or columns) in order to
prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of
the public.
B. Permit. An approved zoning permit from the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall be required for all fences regulated by this chapter.
§ 660-13 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-14
1:686
C. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all fencing,
landscape walls and decorative posts equal to, or exceeding, 30 inches
in height, for all land uses and activities.
D. Standards.
(1) Materials.
(a) Residential districts. Acceptable materials for constructing
fencing, and decorative posts include wood, stone, brick,
wrought iron, chain link, and wire mesh, except that wire-mesh
fencing is not permitted within required front yard or street
yard areas or around swimming pools. Any fence within a
street yard, including along property lines that intersect a
right-of-way, shall be a maximum of 50% opaque.
(b) Nonresidential districts. Acceptable materials for constructing
fencing and decorative posts include wood, stone, brick,
wrought iron, chain link, and wire mesh. Barbed-wire fencing
is permitted to create a security fence, at heights equal to or
greater than 10 feet. Any fence within a street yard, including
along property lines that intersect a right-of-way, shall be a
maximum of 50% opaque.
(c) Temporary fencing. Temporary fencing, including the use of
wood or plastic snow fences for the purposes of limiting snow
drifting between November 1 and April 1, the protection of
excavation and construction sites, and the protection of plants
during grading and construction, and for security fencing of
permitted temporary use or temporary outdoor entertainment
areas, is permitted. Fencing for excavation sites shall be a
minimum of 48 inches in height.
(d) Snow fences. Snow fences constructed of wood and wire and/
or plastic shall be permitted only as temporary fences.
(2) Location. On all properties, no fence or decorative post shall be
located closer than one foot to the right-of-way line. Fences may be
located on any property line abutting a side or rear yard, unless the
lot is developed as a twin home, in which case no fence may be built
on the interior common lot line lying within the front setback area.
(3) Maximum height. The maximum height of any fence or decorative
post shall be the following:
(a) Four feet when located within a required front yard or required
street yard on any property;
(b) Six feet when located on any residentially zoned property, but
not within a required front yard or a required street yard; and
§ 660-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-14
1:687
§ 660-15. Retaining walls and landscape walls.
Retaining walls may be permitted anywhere on the lot; provided, however,
that no individual wall shall exceed six feet in height, and a terrace of at
least three feet in width shall be provided between any series of such walls.
Landscape walls may also be permitted anywhere on the lot; however, when
situated in a front yard or street yard, shall not exceed a height of four feet
and shall be constructed in such a way, so that, by means of spaces between
wall components or spaces that are part of the wall itself, opacity does not
exceed 50%. Both retaining walls and landscape wall shall be no closer than
three feet to the right-of-way without approval of the Public Works Director.
§ 660-16. Satellite dishes and antennas.
All satellite dishes or antennas located in the City of Lake Mills shall
conform to the following regulations contained herein:
(c) Six feet when located on any nonresidential zoned property,
but not within a required front yard or a required street yard,
except that security fences may exceed this height.
(d) The maximum heights listed for Subsection D(3)(a) through (c),
above, may be exceeded with the approval of a conditional use
permit per § 660-195. The following conditions (at a minimum)
shall be established for such requests:
[1] The increase in height shall in no way further obstruct
vision for intersecting streets, driveways, sidewalks or
other traffic areas;
[2] The fence shall be screened on its external side with
adequate plants to maintain an attractive appearance to
said side;
[3] The fence shall be set back from the property line beyond
the requirement of Subsection D(2), above, such distance
as appropriate to contain adequate landscaping per
Subsection D(2) above and to maintain an attractive
relationship to fence's external side.
(4) Orientation. Any and all fences or decorative posts shall be erected
so as to locate visible supports and other structural components
toward the subject property.
(5) Maintenance. All fences or decorative posts shall be maintained in
a structurally sound and attractive manner.
(6) Swimming pools. Fencing of swimming pools shall be as set forth in
§ 660-64I.
§ 660-14 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-16
1:688
§ 660-17. Structures other than buildings.
§ 660-18. through § 660-21. (Reserved)
§ 660-22. Outdoor uses.
A. Size. Satellite dishes or antennas shall not exceed a diameter of two
feet unless approved by the Plan Commission. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Location. All dishes and antennas shall be located at least 10 feet from a
side or rear property line. Dishes and antennas shall not be located
between the public right-of-way and the principal structure. On corner
lots, the dish or antenna shall not be located closer to the street than
the principal structure (that portion of the principal structure closest to
the street).
C. Screening. All ground- or pole-mounted satellite dishes or antennas
shall be screened from view from any street by an opaque fence, wall or
hedge of a minimum of six feet in height.
A. Structures six inches or more in height. Structures not classified as
buildings and six inches or more in height from the surface of the
ground shall be subject to the setback, offset, height, open space, and
architectural requirements of this chapter except as may be specifically
otherwise provided.
B. Children's play houses and structures. Play structures, houses, swing
sets, and other similar structures shall be specifically exempt from the
regulations of this chapter.
C. Underground buildings and structures. Any structure classified as a
building and not extending more than six inches above the surface of
the ground shall not be subject to the setback, offset, building size, or
open space requirements of this chapter.
A. General.
(1) All business, sales, service, storage and display of goods,
manufacturing, and repairs shall be conducted wholly within
enclosed buildings, except where a permanent or temporary
outdoor use is specifically allowed by this chapter.
(2) All outdoor uses shall comply with the provisions for site plan
review and approval outlined in § 660-205 of this chapter before
the zoning, occupancy, and building permits can be issued.
B. Outdoor dining.
(1) Permanent outdoor dining shall be permitted only as an accessory
use to a restaurant or when specifically permitted in conjunction
§ 660-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-22
1:689
with a temporary use as outlined in Chapter 548, Sidewalk Cafes,
of the Code of the City of Lake Mills.
(2) Outdoor dining areas shall not be located in a required yard
abutting any residential district.
C. Outdoor entertainment. Outdoor Entertainment shall be permitted only
as an accessory use to a restaurant, tavern, or brewery, except as a
temporary use in accordance with § 660-29B.
D. Outdoor sales. This subsection regulates outdoor sales areas that are
used for longer periods of time than temporary outdoor sales areas
permitted in § 660-29B(1), whether permanent or seasonal. These
outdoor sales areas are permitted only if allowed by the regulations of
the zoning district in which the lot is located, and shall conform to the
following requirements:
(1) Approval. Outdoor sales shall be permitted by conditional use in
accordance with § 660-195.
(2) Location. Outdoor sales shall not be conducted within 50 feet of
any residential zoning district unless screened from view. Outdoor
sales shall be conducted only within the designated area.
(3) Screening. Screening shall consist of an opaque barrier of
landscaping, walls, fencing, berms or other methods sufficient in
density and height to mitigate sight lines and noise as much as
practicable from the lot line of any lot in a residential zoning
district, and from the street.
(4) Maintenance. Outdoor sales areas and the surrounding premises
shall be maintained in an orderly manner, free of litter and other
refuse. Storage of goods for sale shall be no more than five feet in
height. Outdoor sales shall not obstruct required access to
buildings or parking spaces on the site, or to adjoining property.
(5) Additional provisions. See § 660-29B for additional provisions
applicable to temporary outdoor sales.
E. Outdoor storage.
(1) Approval. Outdoor storage for all nonresidential land uses shall be
permitted by conditional use in accordance with § 660-195.
(2) Location. Outdoor storage shall not be permitted in a required
yard.
(3) Visibility. Outdoor storage shall not be visible from any:
(a) Public street or freeway;
(b) Existing or planned residential area;
§ 660-22 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-22
1:690
§ 660-23. Outdoor storage and parking of recreational vehicle
(RVs), trailers and boats.
(c) Publicly accessible open space area, parking area, access
driveway, or other similar thoroughfare;
(d) Publicly accessible space of any public, quasi-public,
commercial or industrial use; or
(e) Undeveloped property where public access to areas adjoining
the outdoor storage use is likely.
(4) Screening. The following minimum screening requirements shall
apply to outdoor storage adjacent to or potentially visible from
public streets and publicly accessible areas identified in Subsection
E(3) of this section:
(a) A solid masonry wall or opaque fence not more than eight feet
high. Screening walls and fences shall be architecturally
compatible with the principal structure.
(b) No storage may exceed the height of the screening wall or
fence.
(c) Screening landscaping in the street frontage yard, located in
front of the wall or fence, to soften the view shall be required.
(d) No screening wall or fence shall be located within a required
yard.
(5) Surfacing. Outdoor storage areas shall be located on a concrete or
bituminous surface draining to an approved stormwater
management system. Outdoor storage areas may be surfaced with
partially permeable materials with Plan Commission approval.
A. RVs, trailers or boats not meeting the standards set forth in this section
shall not be stored in any residential district, except that a trailer may
be used, in accordance with § 660-29B(6) of this chapter, as a
temporary office or storage space incidental to construction.
B. RVs and trailers shall not be permitted in any district as accessory
buildings. An RV or trailer shall not be used as a dwelling, storage, or
accessory building, except that an RV may be parked or occupied for
lodging purposes on the same lot as a dwelling for not more than 10
days in any consecutive thirty-day period.
C. An RV, trailer or boat shall not be stored in connection with a business
conducted at the location.
D. A stored RV, trailer or boat shall be maintained in mobile condition. No
major construction or repair of a stored trailer or boat shall be
performed on a lot used for residential purposes.
§ 660-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-23
1:691
§ 660-24. Outdoor storage of firewood.
§ 660-25. Outdoor storage of construction materials, junk, refuse,
and disabled or damaged motor vehicles.
E. The state license plates and display title shall be current and properly
displayed. The lot owner shall have, and display upon request to
authorized City officials, proof of ownership of any stored RV, trailer or
boat.
F. A boat, RV, or trailer shall not be parked or stored in such manner as to
create a dangerous or unsafe condition on the lot. Parking or storage in
such fashion that it may readily tip or roll shall be considered a
dangerous and unsafe condition. The boat, RV, or trailer shall not be
stored with flammable liquids aboard in portable containers.
G. No trailer or boat stored in a residential district shall exceed: 10 feet in
height as parked, including trailer cradle or mount, but excluding mast;
30 feet in body length, excluding trailer hitch, tongue, and bumper; and
nine feet in body width, excluding hardware.
H. An RV, trailer, or boat stored in a residential district shall be located
only:
(1) Between the rear lot line and the front setback line, within the rear
yard or interior side yard; and
(2) Not less than six feet from any principal structure, and no less than
three feet from any lot line.
I. No animal transport trailer shall be stored in any residential district.
A. Location. Firewood shall not be stored in the front yard on residentially
zoned property, and may not be located closer than three feet to any lot
line, except when stacked against a fence in accordance with
Subsection B below.
B. Stacking. Firewood should be neatly stacked and may not be stacked
higher than five feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence, where
firewood can be stacked against the fence as high as the fence. Fences
as used in this section shall not include hedges and other vegetation.
C. Nuisance. Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of
transmitting disease to healthy trees and woodpiles that harbor or are
infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are public nuisances and
may be abated pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code.
A. No open storage of construction materials, junk, refuse, scrap, or
disabled or damaged motor vehicles shall occur in any zoning district.
This limitation shall not apply to the open storage of materials actively
being used for the construction or repair of a building or structure on
the same property, provided that no such storage shall continue after
§ 660-23 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-25
1:692
§ 660-26. through § 660-27. (Reserved)
§ 660-28. Temporary structures.
completion of the construction or repairs. Nor shall this limitation apply
to disabled or damaged motor vehicles awaiting repair at an automobile
service station or vehicle sales, rental or servicing establishment.
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A above, open storage of construction
materials is permitted in the PB, PI, I1, and I2 Districts as an accessory
use when approved as a conditional use in accordance with the
procedures and standards set forth in § 660-195 of this article. Any such
materials in open storage shall be screened from the view of the street
and abutting properties to a height of at least six feet by a solid fence
and/or evergreen vegetation.
C. The keeping of inoperable motor vehicles in open storage shall be
subject to forfeitures and removal by the Lake Mills Police Department
in accordance with the Municipal Code.
A. Intent. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum
requirements for the construction and placement of those structures
intended for use for a period of less than 180 days and to safeguard the
public health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the residents by
ensuring that a temporary structure does not create an undesirable
impact to nearby properties.
B. Use.
(1) Temporary structures shall not be used for vehicular storage, RV or
trailer storage, marine equipment or for general storage purposes.
(2) Temporary structures shall not occupy any on-site parking spaces
so as to reduce the number of parking spaces required by § 660-41
of this chapter.Nor shall such structures interfere with drive aisles,
site ingress/egress, vision triangles, required setbacks, or required
buffer yards.
(3) Temporary structures used for purposes of outdoor display and
sales of merchandise shall only be permitted in the B2 and PB
Districts.
C. Number. Only one temporary structure may be erected on a property at
any one time unless additional structures are approved for special
events by the City.
D. Time limits.
(1) No temporary structure may be erected for more than 72 hours
without first obtaining a permit.
(2) No temporary structure may remain in place for more than 180
days in any twelve-month period.
§ 660-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-28
1:693
§ 660-29. Temporary uses.
E. Other conditions.
(1) Temporary structures must be affixed to the ground or a structure
to prevent the wind from relocating the structure.
(2) Temporary structures greater than 400 square feet in floor area
and erected for more than 180 days are regulated by the Wisconsin
Building Code, require a building permit and must comply with all
Zoning Code regulations.
F. Permit. A permit shall be required for all temporary structures, unless
otherwise exempt. The owner or tenant must contact the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and provide the name and address of the
applicant, and the description and location of the structure to be
erected prior to installation.
G. Exceptions. Tents or flies of less than 400 square feet in floor area,
erected for recreational purposes.
H. Fees. No permit fee shall be required for a temporary structures
erected for recreational purposes when located on property used for
residential purposes.
I. Application requirements. Prior to the issuance of a permit to erect any
temporary structure, the Code Enforcement Department shall approve
all applications for the proposed temporary structure. The application
shall contain the following:
(1) Application must be made on the forms provided by the Code
Enforcement Department requesting approval and the term of said
use.
(2) A site map of the subject property showing all lands for which the
temporary structure is proposed as well as all other lands within
200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property.
(3) The site map shall clearly indicate the existing structures on the
subject property and its environs including all utilities, all lot
dimensions, setbacks for the temporary structure, a graphic scale,
and a North arrow.
(4) A written description of the proposed temporary use describing the
type of activities and the type of structures proposed for the subject
property.
J. Approval. The Code Enforcement Department must review the
completed application in accordance with Subsection I of this section. A
permit will be issued for any temporary structure that meets the
requirements of this section.
A. General provisions.
§ 660-28 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-29
1:694
(1) A permit shall be required for temporary uses allowed in this
chapter, except that temporary uses operated or sponsored by a
governmental entity and located on a lot owned by that entity do
not require a permit, but shall otherwise be subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The applicant shall submit a site plan or other suitable description
to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, with any required permit fee. As
a condition of permit issuance, the Zoning Enforcement Officer
may require conformance with specific conditions regarding the
operation of the temporary use as may be reasonably necessary to
achieve the requirements of this chapter. If the Zoning
Enforcement Officer finds that the applicable requirements have
not been met, he may revoke the permit and may require the
cessation of the temporary use. Where a permit for a temporary use
has been revoked, no application for a new permit shall be
approved within six months following revocation.
(3) All temporary uses, including but not limited to those enumerated
in Subsection B below shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) No temporary use shall be established or conducted so as to
cause a threat to the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare, either on or off the premises.
(b) Temporary uses shall comply with all requirements of the
Municipal Code.
(c) Temporary uses shall not obstruct required fire lanes, access to
buildings or utility equipment, or egress from buildings on the
lot or on adjoining property.
(d) Temporary uses shall be conducted completely within the lot
on which the principal use is located, unless the City Council
authorizes the use of City-owned property or right-of-way.
(e) When a permit is required for a temporary use, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall make an assessment of the number
of parking spaces reasonably needed for the permanent uses
on the lot where the proposed temporary use is to be located
and the availability of other public and private parking
facilities in the area. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may
deny the permit for a temporary use if he finds that its
operations will result in inadequate parking being available for
permanent uses on the same lot that are not connected with
the business proposing the temporary use.
(f) During the operation of the temporary use, the lot on which it
is located shall be maintained in an orderly manner; shall be
kept free of litter, debris, and other waste material, and all
§ 660-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-29
1:695
storage shall comply with the regulations outlined in §§ 660-22
and 660-84.
(g) Signs for a temporary use shall be permitted only in
accordance with Article VI, Signage.
B. Permitted temporary uses.
(1) Temporary outdoor sales. Temporary outdoor sales shall be limited
to three events within one calendar year per lot. These events shall
be restricted to the following time limits: one event of not more
than 90 days, and two events of not more than 30 days each.
(2) Public markets, farmers markets, and farm stands. Public markets,
farmers markets, and farm stands shall be regulated in accordance
with Chapter 512, Public Market, of the Code of the City of Lake
Mills.
(3) Outdoor arts, crafts and plant shows, exhibits and sales. Outdoor
arts, crafts and plant shows, exhibits and sales conducted by a
nonprofit or charitable organization shall be permitted in any
nonresidential zoning district, and may be conducted in addition to
the time limits for outdoor sales areas for a period of not more than
seven days.
(4) House, apartment, garage and yard sales. House, apartment,
garage and yard sales are allowed in any residential district, when
the offering for sale includes personal possessions of, or arts and
crafts made by, the owner or occupant of the dwelling unit where
the sale is being conducted; in addition, personal possessions of
other neighborhood residents may also be offered for sale. Such
uses shall be limited to a period not to exceed three consecutive
days, and no more than two such sales shall be conducted from the
same residence in any twelve-month period. A permit or prior
approval of the City shall not be required for such uses.
(5) Temporary outdoor entertainment.
(a) Temporary outdoor entertainment shall be permitted as part of
a community festival or an event hosted by the City, park
district, school district, or other governmental body, or as a
temporary accessory use to a private business use. When
temporary outdoor entertainment is conducted as part of a
community festival or event, no permit is required; when
conducted as an accessory use to a business use, a permit is
required. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(b) The application for a permit for temporary outdoor
entertainment shall be submitted a minimum of 30 days before
the date that the outdoor entertainment event is to commence.
A combined permit may be substituted for temporary use and
§ 660-29 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-29
1:696
§ 660-30. through § 660-32. (Reserved)
§ 660-33. Boathouses.
temporary outdoor entertainment permits under this section.
The applicant is encouraged to meet with the City staff to
discuss the application and coordinate services that may be
provided by the City. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may
refuse to issue a permit for temporary outdoor entertainment
when the application is received less than 30 days before the
date that the entertainment is to commence, if he finds that
there is inadequate time to review the application and arrange
for the provision of necessary City services.
(c) A permit for temporary outdoor entertainment accessory to a
business use shall be limited to a maximum of three days. The
maximum cumulative time any business shall conduct
temporary outdoor entertainment operations shall be 15 days
per calendar year. The hours of operation shall be set in the
permit.
(6) Temporary contractor trailers and real estate model units.
Temporary contractor trailers and real estate sales trailers or
model units shall be permitted in any zoning district when
accessory to a construction project for which a building permit or
site development permit has been issued. Such uses shall be
limited to a period not to exceed the duration of the active
construction phase of such project or the active selling and leasing
of space in such development, as the case may be. No such use
shall contain any sleeping or cooking accommodations, except
those located in a model unit.
A. Use. The boathouse must be designed and used principally for the
storage of boats and accessory marine equipment normally used in the
daily activities of lakefront property and which typically includes a
large overhead door for primary access on the side of the structure
facing the water. Boathouses shall not be permitted to be connected to
public utilities other than electricity.
B. Number. Only one boathouse shall be permitted on a lot.
C. Plat of survey. Submission of a plat of survey shall be required depicting
the location and dimensions of all existing structures located on the
premises, the distances between such structures and all lot lines, the
height of any such structures, the ordinary high-water mark, the
meander lines, structures on adjacent properties within 100 feet, and
other information as required by the Plan Commission.
D. Timing of construction. A boathouse shall be considered an accessory
building to a primary structure and shall not be constructed prior to
construction of the principal building on a lot.
§ 660-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-33
1:697
E. Location. The construction or placing of a boathouse below the ordinary
high-water mark (OHWM) of any navigable waters is strictly prohibited.
Boathouses shall be located a minimum of three feet from the OHWM,
and a minimum distance from the side lot line that is equivalent to the
side yard setback requirements for a principal structure within the
zoning district. Boathouses shall be placed within the vision and access
corridor if they are to be located within the shoreland buffer as set forth
in § 660-34.
F. Height. The highest point of the roof elevation shall not be more than
the vertical measurement of 12 feet above the lowest elevation of the
boathouse structure. Any railing on the roof may not exceed 3.5 feet
and such railing may not be solid in appearance.
G. Size. Boathouses shall not exceed 400 square feet in area.
H. Stairways and pathways. Stairways or pathways used for access to the
lake and to the boathouse shall be located within the vision and access
corridor. If stairways or pathways already exist within the shoreland
buffer, relocation of those stairways or pathways to the vision and
access corridor may be required under the conditional use permit.
I. Other structures. If other structures already exist within the shoreland
buffer, removal or relocation of those structures may be required under
the conditional use permit.
J. Habitation. A boathouse may not be habitable as defined in this chapter.
Final decision as to whether any boathouse would be considered
habitable will be determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
K. Design. The architectural design of the boathouse, and any associated
stairs or paths, shall be harmonious with the surrounding landscape
and shall have a minimal visual impact when viewed from the water.
L. Existing boathouses. All existing boathouses that were lawfully
constructed prior to the enactment of this chapter shall remain legal,
nonconforming uses, and such boathouses may be maintained, but they
may not be enlarged without obtaining a new conditional use permit
and without coming into compliance with the terms of that new
conditional use permit.
M. Additional requirements. Boathouses must also comply with the
provisions outlined in § 660-34, Shoreline Preservation and Vision and
Access Corridor; § 660-35, Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging,
ditching, and excavating; § 660-129, Shoreland-Wetland Overlay (SWO)
District; § 660-199, Floodplain zoning administration and procedures.
§ 660-33 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-33
1:698
Figure 2.1: Boathouse Siting Regulations (Slopes Less Than
20%)
§ 660-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-33
1:699
§ 660-34. Shoreline Preservation and Vision and Access Corridor.
Figure 2.2: Boathouse Siting Regulations (Slopes Greater Than
20%)
A. Vision and access corridor. There shall be a vision and access corridor
in which vegetation may be removed and trees and shrubs trimmed.
This vision and access corridor shall be an area that does not exceed 30
feet if the lot as measured at the OHWM is 100 feet or more in width. If
the lot as measured at the OHWM is less than 100 feet in width, then
the vision and access corridor shall be no more than 30% of the lot
width.
B. Shoreland buffer. A strip of vegetative cover shall be maintained that
extends 35 feet inland from the OHWM and the entire width of the lot;
except within the vision and access corridor. In those cases where the
residential property is split by a public right-of-way, the shoreland
buffer shall apply between the edge of the right-of-way closest to the
OHWM and the OHWM, if that distance is less than 35 feet. Boathouses
shall be placed within the vision and access corridor if they are to be
located within the shoreland buffer.
C. Measuring shoreland buffer. If the slope extending landward from the
OHWM within the shoreland buffer area is less than 20%, then the 35
feet may be measured along the land surface. If the slope is equal to or
§ 660-33 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-34
1:700
greater than 20%, then the shoreland buffer area shall be the horizontal
distance of 35 feet from the OHWM. (See Figure 2.1 and Figure 2.2,
§ 660-33.)
D. Shoreline vegetation. The shoreline shall be vegetated with ground
cover in all areas within 10 feet of the OHWM within the vision and
access corridor, with the exception of areas covered with boathouses,
stairways, and paths providing access to piers. Use of native plants is
encouraged. If naturally occurring sand is already present at the time of
adoption of this chapter, such sand may also be considered as meeting
this requirement to the extent that it is naturally occurring and already
present on the effective date of this chapter.
E. Vegetation removal.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of vegetation removal regulations applicable
to the shoreland area is to protect scenic beauty, control erosion
and replace effluent and nutrient flow from the shoreland. These
provisions shall not apply to the removal of dead, diseased or dying
trees or shrubbery at the discretion of the landowner, or to the
removal of noxious, nuisance or invasive species as they are
defined in §§ 271-3 and 271-6 of the Code of the City of Lake Mills23
or to silvicultural thinning upon recommendation of a forester.
(2) Shoreline cutting and vegetation removal.
(a) Vegetation may be removed and trees and shrubs may be
trimmed within the vision and access corridor, but removal
shall not occur within the shoreland buffer described in
Subsection B, unless such removal is performed on diseased or
dying vegetation. To the extent practicable, healthy individual
trees of twelve-inch caliper or larger and healthy stands of 10
or more trees of six-inch caliper or larger shall be preserved.
Within the shoreland buffer, routine pruning may be done, but
not to the extent of jeopardizing the health and viability of
trees or shrubbery.
(b) If vegetation has already been removed or tree and shrubbery
cutting has already occurred within the shoreland buffer, and
that vegetation removal or cutting has already occurred
outside the vision and access corridor, then mitigation and
restoration or partial restoration may be required as a
condition of approval of permits within the shoreland buffer.
(c) Natural shrubbery shall be preserved as far as practicable and,
where removed, it shall be replaced with other vegetation that
is equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion and
preserving natural beauty.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 271, Brush, Grass and Weeds.
§ 660-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-34
1:701
§ 660-35. Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, ditching, and
excavating.
(3) Paths, roads, stairways and other structures. Any path, road or
passage within the thirty-five-foot strip shall be constructed and
surfaced as to effectively control erosion. A conditional use is
required under § 660-129J(3). Lake access stairways, pathways, or
roads shall be located within the vision and access corridor. New
structures allowed within 35 feet of the OHWM shall be located
within the vision and access corridor.
(4) Alternative cutting plan. An alternative cutting plan allowing
greater cutting than permitted under this section may be permitted
by the Plan Commission by issuance of a conditional use permit,
under § 660-195 of this chapter. In applying for such a permit, the
commission shall require the lot owner to submit a scale drawing of
the lot, including the following information: location of parking,
existing structures, paths, and stairs located within the shoreland
buffer and vision and access corridor, gradient of the land, existing
vegetation, proposed cutting, and proposed replanting. The
Commission may grant such a permit only if it finds that such
special cutting plans:
(a) Will not cause undue erosion or destruction of scenic beauty.
(b) Will provide substantial shielding from the water of dwellings,
accessory structures and parking areas. The replacement
plantings shall not include noxious, nuisance or invasive
species as they are defined in §§ 271-3 and 271-6 of this
chapter.
(5) Cutting more than 35 feet inland. From the inland edge of the
thirty-five-foot strip to the outer limits of the shoreland, the cutting
of trees and shrubbery shall be allowed when accomplished using
accepted forest management practices and sound soil conservation
practices which protect water quality.
(6) Any land-disturbing activities will adhere to the erosion control
measures outlined in § 660-143, Erosion control.
A. General standards. Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, ditching or
excavating which does not require a permit under Subsection B below
is permitted in the shoreland area, provided that:
(1) It is done in a manner designed to minimize erosion, sedimentation
and impairment of fish and wildlife habitat.
(2) Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, ditching or excavating in a
Shoreland-Wetland District meets the requirements of § 660-35 of
this chapter.
§ 660-34 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-35
1:702
(3) A state or federal permit is obtained in addition to a permit under
this chapter, if state or federal laws require the issuance of a permit
for the filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, ditching or excavating
that is proposed.
(4) Any fill placed in the shoreland area is protected against erosion by
the use of riprapping, vegetative cover or a bulkhead.
B. Permit required. Except as provided in Subsection C herein, a
conditional use permit is required:
(1) For any filling or grading of the bed of a navigable body of water.
(2) For any filling or grading of any area which is within 300 feet of the
ordinary high-water mark of a navigable water and which has
surface drainage toward the water and on which there is either:
(a) Filling or grading where a single area of more than 100 square
feet is exposed or where the cumulative exposed area exceeds
300 square feet.
(b) Any filling or grading on slopes of 20% or more.
(c) Filling or grading of more than 1,000 square feet on slopes of
12% to 20%.
(d) Filling or grading of more than 2,000 square feet on slopes of
12% or less.
(3) Before constructing, dredging or commencing work on any
artificial waterway, canal, ditch, lagoon, pond, lake or similar
waterway which is within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark
of a navigable body of water or where the purpose is the ultimate
connection with a navigable body of water.
C. Soil conservation practices. Soil conservation practices such as
terraces, runoff diversions and grassed waterways which are used for
sediment retardation shall not require a permit under Subsection B
herein.
D. Permit conditions. In granting a conditional use permit under
§ 660-195, the City Plan Commission shall attach the following
conditions where appropriate, in addition to those provisions specified
in §§ 660-187 and 660-188.
(1) The smallest amount of bare ground shall be exposed for as short a
time as feasible. Erosion control measures outlined in § 660-143
shall be followed.
(2) Temporary ground cover (such as mulch) shall be used and
permanent cover (such as sod) shall be planted.
(3) Diversion, silting basin, terraces and other methods shall be used
to trap sediment.
§ 660-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-35
1:703
§ 660-36. Sewage disposal.
Individual sewage disposal systems are expressly prohibited unless
specifically approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals after public hearing.
§ 660-37. (Reserved)
§ 660-38. Roadway visibility.
(4) Lagooning shall be conducted in such a manner as to avoid creation
of fish trap conditions.
(5) Fill shall be stabilized according to accepted engineering
standards.
(6) Fill shall not restrict a floodway or destroy the storage capacity of a
floodplain.
(7) Sides of a channel or artificial watercourse shall be stabilized to
prevent slumping.
(8) Sides of channels or artificial watercourses shall be constructed
with slopes (side) of two units horizontal distance to one unit
vertical or flatter, unless bulkheads or riprapping are provided.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of public rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for
the provision of vehicular visibility. The requirements of this section
shall not be imposed in the downtown area.
B. Vision clearance triangle.
(1) In each quadrant of every street intersection in every district
except the B1 Downtown Business District, there shall be designed
a vision clearance triangle, formed by the two intersecting rightsof-
way and a vision line connecting the rights-of-way and extending
to the street edge (see Figure 2.3), as determined by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer. The following standards shall apply:
§ 660-35 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-38
1:704
§ 660-39. Driveways.
Figure 2.3: Vision Clearance Triangle
Table 2.1: Minimum Vision Clearance Triangle
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Distance from Right-of-Way
Intersection
(feet)
Less than 66 15
76 to 99 20
More than 99 25
(2) Within the vision clearance triangle, no signs, parking spaces,
structures, or earthwork in excess of 30 inches, and no vegetation,
fencing, nor other such obstructions between 30 inches and eight
feet in height shall be permitted which exceeds 30 inches in height
above either of the center line elevations of said two streets. This
provision shall not apply to tree trunks or posts.
C. Depiction on required site plan. Except in the downtown where no
requirement is imposed, any and all visibility triangles located on the
subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration
on the site plan as outlined in § 660-205 required for the development
of the subject property.
A. Single- and two-family residential properties.
(1) Number of driveways. Single-family uses are limited to one
driveway per lot unless otherwise regulated in this chapter. Twofamily
uses are permitted two driveways per lot unless otherwise
regulated in this chapter.
(2) Setback. Driveways shall have a minimum setback of five-feet from
the side lot line on all parcels.
(3) Width. (See Figure 2.4.)
§ 660-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-39
1:705
Figure 2.4: Residential Driveway Width
(a) Minimum. The minimum width of driveways shall be eight feet.
(b) Maximum.
[1] At the curbline or road edge. The maximum width of
driveways as measured at the curbline or road edge shall
be the lesser of 24 feet or the width of the garage,
including the taper.
[2] At the right-of-way line. The maximum width of driveways
as measured at the right-of-way line shall be the lesser of
18 feet or the width of the garage.
[3] Where no garage exists, the maximum driveway width
shall be 12 feet and shall be situated as not to create
parking located in the required front yard.
[4] Where the width of the driveway at the garage exceeds the
maximum width of the driveway at the right-of-way line,
the driveway should be tapered. (See Figure 2.5.)
§ 660-39 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-39
1:706
Figure 2.5: Driveway Taper at Right-of-Way
[5] Drives for two-family residences with adjacent garages are
limited to the twenty-four-foot maximum width at the
property line. Each individual driveway may be separated
by a green area extending from the street edge or curbline
to the garage/parking space. (See Figure 2.6.)
Figure 2.6: Driveways for Adjacent Two-Family
Residences
(c) Circular drives. Circular, horseshoe, and similar type
driveways shall be permitted where the minimum lot width is
at least 150 feet and where approved by the Director of Public
Works. The maximum width of such a driveway shall not
exceed 12 feet, except for the area of allowable paving in front
of the garage, and the inside edge of the arc of the driveway
shall be at least 25 feet from the lot line. For driveways with
two curb openings, the spacing shall provide a minimum
dimension of 50 feet between the inside driveway edges,
measured at the lot line.
§ 660-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-39
1:707
(d) One uncovered parking space is permitted alongside a garage
when said space is not located between the building and the
street or the building and the rear lot line and is no closer than
five feet from a side lot line. Said space must be screened from
view. (See Figure 2.7.)
Figure 2.7: Parking Space Alongside Residential Garage
(4) Curb openings. The maximum curb opening shall be determined by
adding five feet to the approved driveway width.
(5) Throat length. All driveways shall have a minimum throat length of
five feet extending from the right-of-way line to the beginning of
the taper. (See Figure 2.8.)
Figure 2.8: Residential Driveway Taper and Throat
(6) Surfacing. Driveways and parking spaces shall have a dust-free
surface in accordance with Table 2.2: Surfacing Standards for
Driveways and Parking Areas, below. Permeable pavers may also be
used for surfacing, installed to recognized industry standards that
§ 660-39 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-39
1:708
achieve the same or better structural integrity as other materials
specified in this section.
(7) Maintenance. All driveways shall be kept in good repair and
working order. A legal agreement shall be required for all shared
drives outlining maintenance responsibilities for adjacent property
owners. Said agreement shall be recorded against the properties
with the Jefferson County Register of Deeds.
B. Multifamily residential, commercial, and industrial use drives.
(1) Number of driveways. The maximum number of driveways shall be
established by the Director of Public Works.
(2) Location. All drives shall be located a minimum of 100 feet, as
measured from the nearest point, from all other driveways.
(3) Setback. Driveways shall have a minimum setback of eight feet
from the side lot line on all parcels.
(4) Width. The maximum width of a driveway for all multifamily
residential, commercial, and industrial uses shall not exceed 30
feet.
(5) Curb openings. The maximum curb opening shall be determined by
adding 10 feet to the approved driveway width.
C. Shared driveways.
(1) Statement of purpose. The purpose of this regulation is to provide
for the possibility of a shared driveway to serve up to two lots. The
shared driveway may be permitted by the Director of Public Works,
provided the shared driveway will meet the standards and criteria
listed below.
(2) Standards and criteria for a shared driveway:
(a) The shared driveway shall meet all of the criteria set forth in
the regulations for driveways in this section.
(b) The deeds for any lots which utilize a shared driveway shall
include all appropriate easements to pass; to install utilities as
necessary; to grade, drain, and maintain; and provide
easements where required by the City. A driveway
maintenance requirement shall be stipulated in the deeds of
both lots. Such deeds shall also contain a provision that the
driveway shall not be used for access to any other property.
(c) Access. The shared driveway shall intersect with an existing or
proposed public street.
§ 660-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-39
1:709
§ 660-40. Traffic circulation.
Table 2.2: Surfacing Standards for Driveways and
Parking Areas
Asphalt Concrete
Surface
(inches)
Base
(inches)
Surface
(inches)
Base
(inches)
Driveways, oneand
two-family
2 4 4 4
Parking lots,
commercial and
multifamily
3 8 6 4
Loading areas
and drives,
commercial
4 8 7 4
Loading areas
and drives,
industrial
4 10 7 4
A. Traffic circulation and traffic control. Site circulation shall be designed
to provide for the safe and efficient movement of all traffic entering,
exiting, and on the site. Circulation shall be provided to meet the
individual needs of the site with specific mixing of access and through
movements, and shall be depicted on any required design plan.
Circulation patterns shall conform to the general rules of the road and
all traffic control measures shall meet the requirements of the Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
B. Maintenance of off-street parking and traffic circulation areas. All offstreet
parking and traffic circulation areas shall be maintained in a
dust-free condition at all times. In no instance or manner shall any offstreet
parking or traffic circulation area be used as a storage area.
C. Traffic circulation design standards.
(1) Marking. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas shall be
paved with a hard, all-weather surface, to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Administrator. Said surfaces intended for four or more
parking stalls shall be marked in a manner that clearly indicates
required parking spaces.
(2) Lighting. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas serving
six or more cars shall be lit to ensure the safe and efficient use of
said areas during the hours of use. Said illumination shall meet the
standards of § 660-142 of this chapter.
(3) Fire lanes. A fire lane shall be required to provide access to any
portion of any structure equal to or less than 40 feet tall that is
§ 660-39 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-40
1:710
§ 660-41. Off-street parking.
more than 150 feet from the nearest street right-of-way, and to
any portion of any structure greater than 40 feet tall that is more
than 50 feet from the nearest street right-of-way. The Zoning
Administrator may also require the provision of a fire lane or lanes
to any part of any structure upon a determination that the distance
of the structure from the nearest hydrant, the configuration of
development on the site, or other special characteristics of the site
otherwise inhibit effective fire extinguishment. All fire lanes shall
provide clear, unobstructed access for vehicles and apparatus at
all times through a combination of pavement marking and signage;
shall be a minimum of 18 feet wide; and shall be surfaced as an allweather
roadway.
(4) Signage. All signage located within, or related to, required offstreet
parking or traffic circulation shall comply with the
requirements of Article VI of this chapter.
A. General provisions. This article regulates the minimum/maximum
number, the use, the design and the maintenance of parking spaces,
parking lots, drives/driveways, aisles, loading and drive-through
facilities within the City of Lake Mills.
(1) When required.
(a) For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date hereof, accessory parking
and loading facilities shall be provided as required in this
section. However, where a building permit has been issued
prior to the effective date hereof, and provided that
construction is begun within six months of such effective date
and diligently prosecuted to completion, parking and loading
facilities in the amounts required for the issuance of said
building permits may be provided in lieu of any different
amounts required by this chapter.
(b) When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or
premises shall be increased through the addition of dwelling
units, gross floor area, seating capacity, employment, or other
units of measurement specified herein for required parking or
loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required
herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
(c) Parking is not required for nonresidential uses in the B1
Downtown Business District. However, when off-street parking
facilities are provided, such facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except in
respect to the required number of spaces. Mixed-use/upperfloor
residential uses need only provide evidence of the
§ 660-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-41
1:711
availability of off-street public or private parking within 1,000
feet of the unit.
(d) Existing parking facilities. Accessory off-street parking
facilities in existence on the effective date of this chapter and
located on the same lot as the building or use served shall not
hereafter be reduced below or, if already less than, shall not be
further reduced below the requirements for a similar new
building or use under the provisions of this chapter.
(e) Use changes. Whenever the existing use of a building or
structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or
loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new
use. However, if the said building or structure was erected
prior to the effective date of this chapter, additional parking or
loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which
the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the
existing use, if the latter were subject to the parking and
loading provisions of this chapter.
(f) Damage or destruction. For any conforming or legally
nonconforming building or use which is in existence on the
effective date of this chapter, which subsequently thereto is
damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion, or other
cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished, or repaired,
off-street parking or loading facilities need not be provided,
except that parking or loading facilities equivalent to any
maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be
restored or continued in operation. However, in no case shall it
be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading
facilities in excess of those required by this chapter for
equivalent new uses or construction.
(2) Location.
(a) All parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the
structure or use that they are intended to serve, unless
otherwise specified in this chapter. In cases where parking
facilities are permitted on land other than the zoning lot on
which the building or use served is located, an agreement
allowing shared parking facilities shall be required between
the property owners. Such agreement may be either by deed or
long-term lease. The owner of the land on which the parking
facilities are to be located shall be bound by covenants filed on
record in the office of the Register of Deeds of Jefferson
County, requiring such owner, his or her heirs and assigns, to
maintain the required number of parking facilities for the
duration of the use. The recorded document shall be provided
to the City.
§ 660-41 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-41
1:712
(b) There shall be no parking in required parking setback areas or
outside of designated parking spaces, except in the driveways
of single-family and two-family dwellings. The following
regulations shall also apply:
[1] Transitional or buffer yards as regulated in § 660-113 of
this chapter take precedent over zoning district setback
requirements.
[2] Vehicular access easements across side and rear yard
setbacks of adjoining parking and loading facilities in
commercial and industrial districts, across side and rear
yards of parking and loading facilities of uses allowed by
conditional use permit in residential districts, and across
side and rear yard setbacks of multifamily developments in
multiple-family dwelling districts may be approved,
provided a cross-access easement is approved by the City
Attorney and filed with the Register of Deeds.
[3] Multifamily dwelling uses in multifamily districts may
reduce setbacks to a ten-foot minimum rear and side yard
setback for parking lots, unless a greater setback is
required per transitional buffer yard standards, and
provided the setback areas are devoted to green area and
comply with the landscaping requirements of this chapter.
(c) Locational prohibitions for off-street parking areas. No private
parking shall occur on street terraces, driveways, or any other
areas that are located within a public right-of-way.
(3) Calculation of requirements. Calculating the number of spaces
required shall be in accordance with the following:
(a) Net floor area. Net floor area shall be used for the purpose of
calculating the number of off-street parking spaces required.
(b) Assembly. In places of public assembly in which patrons or
spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating
facilities, each 30 inches of such seating shall be counted as
one seat for the purpose of this chapter.
(c) Capacity. In cases where parking requirements are based on
"capacity" of persons, capacity shall be based on the maximum
number of persons that may occupy a place, as determined by
the Building Code.
(d) Fractions. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces
required shall be construed to be the next largest number.
(e) Shopping centers/joint parking. Except in shopping centers or
where joint parking has been approved, if a structure or site
contains two or more principal uses, each use shall be
§ 660-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-41
1:713
calculated separately in determining the total off-street
parking spaces required.
(f) Unspecified uses. The Zoning Administrator shall interpret
parking space requirements for any use not specifically listed
in this chapter and shall determine the required parking from
comparable uses listed or may consult the following sources:
Institute of Traffic Engineers; Urban Land Institute;
International Conference of Shopping Centers; and the
American Planning Association.
(4) Limitations on parking facility uses. In residential districts and on
residentially used lots, accessory off-street parking facilities shall
be solely for parking of passenger vehicles, which shall be
regulated as follows:
(a) All vehicles shall be in condition for safe and legal performance
on public rights-of-way and shall be registered, displaying
current license plates.
(b) Vehicles and/or equipment not normally associated with a
residential use specifically prohibited from being parked or
stored outdoors on residential property include, but are not
limited to:
[1] Vehicles with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating
exceeding 10,000 pounds and/or are more than 21 feet in
length.
[2] Construction equipment, such as bulldozers, backhoes,
skid steers, and forklifts.
[3] Dump and stake body style trucks.
[4] Cube- or panel-type vans and trucks.
[5] Landscaping business equipment such as tractors, tree
spades, graders and scrapers.
[6] Semi-trailers and tractors.
[7] Concession, vending and catering trailers.
[8] Commercial/industrial equipment trailers and lifts.
(c) A recreational vehicle (RV) may be parked on a residential
property for a period not to exceed 10 days in any thirty-day
period.
(d) Under no circumstances may any vehicle or equipment be used
as living quarters in residential areas.
B. Parking space design.
§ 660-41 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-41
1:714
(1) Single- and two-family uses.
(a) Legal parking spaces.
[1] Parking spaces may be provided either within a garage or
as uncovered spaces on a paved surface as outlined in this
section.
[2] Parking on driveways may not encroach into the public
right-of-way.
[3] One uncovered parking space is permitted alongside a
garage when said space is not located between the
building and the street or the building and the rear lot line
and is no closer than five feet from a side lot line. Said
space must be screened from view.
[4] Impervious surface associated with rear yard parking shall
be no greater than 20% of the total rear yard area.
(b) Surfacing. All driveways and parking areas shall have a dustfree
surface in accordance with Table 2.2, Surfacing Standards
for Driveways and Parking Areas, which follows § 660-39.
Permeable pavers may also be used for surfacing, installed to
recognized industry standards that achieve the same or better
structural integrity as other materials specified in this section.
(2) Multifamily, commercial and industrial uses.
(a) Parking plan required. Creation of new or reconstruction/
alteration of an existing parking/loading area requires a
parking plan. Parking plans shall following the requirements
outlined for BSO plan per § 660-205 and include the following
information:
[1] Show all lot dimensions and lot lines.
[2] Paved areas shown and dimensioned.
[3] The traffic pattern and parking space layout shall be
indicated, including required handicapped spaces.
[4] The dimension of individual parking spaces and aisle width
shall be identified.
[5] The size and location of ingress and egress openings.
[6] The location, size at planting, and species of all landscape
plantings.
[7] The location of all lighting systems.
[8] Drainage and/or stormwater management plan subject to
approval by the Department of Public Works.
§ 660-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-41
1:715
[9] The site plan shall be drawn to scale.
(b) Access to parking areas/stalls.
[1] Parking spaces and access drives shall be arranged so as
to require ingress and egress from the parking lot to a
street only by forward motion of a vehicle.
[2] Angled spaces (those other than zero or 90°) shall be
accessed via one-way aisles.
(c) Size of parking space. One off-street parking space shall be at
least 162 square feet of area, exclusive of adequate ingress or
egress driveways to connect with a public thoroughfare. A
single stall in any garage may replace any required parking
space.
(d) Surfacing. All driveways, access drives, parking lot aisles,
parking spaces, service areas, and all off-street parking
facilities shall be graded and surfaced so as to be dust-free and
properly drained.
[1] Dust-free surface. All driveways and open off-street
parking areas shall be surfaced with a dustless all-weather
material in accordance with Table 2.2, Surfacing
Standards for Driveways and Parking Areas, which follows
§ 660-39.
[2] Drainage. Parking areas shall be designed in such a
manner so as to not have a negative surface water
drainage impact on adjacent properties and to provide
functional relief from said area. Storm sewers which serve
parking lots shall be designed to accommodate a ten-year
storm event without surcharging out of the rim.
(e) Curbs. A minimum six-inch-high curb shall be installed around
all parking areas and internal landscape islands and end caps,
except as follows:
[1] At designated driveways and cross-access areas.
[2] Where bioretention methods of stormwater management
are utilized as part of an approved grading and drainage
plan, alternative methods to the installation of curbing
may be considered by the Zoning Administrator, provided
that measures are taken to protect landscaping from
vehicular circulation damage.
[3] For industrial uses within industrial zoning districts,
curbing is only required adjacent to buildings, planting
islands, required front yards and so that no part of a
vehicle extends over or beyond any pedestrian paths or
§ 660-41 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-41
1:716
public right-of-way, unless alternative methods to curbing
are approved under Subsection B(2)(e)[2].
(f) Striping. All parking spaces and drive aisles shall be striped
and maintained in a clear and visible manner.
(g) Maintenance of parking areas. Parking facilities and required
screening and landscaping shall be continuously maintained in
good condition and appearance. Whenever necessary,
surfacing, lighting, barriers, markings, and planting materials
shall be repaired or replaced with new materials in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(h) Parking layout dimensions. Parking stalls and drive aisles shall
be installed in conformance with Table 2.3 and Figure 2.9.
Parking stall dimensions are based on the angle of the stall and
the function of the drive aisle.
Table 2.3: Recommended Minimum Parking Lot Layout
Dimensions
Parking Angle in Degrees
Minimum Permitted
Dimensions
0°
(parallel) 45° 60° 90°
(feet)
Stall width at parking
angle (SW)
9 9 9 9
Stall width parallel to
aisle (WP)
18 12.7 10.4 9
Stall depth to wall (D) 91 17.51 191 18.51
Stall length (SL) — 19.8 21
Aisle width (AW) 122 122 152 24
Throat length (right-ofway
to parking area) (T)
Refer to requirements in § 660-39
Wall to wall (singleloaded)
(W1)
21 29.5 34 42.5
Wall to wall (doubleloaded)
(W2)
32 47 53 61
NOTES:
1 Parking spaces located behind an enclosed garage and
located directly off a through aisle shall be at least 30 feet
deep.
2 This dimension represents (AW) for one-way traffic. For
two-way traffic, add 8.0 feet to a maximum (AW) of 24.0
feet.
§ 660-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-41
1:717
Figure 2.9: Recommended Parking Lot Design
Schematic
(i) Parking for physically disabled persons. Parking spaces for use
by physically disabled persons shall be provided according to
the following standards:
[1] At least one space for a parking facility offering 26 to 49
spaces.
[2] At least 2% of all spaces for a facility offering 50 to 1,000
spaces. For more than 1,000 spaces, at least 1% of the
number of spaces over 1,000.
[3] Parking spaces reserved for physically disabled persons
shall be at least 12 feet wide. Such spaces shall be located
as close as possible to an entrance of the parking facility
and to the building entrance.
[4] Reserved parking spaces for use by physically disabled
persons shall observe other applicable regulations
contained in Wisconsin Statutes § 346.503.
(j) Screening and landscaping. Parking lot screening and
landscaping shall comply with the standards set forth in
§ 660-113.
(k) Walkways and pedestrian access. Walkways shall provide
pedestrian access through parking lots from street sidewalks
to building entries. Walkways shall be located and aligned to
directly and continuously connect areas or points of pedestrian
origin and destination, and shall not be located and aligned
solely based on the outline of a parking lot configuration unless
such configuration allows for direct pedestrian access. (See
Figure 2.10.)
§ 660-41 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-41
1:718
Figure 2.10: Recommended Parking Lot Island and
Pedestrian Access Design
[1] Number. One pedestrian access is required per street
frontage.
[2] Design requirements.
[a] Walkways shall have an acceptable dust-free surface
not less than five feet in width and shall be grade
separated from the parking lot or otherwise
delineated with pavement markers, planters, or
alternate paving materials.
[b] The entirety of the on-site pedestrian walkway system
shall be marked and defined using pavement
treatments, signs, lighting, median refuge areas, and
landscaping, as appropriate and approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
[c] Where the primary pedestrian access to the site
crosses drive aisles or internal roadways, the
pedestrian crossing shall emphasize and place priority
on pedestrian access and safety.
§ 660-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-41
1:719
[d] The material and layout shall be continuous as the
pedestrian access crosses the driveway with a break
in continuity of the driveway paving and not in the
pedestrian accessway.
(l) Parking lot lighting. See § 660-142.
(m) Shared parking. The Plan Commission may approve the use of
up to 70% of the required parking spaces to meet off-street
parking regulations for two separate lots on one lot if the
following conditions are present:
[1] Lots are adjacent or opposite (directly across the street)
from each other, fronting on the same street.
[a] One lot is an evening or Sunday use and the other lot
contains a daytime use, such as:
[i] Sunday uses. Auditoriums incidental to public or
parochial schools; churches/places of worship;
theatres; bowling alleys; bars or nightclubs; or
similar uses as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
[ii] Daytime uses. For the purpose of this section, the
following uses are considered as primarily
daytime uses: schools, public or parochial; banks
and professional offices; personal service
establishments; service and repair shops;
manufacturing without second or third shift;
wholesale businesses; and similar uses, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
[b] The use for which application is being made for joint
parking shall be located within 1,000 feet of the use
providing parking facilities.
[c] The applicant shall show that there is no substantial
conflict in the principal operating hours of the
buildings or uses for which joint parking is proposed.
[d] A legally binding instrument, executed by the parties
concerned, for joint off-street parking facilities shall
be approved by the City and recorded at the Register
of Deeds.
(n) Phasing. Required off-street parking areas may be constructed
in phases with a phasing plan to be approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
[1] Areas required for parking, but not immediately improved,
shall be reserved for future parking.
§ 660-41 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-41
1:720
[2] Undeveloped future parking areas shall be seeded with
grass mix, acceptable to the Zoning Administrator, until
said area is fully developed into a parking surface.
(o) Oversized parking lots/maximum number of spaces. Parking
lots may exceed up to 10% of the maximum allowed per the
parking requirements outlined in the off-street parking
requirements in Table 2.4 through an administrative approval,
for which review consideration shall be given to the following
factors. Parking lots in excess of 10% shall be allowed only
through conditional use permit for which review consideration
shall be given to the following factors in granting the permit:
[1] The proposed development has unique or unusual
characteristics (such as high sales volume or low parking
turnover) which creates a parking demand that exceeds
the maximum ratio and does not typically apply to
comparable uses.
[2] The lot is designed to allow for more intensive future site
development.
[3] Pedestrian connectivity through the lot.
[4] The need for additional parking cannot be reasonably met
through provision of on-street or shared parking with
adjacent or nearby uses.
[5] The proposed development demonstrates that its design
and intended use will support high levels of existing or
planned transit and pedestrian activity.
(p) Temporary use parking. As part of a temporary use permit,
temporary outdoor entertainment permit, or combination
thereof, temporary use parking shall be designated on the
temporary use/event site and may also be designated on other
properties. Temporary use parking adequacy shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator based on planned
temporary use/event capacity.
(q) Snow storage requirements for off-street parking and loading
areas.
[1] Snow storage plan required. In conjunction with the
approval of a BSO plan for off-street parking areas, a snow
storage and/or removal plan shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator for review and approval.
[2] Said snow storage plan shall adequately address, either
graphically and/or in writing, the on-site storage of snow
removed from said off-street parking or loading area or the
removal from the site of such snow.
§ 660-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-41
1:721
[3] If the snow is to be physically removed from the site, the
snow storage plan shall specify the location of the
proposed snow repository site.
[4] If the snow is proposed to be stored off site, a letter of
permission from the owner of the snow repository site
shall be furnished the Zoning Administrator with the snow
storage or removal plan.
[5] Snow storage standards for parking and loading areas.
Adequate snow storage shall be provided using the
following standards:
[a] A maximum of 10% of the total required off-street
parking spaces may be used as the snow storage area.
[b] The required snow storage area may be paved or not
paved. In either case, adequate drainage of the snow
storage area shall be provided to accommodate
snowmelt, and no snowmelt shall drain on abutting
properties.
[c] Required setbacks, yards, and buffer yards may be
used to accommodate the required snow storage area.
However, areas landscaped with shrubs and/or trees
shall not be used as snow storage areas.
C. Bicycle parking. A minimum of four bicycle parking spaces may be
provided in lieu of not more than one required automobile parking
space in a nonresidential parking lot with a maximum reduction of up to
five parking spaces.
(1) Location. Bicycle parking spaces and racks shall be located in a
convenient and visible area no farther from the principal entrance
to the building served than the closest automobile parking space.
(2) Design. Bicycle parking shall consist of a bike rack designed so that
the bicycle frame can be locked to the rack.
(3) Maximum reduction. The number of required parking spaces shall
not be reduced by more than 20% of those required due to the
reduction granted by the provision of bicycle parking.
D. Off-street parking requirements. Accessory, off-street parking shall be
provided as specified in Table 2.4 for Specific Off-Street Parking
Requirements, except in the B1 Downtown Business District, or as
otherwise specified in this chapter.
§ 660-41 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-41
1:722
Table 2.4: Specific Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
Minimum
Required On-
Site Queuing
Other
Required Off-
Street Parking
Standards
Commercial/Retail
Auto agency
(sales)
1.0 per 500 SF Plus 3.0 per
service bay and
additional space
for public
display as
required if
outside display
is permitted
Auto fuel station
#1 (w/o service)
2.0 minimum Plus 4.75 per
1,000 retail SF
Auto fuel station
#2 (w/ service)
3.0 minimum Plus 3.0 per
service bay
Auto fuel station
#3 (w/
convenience
store)
Station #1 or
#2
requirements
Plus 1.0 per 200
SF
Auto fuel station
(w/ car wash)
Station #1 or
#2
requirements
Equal to 3 times
car wash
capacity
Auto parts (tire/
battery/acc.)
4.75 per 1,000
SF
Auto service
station
3.0 minimum Plus 3.0 per
service bay
Barber/beauty
salon
3.0 per licensed
chair
Building
materials/home
improvement
center
4.75 per 1,000
SF
Car wash (full
service)
1.0 per 200 SF
of office space
Equal to 8 times
car wash
capacity
Plus 1.0 per
employee on
largest shift
Car wash (self
service)
4.0 cars per
wash stall
Car wash
(accessory)
Equal to 3 times
car wash
capacity
§ 660-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-41
1:723
Table 2.4: Specific Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
Minimum
Required On-
Site Queuing
Other
Required Off-
Street Parking
Standards
Commercial or
retail sales uses
(except as
herein noted)
4.75 per 1,000
SF
Commercial
vegetable and
flower
gardening, plant
nurseries and
greenhouses
2.0 per 3
employees on
maximum shift
Plus 1.0 per
vehicle used or
stored plus 5.0
per 1,000 SF
retail floor area
Equipment
sales, service,
rental and
repair
1.0 per 250 SF
Furniture store 2.5 per 1,000 SF
General
merchandise
and department
store < 5,000
SF
5.0 per 1,000 SF
General
merchandise
and convenience
store >5,000 SF
4.75 per 1,000
SF
Hardware,
paint, home
improvement
store
4.0 per 1,000 SF
Laundry and dry
cleaning (dropoff/
pick-up)
4.0 per 1,000 SF
Laundry (self
service)
1.0 per 2
washers
Paint store 3.0 per 1,000 SF
§ 660-41 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-41
1:724
Table 2.4: Specific Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
Minimum
Required On-
Site Queuing
Other
Required Off-
Street Parking
Standards
Plumbing, airconditioning
and
heating
equipment
(sales, service,
warehousing)
3.0 per 1,000 SF
sales and office
area stored
Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
maximum shift;
plus 1.0 per
vehicle stored
on site
Restaurant,
dine-in (quality,
gourmet, family)
1.0 per 3 seats Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
maximum shift;
10.0 minimum
Restaurant,
dine-in, fast food
(w/o drivethrough)
1.0 per 2 seats Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
maximum shift
Restaurant, fast
food (w/ drivethrough)
1.0 per 2 seats 8.0 per drive-up
window with 3
spaces minimum
at ordering
station
Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
maximum shift
Shopping center
(w/
supermarket)
5.5 per 1,000 SF
Shopping center
(w/o
supermarket)
5.0 per 1,000 SF
Shopping center
(3+ stores, not
classified
elsewhere in
table)
5.0 per 1,000 SF
Specialty retail
center (average
tenant space <
2,500 SF)
4.0 per 1,000 SF
Specialty store 4.0 per 1,000 SF
Supermarket,
grocery
6.0 per 1,000 SF
Taxidermist 2.0 per 1,000 SF
§ 660-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-41
1:725
Table 2.4: Specific Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
Minimum
Required On-
Site Queuing
Other
Required Off-
Street Parking
Standards
Tavern, bar,
cocktail lounge
1.0 per 2.5 seats Plus 1.5 per
employee on
maximum shift
Truck service
center and
repair facility
1.0 per
employee
Plus 2.0 truck
spaces per each
stall
Video tape
rental/sales
5.5 per 1,000 SF
Residential
Apartment 2.0 per unit of
which 1 must be
enclosed
Plus 0.5 per unit
for visitors
Caretaker's
residence
1.0 per bedroom
Condominium 2.0 per unit of
which 1 must be
enclosed
Plus 0.5 per unit
for visitors
Dormitories or
group living
facilities
(CBRFs)
0.5 per bedroom
Dwellings
(single-family
detached)
2.0 per dwelling
Dwellings (twofamily/
duplex)
2.0 per unit of
which 1 must be
enclosed
Plus 0.5 per unit
for visitors
Group homes 0.25 per bed Plus 1.0 per
employee on
maximum shift
Rectory 1.0 per bedroom
Residential units
in nonresidential
structures
1.0 per bedroom
§ 660-41 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-41
1:726
Table 2.4: Specific Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
Minimum
Required On-
Site Queuing
Other
Required Off-
Street Parking
Standards
Senior citizen
multiple-family/
retirement
community
0.5 per unit Consider 1.0 per
unit reserved for
future
conversion to
conventional
multiple-family
Transportation/Communication/Utilities:
Airports/
heliports/
landing strips
2.0 per 3
employees on
maximum shift
Plus 1.0 per
vehicle used or
stored; plus 1.0
per 200 SF
lobby area
Radio, TV and
other
communication
facilities
2.0 per
employee on
maximum shift
Plus 1.0 per
vehicle used or
stored
Institutional:
Child-care
centers/day
nurseries
1.0 per
employee
Plus 1.0 per 10
children
Churches/
chapels
1.0 per 3 seats Plus 1.0 per
vehicle used or
stored on
premises
Clubs and
lodges
1.0 per 4 seats;
or 1.0 per 3
members,
whichever is
greater
Hospitals 0.75 spaces per
bed
Kennels 2.0 per 3
employees on
maximum shift
Plus 1.0 per
vehicle used or
stored
Museums/
galleries
2.5 per 1,000 SF
gross floor area
Nursing homes 0.75 per bed 5 vehicles on
site
§ 660-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-41
1:727
Table 2.4: Specific Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
Minimum
Required On-
Site Queuing
Other
Required Off-
Street Parking
Standards
Postal stations 4.0 per
customer
service station
Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
maximum shift;
Plus 1.0 per
vehicle stored
on site
Schools
(preschools)
1.0 per
employee
Plus 1.0 per 10
children
Schools
(elementary
schools)
1.0 per
classroom and
4.5 per 1,000 SF
office
8 vehicles
Schools (middle
schools)
1.0 per
classroom and
4.5 per 1,000 SF
office
8 vehicles
Schools (high
schools)
1.0 per
classroom and
4.5 per 1,000 SF
office
8 vehicles Plus 1.0 per 3
students
Schools (special
education)
1.0 per
classroom and
4.5 per 1,000 SF
office
8 vehicles
Schools
(vocational)
1.0 per
classroom and
4.5 per 1,000 SF
office
Plus 1.0 per 2
students
Schools (college,
university)
1.0 per
employee
Plus 1.0 per 2
students
Cultural/Entertainment/Recreational
Arcades/
amusement
places
5.0 per 1,000 SF Plus 1.0 per 2
games
Athletic fields 60 per 1 facility
(field, diamond);
100 per 2
facilities
§ 660-41 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-41
1:728
Table 2.4: Specific Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
Minimum
Required On-
Site Queuing
Other
Required Off-
Street Parking
Standards
Auditoriums/
meeting rooms/
places for public
assembly
(except as noted
herein)
1.0 per 3 seats
or 1.0 per 50 SF
floor area of
assembly area
where there is
no fixed seating
Bowling alleys 5.0 per alley
Cemeteries 2.0 per 3
employees on
maximum shift
Plus 1.0 garage
space per
vehicle used or
stored
Clubs/lodges,
open to public
1.0 per 2.5 seats Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
maximum shift
Community
centers and
private,
nonprofit
recreation
centers (except
as noted)
4.0 per 1,000 SF 5 vehicles on
site
Plus 1.0 per
employee on
maximum shift
Dance studio,
martial arts
studio
5.0 per 1,000 SF
Golf/country
clubs
To be
determined by
Plan
Commission
based upon
report prepared
by applicant
Golf courses 3.0 per hole Plus spaces
equal to 30%
total licensed
seating capacity
of buildings
Golf driving
ranges
2.0 per tee
§ 660-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-41
1:729
Table 2.4: Specific Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
Minimum
Required On-
Site Queuing
Other
Required Off-
Street Parking
Standards
Golf, miniature 1.0 per 5,000 SF
lot area
Gymnasiums 3.0 per 1,000 SF
Handball/
racquetball
courts
3.0 per court
Ice and roller
rinks
5.5 per 1,000 SF
Parks (City/
county/state),
playgrounds and
picnic grounds
To be
determined by
Parks Board
Sports club/
health spa
7.0 per 1,000 SF
Swimming pools 3.0 per 1,000 SF Plus 1.0 per
employee
Tennis clubs 3.0 per 1,000 SF Plus 1.0 per 4
spectator seats
Tennis courts,
outdoor
3.0 per court Plus 1.0 per 4
spectator seats
Theater, live 1.0 per 50 SF
Theater, music 1.0 per 50 SF
Theater, movie 0.50 per seat
Industrial
Concrete or
asphalt batch
plant
1.0 per
employee
1.0 per vehicle
stored on site
Light industry 2.0 per 1,000 SF
office/customer
use
Plus 1.0 per 750
SF other or per
vehicle used/
stored
Manufacturing
and fabrication
2.0 per 1,000 SF
office/customer
use
Plus 1.5 per
employee on
maximum shift
and 1.0 per
company vehicle
stored on site
§ 660-41 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-41
1:730
Table 2.4: Specific Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
Minimum
Required On-
Site Queuing
Other
Required Off-
Street Parking
Standards
Plumbing, airconditioning
and
heating
equipment
(sales, service,
warehousing)
2.0 per 1,000 SF
office/retail use
Plus 1.0 per 750
SF other or per
vehicle used/
stored
Warehousing
and wholesaling
2.0 per 3
employees on
maximum shift
Plus 1.0 per
vehicle used/
stored but no
less than 1/
2,000 SF
Office
Dental offices
and clinics
4.5 per 1,000 SF
Medical office
building or
clinic
6.0 per 1,000 SF
floor area or 5.0
per doctor,
whichever is
greater
Office building,
general
Maximum 4.5
per 1,000 gross
SF to minimum
4.0 per 1,000
net SF based
upon floor plan
utilization
report approved
by Plan
Commission
with maximum
of 20% of gross
SF to be
considered
unleasable
space under a
net square foot
analysis
Research center
(nonleasable
space)
3.0 per 1,000 SF
up to 50,000 SF
Plus 2.5 per
1,000 SF over
50,000 SF
§ 660-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-41
1:731
§ 660-42. Off-street loading facilities.
Table 2.4: Specific Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
Minimum
Required On-
Site Queuing
Other
Required Off-
Street Parking
Standards
Services
Financial: bank
(walk-in only)
4.5 per 1,000 SF
Financial: bank
(drive-up and
walk-in)
4.5 per 1,000 SF Equal to 5 times
drive up
capacity
Financial:
lending agency,
stockbroker
4.0 per 1,000 SF
Hotels, motels 1.0 per sleeping
unit
Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
maximum shift;
Plus 1.0 per
vehicle used or
stored
Insurance
agents/brokers
4.0 per 1,000 SF
Mortuaries/
funeral homes
1.0 per 5 seats;
10 minimum
Real estate
agents/brokers
4.5 per 1,000 SF
Veterinary
clinics and
hospitals
6.0 minimum Plus 4.0 per
each exam room
over 1 room
A. Requirement. Loading and/or unloading facilities shall be provided for
all commercial and industrial uses which require receipt or distribution
by vehicles of materials and merchandise according to Table 2.5, unless
an equivalent number of spaces are provided in conformity with these
regulations. The off-street loading requirements shall also apply when a
commercial or industrial establishment is expanded. Within a shopping
center, the requirements set forth in Table 2.5 shall apply to each
establishment or business tenant space rather than to the shopping
center as a whole.
§ 660-41 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-42
1:732
Table 2.5: Minimum Off-Street Loading Berth Requirements
Floor Area of
Establishment
(square feet)
Required
Number
Minimum
Size
(feet)
Minimum
Vertical
Clearance
(feet)
0 to 10,000 1 10 x 25 12
10,001 to 25,000 2 10 x 40 12
25,001 to 40,000 3 10 x 50 15
40,001 to 100,000 4 10 x 60 15
Over 100,000 5* 10 x 60 15
NOTES:
* Plus one additional space for every 25,000 square feet of floor area
over 150,000.
B. Location.
(1) All required loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the
use served.
(2) All required off-street loading spaces shall not be located in a
required side yard.
(3) All required off-street loading spaces shall not directly face a public
or private street.
(4) All required off-street loading spaces shall be located to provide
direct access to a street or alley so as not to hinder the free
movement of pedestrians and vehicles on a sidewalk, street, or
alley.
C. Drainage. All open loading spaces shall have a stormwater drainage
system connected to a public storm sewer if available, as approved by
the Zoning Administrator. No surface runoff shall be allowed to flow
across any lot line.
D. Screening. All loading spaces shall be screened from the view of
abutting lots to a height of at least six feet by a solid fence and/or
evergreen vegetation in compliance with § 660-113.
E. Loading spaces do not count as parking spaces. Space required and
allocated for off-street loading shall not be allocated or used to satisfy
the space requirements for off-street parking.
F. Surfacing. All open off-street loading spaces shall be provided with
surface improvements as required for parking areas.
G. Service and repair. Repairing or servicing of motor vehicles shall not be
permitted in an off-street loading space.
§ 660-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-42
1:733

ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts and Land Uses
§ 660-43. Establishment of zoning districts. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
In order to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter, the City of Lake
Mills is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
Standard Zoning Districts
Residential Districts
Single-Family Districts
Rural Development (RD) District
Single-Family Residential-4 (R1-4) District
Single-Family Residential-6 (R1-6) District
Single-Family Residential-8 (R1-8) District
Two-Family Districts
Two-Family Residential-8 (R2-8) District
Multiple-Family Districts
Multifamily Residential-12 (R3-12) District
Nonresidential Districts
Business and Office Districts
Downtown Business (B1) District
Neighborhood Business (B2) District
Planned Business (PB) District
Industrial Districts
General Industrial (I1) District
Heavy Industrial (I2) District
Planned Industrial (PI) District
Special Purpose Districts
Planned Development (PDD) District
Overlay Districts
Lake Residential Overlay (LRO) District
Public and Institutional Overlay (PIO) District
Historic Preservation Overlay (HPO) District
Wellhead Protection Overlay (WPO) District
Shoreland-Wetland Overlay (SWO) District
Floodplain Overlay (FPO) District
Flood-Fringe Overlay (FFO) District
§ 660-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-43
1:735
General Floodplain (GFP) District
Conservancy Overlay (CO) District
Flood Storage Overlay (FSO) District
Extraterritorial Districts
A1 Exclusive Agriculture District, ETZ
R1 Single-Family, Low-Density Residential District, ETZ
R3 Multifamily Residential District, ETZ
PB Planned Business District, ETZ
PO Planned Office District, ETZ
PDD Planned Development Overlay District, ETZ
§ 660-44. Zoning Maps.
§ 660-45. District boundaries.
When uncertainty exists with respect to boundaries of the various districts
shown on the Zoning Maps, the following rules shall apply:
A. Official City of Lake Mills Zoning Map. The location and boundaries of
the districts and overlay districts established by this chapter are set
forth on the Official Zoning Map, which is incorporated herein and
made a part of this chapter. The Official Zoning Map, and all
amendments thereto, shall be deemed included within this chapter as
though fully set forth and described herein. The Official Zoning Map is
sometimes referred to in this chapter as the "Zoning Map" or the
"Zoning District Map."
B. Extraterritorial Zoning Map. The Extraterritorial Zoning Map is an
integral part of this chapter. The official copy of this map, entitled "Lake
Mills Extraterritorial Zoning Map," together with a copy of this chapter,
shall be kept at the office of the City Clerk and shall be available for
public inspection during office hours. The map shall be certified by the
City Clerk. Any changes in zoning district boundaries shall be recorded
on the map. No such change shall be effective until so recorded.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Zoning boundary determination. The zoning district boundaries are
corporate limits; United States Public Land Survey lines; lot or property
lines; center lines of streets, highways (not including freeways), alleys,
easements, and railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended; flood
boundaries; and wetland boundaries unless otherwise shown. Distances
not specifically shown on the Zoning Maps shall be determined by the
scale of the Zoning Maps.
B. Zoning boundary determination for approximate boundaries. Where the
designation of the Official Zoning Map shows that various zoning
§ 660-43 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-45
1:736
districts are approximately bounded by a street, alley, railroad, lot
line, flood boundary, or wetland boundary such lot line or the center
line of such street, alley, or railroad right-of-way, the flood boundaries,
or wetland boundaries as delineated on large-scale topographic maps
prepared by the City or as determined by using flood profiles and
accompanying hydrologic and hydraulic engineering data, said
approximate boundaries shall be construed to be the zoning district
boundary line.
C. Split zoning of newly created lots not allowed. The rezoning of any lot or
parcel into more than one standard zoning district shall not be allowed.
Use of overlay zoning districts and the Planned Development District
shall be excepted. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single
ownership on the effective date of this chapter, the Zoning Board of
Appeals, after due hearing, may extend the regulations for either
portion of such lot.
D. Zoning district boundary lines on unsubdivided property. In
unsubdivided property, the location of the zoning district boundary lines
shown on the Zoning Maps shall be determined by:
(1) For unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines shown on
the maps shall be determined by use of the scale shown on such
maps;
(2) In the case of flood boundaries, shall be determined by using flood
profiles and accompanying hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
data; or
(3) Be in accordance with the dimensions shown on the map measured
at right angles from the center line of the street or highway, and the
length of frontage shall be according to dimensions shown on the
map from section, quarter-section, or division lines, or center lines
of streets, highways, or railroad rights-of-way unless otherwise
shown.
E. Locating shoreland-wetland boundaries. Where an apparent
discrepancy exists between Shoreland-Wetland Districts shown on the
official wetland maps and actual field conditions at the time the maps
were adopted, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall contact the
appropriate field office of the WDNR to determine if the Shoreland-
Wetland District as mapped is in error. If the WDNR staff concur with
the Zoning Enforcement Officer that a particular area was incorrectly
mapped as a wetland, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to immediately grant or deny a land use permit in accordance
with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to
correct wetland mapping errors shown on the Official Zoning Map, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for initiating a map
amendment within a reasonable period of time.
§ 660-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-46
1:737
§ 660-46. Zoning of streets, alleys, public ways, waterways, and
railroad rights-of-way.
All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways, and railroad rights-of-way, if not
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zoning
district as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets,
public ways, waterways, and railroad rights-of-way. Where the center line
of a street, alley, public way, waterway, or railroad right-of-way serves as
a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically
designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property
up to such center line.
§ 660-47. Annexed land.
§ 660-48. through § 660-51. (Reserved)
§ 660-52. Purpose statements.
A. Temporary zoning. Except as provided in § 62.233, Wis. Stats., an
annexation ordinance may temporarily designate the classification of
the annexed area for zoning purposes until the zoning ordinance is
amended as prescribed in § 660-197 and § 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats. All
real estate that is annexed to the City shall be automatically classified
in the Rural Development (RD) District upon annexation, unless
otherwise classified by amendment.
B. Recommendation. Before introduction of an ordinance containing such
a temporary classification, the proposed classification shall be referred
to and recommended by the Plan Commission, which shall cause a Class
1 notice to be published, and which shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed interim zoning classification. The authority to make such
temporary classification shall not be effective when the county
ordinance prevails during litigation as provided in § 59.69(7), Wis.
Stats.
A. Standard zoning districts.
(1) Residential districts.
(a) Single-family districts.
[1] Rural Development (RD) District. This district is intended
to permit development which is solely of a rural
community character. The land use standards for this
district permit very low density single-family detached
residential development, as well as a variety of
agricultural and agriculture-supporting land uses. Density
and intensity standards for this district are designed to
ensure that development which requires even a minimum
of urban services does not occur until such services are
available. As such, the Rural Development District shall
§ 660-46 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-52
1:738
either serve as a designation which preserves and protects
agricultural activities, or as a "holding zone" which
provides for an interim land use (agriculture) that will
easily permit further development (with rezoning to
another district) at the appropriate time. In this manner,
even if all property were developed in a given area with
the RD District designation, the rural community
character of that area would still be maintained. This
district has a maximum density of one dwelling unit per 35
acres of land area.
[2] Single-Family Residential-4 (R1-4) District. The purpose of
the Single-Family Residential-4 District is to accommodate
lower-density single-family residential development in the
City. This district primarily consists of post-World War II
residential neighborhoods that have a suburban character,
and has a maximum density of approximately four units
per acre.
[3] Single-Family Residential-6 (R1-6) District. The purpose of
the Single-Family Residential-6 District is to accommodate
medium-density single-family residential development in
the City. This district primarily consists of post-World War
II residential neighborhoods that have a urban character,
and has a maximum density of approximately six units per
acre.
[4] Single-Family Residential-8 (R1-8) District. The purpose of
the Single-Family Residential-8 District is to accommodate
higher-density single-family residential development in the
City. This district primarily consists of older platted
residential neighborhoods that have a urban character,
and has a maximum density of approximately eight units
per acre.
(b) Two-family districts. Two-Family Residential-8 (R2-8) District.
The purpose of the Two-Family Residential-8 District is to
preserve higher-density single- and two-family residential
development in older neighborhoods of the City, and to
accommodate new residential development with a similar
character. The R2-8 District also provides for auxiliary dwelling
units compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods.
The district is intended to provide the principal location for
single-family attached dwelling types, including duplexes, twin
houses, and two-flats. This district has a maximum density of
approximately eight units per acre.
(c) Multiple-family districts. Multifamily Residential-12 (R3-12)
District. The purpose of the R3-12 Multifamily Residential
District is to accommodate a range of housing densities and a
§ 660-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-52
1:739
variety of housing types and styles, with a maximum density of
approximately 12 units per acre.
(2) Nonresidential districts.
(a) Business and office districts.
[1] Downtown Business (B1) District. The purpose of the
Downtown Business District is to provide for the
maintenance and orderly growth of a traditional,
pedestrian friendly, compact district of retail, service,
office, and higher density residential uses in the central
area of the City. A wide range of office, retail, and lodging
land uses are permitted within this district. Development
within the B1 District is intended to promote the
rehabilitation and full utilization of existing older
structures as well as appropriate redevelopment to assist
in maintaining the long-term viability of the center of the
community.
[2] Neighborhood Business (B2) District. The purpose of the
Neighborhood Business District is to provide locations for
small-scale service, retail and office uses that primarily
serve the convenience needs of neighborhoods. The B2
District permits a mix of uses, but care must be taken to
ensure that adequate access, parking and screening is
provided so as not to negatively impact adjoining
residential neighborhoods.
[3] Planned Business (PB) District. The purpose of the
Planned Business District is intended to provide for the
orderly and attractive grouping at appropriate locations of
commercial activities of a more general retail and
wholesale nature, and of the office and service facilities
serving a larger community trade area. Uses in the PB
District have the potential to generate significant
automobile traffic, and therefore care must be taken to
properly design access and parking facilities. Since this
district is located along the roads that serve as gateways,
quality building architecture, landscaping and other site
improvements are necessary to ensure this type of
development enhances Lake Mills' image. The size and
location of such districts shall be based upon relationship
of the community need and economy. Uncoordinated,
piecemeal development of small parcels that do not fit into
a larger context are discouraged in the PB District.
Compatible land uses, access, traffic circulation,
stormwater management and natural features, all should
be integrated into an overall development plan. Because
this district is primarily at high-visibility locations, quality
building architecture, landscaping and other site
§ 660-52 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-52
1:740
improvements are required to ensure superior aesthetic
and functional quality.
(b) Industrial districts.
[1] General Industrial (I1) District. This district is intended to
provide for the same type of manufacturing and industrial
development as in the PI District, but in those areas where
the relationship to surrounding land use would create
fewer problems of compatibility and would not necessitate
as stringent regulatory controls. This district should not
normally abut directly upon residential uses without the
use of increased setbacks or extensive landscape buffers.
[2] Heavy Industrial (I2) District. The purpose of the Heavy
Industrial District is to provide areas suitable for primary
and secondary processing, manufacturing and
remanufacturing or reprocessing of all types, with related
outdoor storage and incidental sales. The I2 District is
appropriate where the location has access to an arterial
street or highway, an active rail corridor, and where uses
will not create significant adverse impacts on residential,
commercial or other nonindustrial uses in the area. It must
be emphasized that this is not a district where virtually any
land use is permitted.
[3] Planned Industrial (PI) District. The Planned Industrial
District is intended to provide for the orderly and
attractive grouping in appropriately landscaped grounds
of any manufacturing or industrial operation which, on the
basis of actual physical and operational characteristics,
would not be detrimental to the surrounding area or to the
community as a whole by reason of noise, dust, smoke,
odor, traffic, physical appearance or other similar factor;
and to establish such regulatory controls as will
reasonably insure compatibility with the surrounding area.
B. Special purpose districts. Planned Development District (PDD). The
purpose of the Planned Development District is intended to provide
more incentives for redevelopment in areas of the community which are
experiencing a lack of reinvestment, or which require flexible zoning
treatment because of factors which are specific to the site. This district
is designed to forward both aesthetic and economic objectives of the
City by controlling the site design and the land use, appearance,
density, or intensity of development within the district in a manner
which is consistent with sound land use, urban design, and economic
revitalization principles. The application of these standards will ensure
long-term progress and broad participation toward these principles.
Refer to § 660-206 for the procedures applicable to proposal review in
this standard zoning district. The City intends to use the Planned
§ 660-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-52
1:741
Development District to provide a mechanism for review of planned
neighborhoods, mixed use, and traditional neighborhood developments.
C. Overlay zoning districts.
(1) Lake Residential Overlay (LRO) District. This district is intended to
apply to lake shore properties with specialized regulations
appropriate to their unique character; with particular recognition
of the disproportionately high land value of lake frontage, the
problems of over intensive exploitation of such frontage resulting
from excessive demand, the extreme vulnerability of lake shore
properties to nuisance and to adverse effect on property value, and
the problems of pollution and public safety resulting from over use.
(2) Public and Institutional Overlay (PIO) District. The purpose of the
Public and Institutional Overlay District is to regulate the
development of larger public and semipublic uses in a manner
harmonious with surrounding uses. The PI District designation is
intended to provide an area for activities relating to necessary
public services, provide for continued operation and facilitate
managed growth of existing institutions, and provide and protect
parks, open space and other natural, physical assets of the
community to improve the aesthetic and functional features of the
community.
(3) Historic Preservation Overlay (HPO) District. This district is
intended to preserve and enhance the historical quality of Lake
Mills' historic neighborhoods, places, and corridors. As emphasized
in the Comprehensive Plan, the HPO District is designed to forward
aesthetic objectives of the City by controlling the appearance of
development within the district in a manner which is consistent
with historic neighborhood design principles. The application of
these standards will ensure long-term progress and broad
participation toward these principles. Section 660-180 outlines the
procedures applicable to proposal review in this overlay district.
(4) Wellhead Protection Overlay (WPO) District. The purpose of the
WPO District is to protect the City's municipal water supply and
areas from which City wells draw water, and to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City. The
residents of the City depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe
drinking water supply and certain land use practices and activities
can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality.
(5) Shoreland-Wetland Overlay (SWO) District. The SWO District is
intended to preserve, protect, and enhance the ponds, streams, and
wetland areas of the City. The preservation, protection, and
enhancement of these areas will serve to maintain safe and
healthful conditions; maintain and improve water quality, both
ground and surface; prevent flood damage; control stormwater
runoff; protect stream banks from erosion; protect groundwater
§ 660-52 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-52
1:742
recharge and discharge areas; protect wildlife habitat; protect
native plant communities; avoid the location of structures on soils
which are generally not suitable for use; and protect the waterbased
recreational resources of the City.
(6) Floodplain Overlay (FPO) District. The purposes of the Floodplain
Overlay District are to: ensure public safety through reducing the
threats to life and personal injury; eliminate new hazards to
emergency response officials; prevent the occurrence of public
emergencies resulting from water quality contamination, and
pollution due to flooding; avoid the loss of utility services which if
damaged by flooding would disrupt or shut down the utility
network and impact regions of the community beyond the site of
flooding; eliminate costs associated with the response and cleanup
of flooding conditions; and reduce damage to public and private
property resulting from flooding waters.
(7) Conservancy Overlay (CO) District. The purpose of the
Conservancy Overlay District is to protect the public health, safety,
comfort and welfare and reducing financial burdens imposed on the
community and its individuals by restricting the use of many of
those areas within the City that are subject to periodic inundation,
high groundwater table, unstable soil conditions, presence of
primary and secondary environmental corridors, etc. It is the
intention of the City to allow the development of such areas
through the process of rezoning, provided the difficulties inherent
in soil conditions can be overcome.
D. Extraterritorial zoning districts.
(1) A1 Exclusive Agriculture District, ETZ. The long-range goal for
agricultural land use within Jefferson County is to preserve the
most valuable of resources that of fertile land for agricultural
pursuits, and to protect the land best suited for farming from
premature urbanization. The agricultural district regulations are
therefore designed to regulate the use of land and structures
within the areas of the county where soil and topographic
conditions are best adapted to agricultural pursuits. The
agricultural lands best suited for farming and for protection against
development are prime agricultural lands as defined in the
Jefferson County Zoning Ordinance. Jefferson County's A1
Exclusive Agriculture District regulations are incorporated herein
by reference and made a part of the extraterritorial zoning
regulations set forth in this chapter.
(2) R1 Single-Family Residential District, ETZ. This district is intended
to permit development which has a low-density community
character. The land use standards for this district allow primarily
single-family detached residential development and a variety of
related institutional, recreational, and social land uses. The City of
Lake Mills Single-Family Residential-4 (R1-4) District regulations
§ 660-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-52
1:743
§ 660-53. through § 660-54. (Reserved)
are incorporated herein by reference and made a part of the
extraterritorial zoning regulations set forth in this chapter.
(3) R3 Multifamily Residential District, ETZ. This district is intended to
permit development which has a higher-density community
character. The land use standards for this district primarily allow
single-family detached, twin house/duplex, two flats, townhouses,
and multifamily residential development and a variety of related
institutional, recreational, and social land uses. The City of Lake
Mills Multifamily Residential-12 (R3-12) District regulations are
incorporated herein by reference and made a part of the
extraterritorial zoning regulations set forth in this chapter. The
performance standards and design review requirements set forth in
Article V of this chapter of the City of Lake Mills Code are also
applicable and incorporated herein by reference.
(4) PB Planned Business District, ETZ. This district is intended to
permit large- and small-scale commercial development which is
compatible with the desired overall community character of the
area in general. Significant areas of landscaping are required in
this district to ensure that this effect is achieved. A wide range of
office, retail, and lodging land uses are permitted within this
district. The performance standards and design review
requirements set forth in Article V of this chapter of the City of
Lake Mills Code are also applicable and incorporated herein by
reference.
(5) PO Planned Office District, ETZ. This district is intended to permit
high-quality office and institutional land uses at an intensity
compatible with the overall character of the City. A relatively low
maximum floor area ratio (FAR) and significant areas of
landscaping are required in this district to ensure that this effect is
achieved. The performance standards and design review
requirements set forth in Article V of this chapter of the City of
Lake Mills Code are also applicable and incorporated herein by
reference.
(6) PDD, Planned Development Overlay District, ETZ. This overlay
district is intended to permit greater flexibility and, consequently,
more creative and imaginative design for the development of a site
than is possible under conventional zoning regulations. It is further
intended to promote more economical and efficient use of land
while providing a harmonious mix of land uses, a higher level of
amenities, adequate buffering between adjacent uses, and
preservation of the natural qualities of open spaces. The City of
Lake Mills Planned Development Overlay District regulations in
§§ 660-63A and 660-206 are incorporated herein by reference and
made a part of the extraterritorial zoning regulations set forth in
this chapter.
§ 660-52 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-55
1:744
§ 660-55. Extraterritorial Zoning (ETZ).
§ 660-56. Land use regulations and Matrix of Land Uses.
A. Intent. The intent of these extraterritorial zoning (ETZ) regulations is to
promote public health, safety, and general welfare, and to provide
sound controls over land uses within the areas over which the
governing body of the City of Lake Mills has jurisdiction pursuant to
§ 62.23(7a) of the Wisconsin Statutes. These ETZ regulations and
associated map have been approved by the Joint Extraterritorial Zoning
Committee for the City of Lake Mills and Town of Lake Mills, and all
necessary public hearings have been held and all approving and
recommending actions taken by the Town and the City, as called for by
the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Scope. The restrictions and requirements set forth in this chapter shall
be deemed the minimum necessary to conserve the value of land and
buildings and encourage the most appropriate use of land, to lessen
congestion in the streets, secure safety from fire and other dangers,
promote health and general welfare, provide adequate light and air,
prevent overcrowding of land, avoid undue concentration of population,
and facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewers,
schools, parks, and other public requirements.
C. Authority. Should the requirements of this chapter be found in conflict
with any state statute, local ordinance, or regulation, or any existing
easement, covenant or agreement, or any permits previously issued
pursuant to law applicable to the use of any land or structure in the
area specified herein as the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction limits,
the more restrictive law, ordinance, regulation, restriction, or
requirement shall govern.
D. Description of extraterritorial zoning area. The lands affected by this
chapter are those described in Resolution 02-44,24 and as referred to as
the North Growth Area in an intergovernmental agreement between
the City and the Town of Lake Mills, and as is further shown in an
exhibit to that agreement, all of which are incorporated herein by
reference. In the event of any dispute regarding the location or extent
of the ETZ area, the determination of whether an area is included
within or excluded from the extraterritorial zoning area shall refer to
§ 63.23(7a) of the Wisconsin Statutes, which requires all boundary lines
to follow government lot or survey section or fractional section lines or
public roads.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to indicate which land uses may
locate in each zoning district and under what requirements; and which
land uses may not locate therein. A further distinction is made for land
uses which may locate in a given district only upon obtaining a
24.Editor's Note: Said resolution is titled, "A Resolution Declaring Intent to Exercise
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction in the Town of Lake Mills."
§ 660-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-56
1:745
conditional or temporary use permit to do so. Finally, certain land uses
may locate in a given district as a matter of right upon compliance with
special regulations for such a land use.
B. Regulation of allowed uses. The land uses listed in Subsection C are
specifically designated and refer to the detailed listing of land uses
contained in Article IV, Standards and Regulations for Specific Land
Uses.
(1) Land uses permitted by right. Land uses listed as permitted by
right are permitted per the general land use requirement of this
chapter; per the general requirements of the specific zoning
district in which they are located; per any additional requirements
imposed by applicable overlay zoning districts as designated on the
Official Zoning Map; per the general requirements of this chapter
including § 660-197; and per any and all other applicable City,
county, state, and federal regulations.
(2) Land uses permitted as a conditional use. Land uses permitted as a
conditional use are subject to all the requirements applicable to
uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection B(1) above, plus any
additional requirements applicable to that particular land use as
contained in Article IV, Standards and Regulations for Specific
Land Uses, including any additional requirements imposed as part
of the conditional use process. Each application for, and instance
of, a conditional use shall be considered a unique situation and
shall not be construed as precedence for similar requests. Also
reference § 660-195, Conditional uses.
(3) Land uses permitted as an accessory use. Land uses permitted as
an accessory use are permitted subject to all the requirements
applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection B(1)
above, plus any additional requirements applicable to that
particular land use as contained in Article IV, Standards and
Regulations for Specific Land Uses.
(4) Land uses permitted as a temporary use. Land uses listed as
permitted as a temporary use are permitted subject to all the
requirements applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in
Subsection B(1), above, plus any additional requirements
applicable to that particular land use as contained in Article IV,
Standards and Regulations for Specific Land Uses.
(5) Land uses not listed. Land uses which are not listed or designated
by a letter in the Matrix of Land Uses in § 660-56C shall be
specifically prohibited. The Plan Commission shall be responsible
for all determinations of use and permissibility.
C. Matrix of Land Uses. The matrix indicates, by zoning district, the land
uses or activities permitted by right (P), permitted by conditional use
(C), permitted as a temporary use (T), and permitted as an accessory
§ 660-56 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-56
1:746
§ 660-57. Bulk regulations.
(A). Blank spaces in the matrix specify that a listed activity or use is
prohibited.25
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to indicate the requirements for
building location and bulk in both residential and nonresidential
developments.
B. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot size. In any residence district, on a lot of record on the
effective date of this chapter, a single-family dwelling may be
established regardless of the size of the lot, provided all other
requirements of this chapter are complied with. Notwithstanding
anything contained herein to the contrary, the shape and dimension
of any nonconforming lot of record as of the effective date of this
chapter may be modified by altering the lot lines; provided,
however, that the alteration for modification of the lot line does not
result in any greater nonconformity than that which existed as of
the effective date of this chapter.
(2) Through lots.
(a) In any residence district where a lot runs through a block from
street to street, a front yard as hereinafter provided shall be
required along each street lot line not a side street lot line.
(b) In any commercial or industrial district where a lot runs
through a block from street to street, the requirements for a
rear yard may be waived by furnishing an equivalent open
space on the same lot in lieu of the required rear yard.
(c) Lots on district boundaries. Any side yard, rear yard or court
abutting a district boundary line shall have a minimum width
and depth in the less restricted district equal to the average of
the required minimum widths and depths for such yards and
courts in the two districts which abut the district.
(d) Lot grades on through or corner lots. Where a lot abuts on two
or more streets or alleys having different average established
grades, the higher of such grades shall control only for a depth
of 120 feet from the line of the higher average established
grade.
(e) Lot area not to be reduced below requirements. No lot area
shall be so reduced that the dimensions and yard requirements
imposed by this chapter cannot be met.
25.Editor's Note: The Matrix of Land Uses is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 660-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-57
1:747
C. Bulk standards. All lots shall comply with the standards prescribed by
this section. These standards are related to the specific zoning district
used. Bulk Regulations are listing in the Table found in Subsection I
below.
D. Number of buildings on a zoning lot. All principal buildings shall be
located on a zoning lot. Only one principal building shall be located,
erected, or moved onto a lot in all districts by right. The Plan
Commission may permit more than one principal building per lot by
conditional use as outlined in § 660-195 for the orderly development of
the parcel. When additional structures are permitted, the Plan
Commission may impose additional yard requirements, floor area ratio
limitations, residential density requirements, land use intensity
requirements, landscaping requirements, or parking requirements, or
may require a minimum separation distance between principal
buildings.
E. Yard requirements where different districts abut. Any side yard, rear
yard or court abutting a district boundary line shall have a minimum
width and depth in the less restricted district equal to the average of
the required minimum widths and depths for such yards and courts in
the two districts which abut the district boundary line.
F. Front yard setback adjustment. Front yard setbacks should be adjusted
as follows when the described conditions or circumstances exist:
(1) Setbacks from ultimate street right-of-way line. On all streets or
highways for which the ultimate width has been established by the
City of Lake Mills Official Map, and/or subsequent amendments
thereto to those documents, the base setback line shall be located
at the established ultimate street and/or highway right-of-way line
as prescribed by this chapter. Required setbacks shall be measured
from the base setback line.
(2) Average front yard setback. Reduced building setbacks: A setback
of less than that required by Table 3.2, where there is at least one
main building on either side of the applicant's lot within 200 feet of
the proposed site that is built to less than the required setback. In
such case, the setback shall be the average of the setbacks of the
nearest main building on each side of the proposed site or, if there
is an existing main building on only one side, the setback shall be
the average of the existing building and the required setback. Any
other setback may be permitted by the Zoning Board of Appeals,
according to § 660-176 of this chapter, upon a written finding of
unnecessary hardship.
(3) Corner lot setbacks. Corner lots shall be determined to have two
front yards and two side yards. Corner lot setback requirements on
a side street shall meet the requirements set forth in this chapter.
G. Intrusions into required yards. The minimum setback requirements of
each zoning district establish the minimum required yards for all uses,
§ 660-57 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-57
1:748
except those exempted by the provisions of this section or necessary for
life-safety issues.
Table 3.1: Intrusions into Required Yards
Yard Type
Projection, Obstruction, or
Accessory Use Front Rear Side
Air-conditioning units, window only
(not to exceed 2 feet)
P P P
Air-conditioning equipment shelters
(not less than 5 feet from any
property line); may be reduced with
an supporting letter from abutting
property owner.
N P P
Arbors and trellises P P P
Awnings and canopies projecting into
10% or less of yard depth (for
windows only and when attached to a
principal structure)
P P P
Balconies, open P P P
Basketball goal (limited to 1 polemounted
or garage-mounted goal in
residential zoning districts only and
not closer than 5 feet from property
line)
P P P
Chimneys (not to exceed 2 feet) P P P
Decks, open (not less than 10 feet
from any property line)
N P P
Dish antennas N P N
Dog runs, enclosed N P N
Eaves, overhanging (not to exceed 3
feet)
P P P
Equipment shelters (not less than 5
feet from property line)
N P P
Essential services, utilities, and
electric power and communication
transmission lines
P P P
Flagpoles P P P
Gardens, vegetable P P P
Gutters (not to exceed 3 feet) P P P
Landscape buffer yards P P P
Laundry drying equipment N P P
§ 660-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-57
1:749
Table 3.1: Intrusions into Required Yards
Yard Type
Projection, Obstruction, or
Accessory Use Front Rear Side
Lawn furniture P P P
Light standards, ornamental P P P
Loading, off-street, open N P P
Parking, off-street, open (not less
than 5 feet from any property line)
P P P
Patios, open without roof (not less
than 5 feet from any property line)
N P P
Porches/breezeways with roof, sides
open (not less than 5 feet from
property line)
N P P
Ramps for use by persons with
disabilities (not closer than 3 feet to
property line)
P P P
Recreational vehicle parking or
storage (not less than 5 feet from any
front property line and 2 feet from
any side yard)
N P P
Signs (not less than 5 feet from any
property line)
P P P
Skateboard ramps (not less than 5
feet from any property line)
N P N
Stairways, open without roof (not
less than 5 feet from any property
line)
N N N
Television or radio towers or
antennas
N P P
Recreation courts, private (not less
than 10 feet from any property line)
N P N
Terraces, open without roof (not less
than 4 feet from any property line)
N P P
Trash dumpsters and/or garbage
receptacles (also subject to the other
provisions of this chapter and not
less than 5 feet from any property
line)
N P P
Trees, shrubs, and flowers P P P
Walls (not including retaining walls) N P P
Walls, retaining P P P
§ 660-57 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-57
1:750
§ 660-58. Substandard lots.
Table 3.1: Intrusions into Required Yards
Yard Type
Projection, Obstruction, or
Accessory Use Front Rear Side
Windows, bay cantilevered (not to
exceed 3 feet)
P P P
Other accessory uses (as may be
permitted elsewhere in this chapter)
N P N
H. Exceptions to maximum height regulations. The maximum height
regulations listed for residential and nonresidential uses and accessory
structures in each zoning district are the maximum permitted heights
for all buildings and structures, except those exempted by this section
below.
(1) In all districts. Chimneys, antennas and communications
equipment accessory to the principal structure, and ornamental
roof projections, provided such projections are solely ornamental
and do not form an integral part of the structure's roof. Church
spires, belfries, cupolas and domes which do not contain usable
space, public monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, flag
poles.
(2) In the Public and Institutional Overlay District. Churches, schools,
hospitals, sanatoriums and other public and quasi-public buildings
may be erected to a height not exceeding 45 feet nor three stories,
provided the front, side and rear yards required in the district in
which such building is to be located are each increased at least one
foot for each foot of additional building height above the height
limit otherwise established for the district in which such building is
to be located.
(3) For all structures, except single-family, duplex, or similar twofamily
residential uses. Cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire
towers, public monuments, smoke stacks, storage tanks, cooling
tanks, water towers, spires, domes, ornamental towers,
observation decks, and communications towers and
appurtenances, all of which are subject to site plan approval and
are required to be in accordance with all other ordinances or
regulations of the City.
I. Bulk regulations. Table 3.2, Bulk Regulation Table is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
A. Upon and after the effective date of this chapter, no lot shall be created
which does not meet the minimum zoning district area requirements of
each zoning district or the minimum lot area requirements of each
§ 660-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-58
1:751
§ 660-59. Nonconforming structures.
zoning district or which does not meet the lot dimension requirements
of each zoning district.
B. A lot of record existing upon the effective date of this chapter in a
residential district, which does not meet the applicable minimum
zoning district area, lot area, or dimensions, may be used for a detached
single-family dwelling if said lot area and each lot dimension are equal
to or greater than 70% of the requirements of this chapter, and if all
other applicable zoning district standards are met. Said lot shall not be
more intensively developed (with multifamily or nonresidential uses)
unless combined with one or more abutting lots (or portions thereof) so
as to create a lot which meets the requirements of this chapter.
A. Continuation. Any structure lawfully existing upon the effective date of
this chapter may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation
existing upon such date, except as provided in this section.
B. Damaged or destroyed. A nonconforming structure damaged or
destroyed on or after the effective date of this chapter by violent wind,
vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation may be restored to
the size and/or location without any limits on the costs of the repair,
reconstruction, or improvement in accordance with Wis. Stats.
§ 62.23(7)(hc).
C. Expansion or improvement. Any lawful nonconforming structures
existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of the chapter may
be continued, although its size or location does not conform with the lot
width, lot area, yard, height, parking and loading, and access provisions
of this chapter. Any lawful nonconforming structures may be allowed to
be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered,
provided that said extension, enlargement, reconstruction, movement
or alteration complies with the bulk requirements of the specific zoning
district, except for the existing nonconformance. However, the
nonconforming feature of a lawful nonconforming structure shall not be
allowed to become more nonconforming by being extended, enlarged,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except as permitted under
Subsection D below or when required to do so by law, or order, or to
comply with the provisions of this chapter, or with the approval of the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
D. Unsafe structures. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Zoning
Enforcement Officer or any other City official from initiating remedial
or enforcement actions when a lawful nonconforming structure is
declared unsafe or presents a danger to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
E. Ordinary maintenance. Ordinary maintenance repairs, including
repairs reasonably necessary to prevent the deterioration of a
structure, and remodeling of a nonconforming structure are permitted,
§ 660-58 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-59
1:752
§ 660-60. Nonconforming uses.
as well as necessary nonstructural repairs and alterations which do
not extend, enlarge, or intensify the nonconforming structure. Ordinary
maintenance repairs and remodeling include internal and external
painting, decorating, paneling, the addition of acoustical ceilings, the
installation of heating, electricity, plumbing (including fixtures) or
insulation, and the replacement of doors, windows, and other
nonstructural components.
F. Timing of building permit. Any structure for which a building permit
has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of this chapter or
an amendment, which will become nonconforming under the provisions
of this chapter or that amendment thereto, may be completed in
accordance with the approved plans. If all such conditions are met, the
structure shall thereafter be a legal nonconforming structure.
A. Continuance of a nonconforming use. Any nonconforming use lawfully
existing upon the effective date of this chapter or any amendment to it
may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation existing upon
such date, except as specified in this section. Any prior legal use made
nonconforming by this chapter or by an amendment to it may be
granted legal conforming status by the issuance of a conditional use,
subject to the standards and procedures prescribed by § 660-195. Any
prior legal use made nonconforming by a modification to the Official
Zoning Map after the effective date of this chapter may be granted legal
conforming use status, subject to the standards and procedures
prescribed by § 660-197.
B. Modification of a nonconforming use.
(1) Except as permitted in this section, a nonconforming use shall not
be expanded, enlarged, extended or reconstructed, unless the use
is changed to a use permitted in the district in which the use is
located, or shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.
(2) A nonconforming nonresidential use not served by public sanitary
sewer and/or public water may be permitted to expand without
being served by public sanitary sewer and/or public water if either
or both facilities are not available within 1,000 feet of the subject
property, and a conditional use permit is granted for such
expansion.
C. Discontinuance of a nonconforming use. When any nonconforming use
of any structure or land is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive
months, or is changed into a conforming use, any future use of said
structure or land shall be in complete conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
D. Maintenance and repair of a nonconforming use. The ordinary
maintenance and repair of a nonconforming use (structure or land) is
§ 660-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-60
1:753
§ 660-61. through § 660-62. (Reserved)
§ 660-63. Special purpose and overlay zoning districts.
permitted, including necessary repairs and incidental alterations which
do not exacerbate the adverse impacts of the nonconforming use in
relation to the purpose of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided
in this section, whenever a nonconforming use is damaged to the
extent of more than 50% of its current equalized assessed value, it
shall not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located. Notwithstanding the previous sentence,
the structural repairs or alterations in a structure either itself
nonconforming or containing a nonconforming use shall not during its
lifetime exceed 50% of the present equalized assessed value of said
structure unless permanently changed to a conforming use. Pursuant
to § 62.23(7)(hc), Wis. Stats., a nonconforming structure damaged or
destroyed by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold or
infestation after March 2, 2006, may be restored to, or replaced at,
the size, location, and use that it had immediately before the damage
or destruction occurred, and no limits may be imposed on the costs of
the repair, reconstruction, or improvement of said structure. The size
of the structure may be larger than the size it was immediately before
the damage or destruction if necessary for the structure to comply
with applicable state or federal requirements. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Planned development district.
(1) Approval. All planned development districts shall comply with the
regulations outlined in § 660-206, Planned Development District
(PDD) procedures.
(2) Permitted location. A PDD may be established for any parcel or
tract of land that has a minimum size of five acres (217,800 SF).
PDDs shall be permitted with the approval of a PDD Overlay Zoning
District, specific to the approved PDD, within any one or more
standard zoning districts identified in § 660-52.
(3) Flexible development standards. The following exemptions to the
development standards of the underlying zoning district may be
provided with the approval of a planned development district:
(a) Land use requirements. All land uses listed in the districts
established in § 660-52 may be permitted within a PDD.
(b) Number of buildings on a lot. More than one building on a lot/
parcel shall be permitted in a planned development district.
(c) Mixed uses. A mix of different uses within a planned
development district may be permitted if the Plan Commission
§ 660-60 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-63
1:754
and City Council determine that the mix of uses is compatible
and necessary to achieve the objectives of the PDD.
(d) Density and intensity requirements. All requirements listed in
§ 660-57, Bulk regulations, for residential density and
nonresidential intensity may be waived within a PDD. The
planned development district may permit the transfer of
density (dwelling units) from one portion of the subject site to
another and will permit the clustering of dwelling units in one
or more locations within the total site. However, the density of
use shall not exceed the density permitted in the underlying
existing zoning district.
(e) Bulk requirements. All requirements listed in § 660-57, Bulk
regulations, may be waived within a PDD.
(f) Landscaping requirements. Specific requirements listed in
§ 660-113, Landscape and buffers, may be waived or altered
within a PDD.
(g) Parking and loading requirements. The requirements listed in
§§ 660-41 and 660-42 may be waived or altered within a PDD.
(h) Application of the subdivision and platting code. To the extent
applicable, any PDD shall be subject to the procedures and
regulations of Chapter 650, Subdivision Regulations, of the
Code of the City of Lake Mills.However, the design standards
and required improvements established in Chapter 650,
Subdivision Regulations, may be modified or waived upon
recommendations by the Plan Commission and the Public
Works Board, and approval by the City Council, where strict
compliance would result in not achieving the design flexibility
necessary to achieve the objectives of the planned
development.
(4) Requirements to depict all aspects of development. Only
development which is explicitly depicted on the required general
development plan (discussed in greater detail later in this section)
approved by the City Council as part of the approved planned
development district shall be permitted, even if such development
(including all aspects of land use, density and intensity, bulk,
landscaping, and parking and loading), is otherwise listed as
permitted in § 660-57, Bulk regulations. Requested exemptions
from these standards shall be made explicit by the petitioner in the
application, and shall be recommended by the Plan Commission
and approved explicitly by the City Council. If not so requested and
approved, such exemptions shall not be permitted.
(5) The burden of providing evidence and persuasion that any such
exceptions are necessary and desirable shall in every case rest with
the petitioner. It shall not be sufficient to base justification for
approval upon an already existing planned development district.
§ 660-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-63
1:755
Each planned development district shall be presented and judged
on its own merits.
B. Lake Residential Overlay (LRO) District.
(1) Pier, wharf, boat shelter, boat hoist, and boat lift structures.
(a) Eligibility. Only riparian properties shall be eligible to install or
construct such structures.
(b) Regulations. All structures shall comply with the regulations
outlined in Chapter 30 of the Wisconsin Statutes and Ch. NR
326 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(c) Permits. A building permit issued by the City of Lake Mills shall
not be required prior to construction.
C. Public and Institutional Overlay (PIO) District.
D. Historic Preservation Overlay (HPO) District.
(1) Designation. For purposes of this chapter, a historic structure,
historic site, or historic district designation may be placed on any
site, natural or improved, including any building, improvement or
structure located thereon, or any area of particular historic,
architectural, archeological or cultural significance to the City such
as historic structures, sites, or districts which:
(a) Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state or community;
(b) Are identified with historic personages or with important
events in national, state or local history;
(c) Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
type or specimen inherently valuable for a study of a period,
style, method of construction, or of indigenous materials or
craftsmanship;
(d) Are representative of the notable work of a master builder,
designer or architect who influenced their age; or
(e) Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important
to prehistory or history.
(2) Consideration. The Historic Preservation Commission, within the
context of deliberating on a nomination submitted to designate a
historic structure, site or district, shall consider any or all of the
following:
(a) Age of the structure. Age alone shall not be the sole factor
considered in determining historical designation.
§ 660-63 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-63
1:756
(b) Official documents of any type from any governmental agency
at any level.
(c) Sworn affidavits from any individual.
(d) Any statement, written or verbal, from the current owner of the
nominated property.
(e) Written or verbal statements from acknowledged experts in the
fields of history, architecture, archeology, anthropology, or real
estate. The Commission retains the authority to determine the
expert status of individuals under this subsection.
(f) Plans, drawings, sketches, maps, and any other document that
has been recorded at the Register of Deeds or Clerk for any
county in the State of Wisconsin.
(3) Research. The Historic Preservation Commission, within the
context of deliberating on a nomination submitted to designate a
historic structure, site, or district, may consider any or all of the
following:
(a) Newspaper, magazine, periodical, or newswire articles,
including pictures or photographs.
(b) Video or audio tapes of a commercial or public broadcast
network or station.
(c) Unsworn statements from any individual, including but not
limited to photographs and letters.
(d) Any item from the files of the local, county, or state historical
societies.
(e) The Historic Preservation Commission may require the
submission of any item listed in Subsection D(2) above prior to
making its preliminary written findings of fact.
(4) Regulation of construction, alteration and demolition.
(a) No owner or person in charge of a historic structure, historic
site or structure within a historic district shall alter, demolish
or remove all or any part of the exterior of such property or
construct any improvement upon such designated property or
properties or cause or permit any such work to be performed
upon such property or demolish such property unless a
certificate of approval has been granted by the Historic
Preservation Commission. Also, unless such certificate has
been granted by the Commission, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall not issue a permit for any such work.
(b) Upon the filing of any application for a certificate of approval
with the Commission, the Commission shall review the
§ 660-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-63
1:757
application using the following guidelines, and shall not
unreasonably deny issuance of the certificate of approval,
provided:
[1] In the case of a designated historic structure or historic
site, the proposed work would not detrimentally change,
destroy, or adversely affect any exterior feature of the
improvement or site upon which said work is to be done in
accordance with the guidelines for alterations as follows:
[a] Height. All additions shall be no higher than the
existing building.
[b] Second exit platforms. Second exit platforms shall not
be applied to the front or sides of a building, unless
they are not visible from the street.
[c] Solar apparatus. Passive and active solar apparatus
shall be allowed only if such devices do not detract
from the architectural integrity of the building and are
as unobtrusive as possible.
[d] Repairs. Repairs in materials that exactly duplicate
the original in composition, texture, and appearance
are encouraged. Repairs in new materials that
duplicate the original in texture and appearance are
also permitted. Repairs in materials that do not
duplicate the original in appearance may be permitted
on an individual basis, providing the repairs are
compatible with the character and materials of the
existing building and repairs that duplicate the
original in appearance are prohibitively expensive.
[e] Restoration. Projects that will return the appearance
of the building to an earlier appearance are
encouraged and shall be permitted if such projects are
documented by photographs, architectural or
archaeological research, or other suitable evidence.
[f] Re-siding with aluminum or vinyl. Re-siding with
aluminum or vinyl which replaces clapboards or
nonoriginal siding on buildings originally sided with
clapboards may be permitted, providing the new
siding imitates the width of the original siding within
one inches, the wood graining, and providing
architectural details (such as window trim, wood
cornices, and ornament) either remain uncovered or
are generally duplicated in appearance.
[g] Storms, screens, and storm doors. The repair and
retention of original storms, screens and storm doors,
or the replacement of same with new units that
§ 660-63 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-63
1:758
duplicate the original in materials and appearance
is encouraged. Replacements with nonoriginal
materials, such as combination metal components,
may also be permitted. If metal components are used,
owners are encouraged to use metal components
which have been factory painted.
[h] Additions and alterations to street facades. The
appearance of all street facades of a building shall not
be altered unless the design is sensitive to the historic
character of the building. Specifically, the design or
alteration shall be compatible with the existing
building in scale, color, texture, and the proportion of
solids to voids.
[i] Alterations to the roof. Roof alterations, resulting in
increased building volume, to provide additional
windows or skylights, headroom, or area are
prohibited. The roof shape of the front of the building
shall remain the same unless the owner wishes to
restore an earlier, documentable appearance.
Changes in roofing materials (excluding color
changes) are prohibited unless the existing materials
are no longer produced or the cost of production and
installation exceeds 10% of the assessed value of the
structure, in which case the new roof materials shall
resemble existing materials as closely as economically
possible or the materials shall closely resemble an
earlier documentable material.
[2] In the case of the construction of a new improvement upon
a historic site, or within a historic district, the exterior of
such improvement would not adversely affect nor
disharmonize with the external appearance of other
improvements on such site or within the district, and the
Historic District Guidelines for New Construction,
incorporated herein by reference, shall be applicable to all
new construction proposals within a historic district.
[3] In the case of any property located in a historic district,
the proposed construction, reconstruction, exterior
alteration or demolition conforms to the purpose and
intent of this section and to the objectives and design
criteria of the historic preservation plan for said district;
[4] The building or structure is of such architectural or
historical significance that its demolition would not be
detrimental to the public interest nor contrary to the
general welfare of the people of the City and state;
§ 660-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-63
1:759
[5] In the case of a request for the demolition of a deteriorated
building or structure, the economic hardship or difficulty
claimed by the owner is not self-created nor is it the result
of failure by the owner to maintain the property in good
repair.
(c) If the Commission determines the application for a certificate
of approval and the proposed changes are consistent with the
guidelines of § 660-63D(4)(b), it shall issue the certificate of
approval. The Commission shall make this decision within 60
days of the filing of the application.
(d) The issuance of a certificate of approval shall not relieve the
applicant from obtaining other permits and approvals required
by the City. A building permit or other municipal permit shall
be invalid if it is obtained without the presentation of the
certificate of approval required for the proposed work.
(e) Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be undertaken without
a certificate of approval, provided the work involves repairs to
existing features of a historic structure or site or the
replacement of elements of a structure with pieces identical in
appearance and provided the work does not change the
exterior appearance of the structure or site and does not
require the issuance of a building permit.
(5) Recognition of historic structures, sites and districts. At such time
as a historic structure, site or district has been properly
designated, the Commission, in cooperation with the property
owner, may cause to be prepared and erected on such property, at
City expense, a suitable plaque declaring that such property is a
historic structure, site or district. The City's share of the plaque
shall not exceed $100.
E. Wellhead Protection Overlay (WPO) District. See § 660-128, Wellhead
Protection Overlay (WPO) District.
F. Shoreland-Wetland Overlay (SWO) District. See § 660-129, Shoreland-
Wetland Overlay (SWO) District.
G. Floodplain Overlay (FPO) District. See § 660-130, Floodplain Overlay
(FPO) District.
H. Floodway Overlay (FPW) District. See § 660-131, Floodway Overlay
(FWO) District.
I. Flood-fringe Overlay (FFO) District. See § 660-132, Flood-fringe
Overlay (FFO) District.
J. Flood Storage Overlay (FSO) District. See § 660-134, Flood Storage
Overlay (FSO) District.
§ 660-63 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-63
1:760
K. Conservancy Overlay (CO) District. See § 660-136, Conservancy
Overlay (CO) District.
§ 660-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-63
1:761

ARTICLE IV
Standards and Regulations for Specific Land Uses
§ 660-64. Swimming pools.
A. Permit required. A building and zoning permit shall be required for all
pools except those specifically exempt.
B. Exempt pools. Storable children's swimming or wading pools, with a
maximum wall height of 12 inches, are exempt from the provisions of
this section.
C. Location. All swimming pools shall be located at least 10 feet from any
lot line or structure. In no case shall a swimming pool be located
between the public right-of-way and the principal structure. In no case
shall a swimming pool be erected or constructed in a required yard
adjacent to a street right-of-way.
D. Equipment. All private swimming pools must have a filtration system to
assure proper circulation of the water therein and maintenance of the
proper bacterial quality thereof. Pumps and filter equipment shall in no
case be closer than 20 feet to a property line and shall be adequately
housed and muffled.
E. Patios and decks. Surfaced terraces shall be permitted no closer than
three feet to a lot line where accessory to a private residential pool. Sun
decks shall comply with the bulk regulations for accessory structures.
F. Attractive nuisance. Reasonable precautions shall be taken to insure
the safety of the pool area and to prevent it from becoming an
"attractive nuisance." Pools other than those classified as "private
residential" shall be completely fenced so as to prevent the unregulated
entrance of young children to the pool area.
G. Exposed or partially exposed pools. Permanent pools constructed to be
exposed or partially exposed above the surface of the ground shall have
the pool construction completely and adequately screened from the
view of the abutting properties by means of combined fence and
landscape screen approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
H. Pools other than those classified as private residential. Pools other than
those classified as private residential shall conform to the following:
(1) Pools shall meet state requirements contained in Wisconsin
Administrative Codes Chs. SPS 390 and DHS 172.
(2) Adequate provision shall be made for separate shower, lavatory,
and dressing facilities for men and women which facilities shall be
well lighted, ventilated and properly equipped.
(3) Pool construction shall be of concrete, steel or other material
having an impervious smooth surface and approved by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
§ 660-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-64
1:763
(4) Pool shape, design, depth and slopes shall be such as to promote
safe control of the bathers in the pool.
(5) Inlets must be submerged and produce uniform circulation without
"dead" spots.
(6) Outlets must be of ample size and located at the pool low points.
(7) Hose connections must be of ample size and located at the pool low
points.
(8) Overflow gutters must surround the pool and have a pitch adequate
to carry off all overflow.
(9) Adequate steps of ladder shall be provided to allow safe emergence
from the pool and shall be made of impervious material, easily
cleaned, and must not collect water or retain water.
(10) A suction cleaner must be used to removed sludge, sediment and
other accumulations.
(11) Recirculation systems shall consist of pumping equipment, hair and
lint catcher, filter, and all necessary fixtures and connections; must
be capable of six-hour turnover of water; and must include
disinfecting equipment.
(12) All equipment must be accessible, satisfactorily located and the
equipment room adequately drained.
(13) Each pool shall have available a pH and residual determination.
(14) If used at night, the pool shall be adequately lit.
I. Fencing requirements.
(1) Swimming pools not enclosed within a permanent building shall be
completely enclosed by a fence of sufficient strength to prevent
access to the pool and shall be so constructed so as not to have
voids, holes or openings larger than four inches in any one
dimension. No fence shall be located, erected, constructed or
maintained closer to a pool than three feet.
(2) In-ground pools shall be completely fenced by a permanent, sturdy
fence, not less than four feet or more than six feet in height. Access
to any such pool shall be through a gate or gates in the fence,
equipped with a self-closing, self-latching device placed at a
minimum height of three feet above the ground.
(3) Aboveground pools having a height of less than four feet (48
inches) above ground at any portion of the pool side wall are
required to be fenced the same as in-ground pools. When fencing is
required, it shall be installed to extend a minimum of four feet
beyond any area less than 48 inches high. When the height of a pool
side wall is such that a fence will not be required (48 inches or
§ 660-64 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-64
1:764
§ 660-65. Home occupations.
§ 660-66. Artist live/work space.
Artist live/work space shall conform to the standards applicable to home
occupations, except that the floor area devoted to nonresidential activity
shall not be limited.
§ 660-67. In-family suite.
higher), all ladders, steps or other means of access to an above
ground pool shall be removed and/or designed to prevent access
when the pool is unattended.
A. Home occupations shall be permitted as an accessory use when
incident to the principal residential use, situated in the same building,
and carried on by the residential occupant, subject to the provisions of
this section.
B. Regulations applicable to home occupations.
(1) Such uses shall not occupy more than 25% of the assessed floor
area of the principal structure in which it is located, unless a
conditional use is approved by the Plan Commission in accordance
with § 660-195 of this chapter.
(2) Such use shall not employ more than three persons not a resident
on the premises.
(3) No such use shall be permitted which generates pedestrian or
vehicular traffic incompatible with the residential character of the
neighborhood.
(4) Any off-street parking area provided shall be maintained dustless,
and adequately screened from adjoining residential properties.
(5) Such use shall not include the conduct of any retail or wholesale
business on the premises, nor the removal of sand, gravel, stone,
topsoil, or peat moss for commercial purposes.
(6) Such use shall not include the operation of any machinery, tools or
other appliances, or the outside storage of materials, or other
operational activity, which would create a nuisance or be otherwise
incompatible to the surrounding residential area.
A. The dwelling unit and the in-family suite shall together appear as a
single-family dwelling, and the suite must have an internal connection
to the primary residence. External stairs serving as the primary access
to the in-family suite are prohibited.
B. In-family suite may contain separate kitchen, dining, bathroom,
laundry, living, sleeping, and recreation areas, including exterior
porches, patios and decks.
§ 660-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-67
1:765
§ 660-68. Guesthouse.
§ 660-69. (Reserved)
§ 660-70. Twin homes (zero-lot-line).
The twin home, also called a zero-lot-line home, consists of a single-family
dwelling which is attached on one side to another single-family residence.
The two residences are located on separate lots.
C. A separate outdoor access or separate access to the garage may be
provided.
D. A separate address and utility connection or meters for the in-family
suite are not permitted.
E. The in-family suites may not be occupied by a non-family member.
F. In-family suites should be considered and regulated as part of a singlefamily
dwelling unit.
A. Guest homes shall be permitted by conditional use in accordance with
§ 660-195.
B. Guest houses shall not be rented or leased.
C. Guest houses shall have a minimum floor area of 900 square feet and a
maximum floor area as outlined for accessory structures in § 660-13B
and comply with the bulk regulations as outlined in § 660-57I for the
zoning district in which it is located.26 [Amended 11-6-2018 by Ord.
No. 1197A]
A. Twin homes shall be built with one unit per subdivided lot, and with no
more than two units per building, with each dwelling unit being
attached to the adjacent unit.
B. A subdivision plat or certified survey showing the common wall and lot
line shall receive approval from the City prior to the issuance of any
required building, plumbing, occupancy or other permit.
C. All City of Lake Mills building and fire codes are applicable to twin
homes, as well as a minimum one-hour fire separation, complying with
the Wis. Admin. Code, and which provides for a vertical separation of all
adjacent areas of each dwelling unit from the lowest level flush against
the underside of the roof. Each twin home unit shall have separate
sewer and water laterals and shall have separate utility services for all
other utility hookups.
D. The Zoning Administrator may require restrictive covenants be
recorded against the property as a condition to any certified survey
map or subdivision plat approval or conditional use, occupancy,
26.Editor's Note: See Table 3.2, Bulk Regulations, which is an attachment to this chapter.
§ 660-67 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-70
1:766
§ 660-71. Townhouses.
Townhouses are attached, two-story, single-family residences, each having a
private, individual access. They may be located on their own lots or within a
group or large development and may not be split into additional residences.
§ 660-72. Bed-and-breakfast establishment.
A structure designed and occupied as a bed-and-breakfast residence in
which sleeping rooms are provided on a daily or weekly basis for use by
travelers or transients shall conform to the following regulations:
§ 660-73. Boardinghouses.
building or plumbing permit issuance. The recorded restrictive
covenants shall be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer prior to
the issuance of any permit for zero-lot-line dwellings.
A. All townhouse residential developments shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter before the zoning, occupancy, and building
permits can be issued.
B. No more than six units shall be attached per structure.
A. The establishment and operation shall be located within an existing
owner-occupied single-family dwelling.
B. The establishment shall have no more than eight guest rooms for rent to
no more than 20 tourists or transients.
C. The owner of the property shall be responsible for the operation of the
property and shall be a resident of the property when the establishment
is in operation.
D. The establishment shall provide no meals other than breakfast, and
breakfast shall only be provided to renters of the place. No cooking
facilities, including, but not limited to, stoves, microwave ovens, toaster
ovens, and hot plates, shall be available to guests. The establishment
shall comply with Chapter 97, Food, Lodging and Recreation, of the
Wisconsin Statutes. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
E. The single-family residence in which the operation is located shall be
maintained so that the appearance of the building and grounds remain
that of a single-family residence.
F. Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards outlined in § 660-142.
G. Parking shall be provided in accordance with § 660-41, Off-street
parking.
A. Each boarding house shall be a single structure containing assigned
rooms for residents.
§ 660-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-73
1:767
§ 660-74. Community living arrangement.
Community living arrangement facilities are regulated depending upon
their capacity as provided for in Wisconsin Statutes § 62.23(7)(i), provided
any such regulations do not violate federal or state housing or
antidiscrimination laws. Community living arrangements include all
facilities provided for in Wisconsin Statutes § 46.03(22), including child
welfare agencies, group homes for children, foster homes, treatment foster
homes, adult family homes, and community-based residential facilities.
Community living arrangements are subject to the following provisions:
B. The minimum lot size shall be 900 square feet per boarding room, and
the lot shall have a minimum sixty-six-foot width.
C. No more than one boarding house per individual tract, parcel, or
platted lot is allowed.
D. Each boarding room shall be a minimum of 200 square feet in area, and
no more than two occupants per sleeping room are allowed.
E. Public ingress and egress to the boarding house shall be through one
common exterior entrance. Ingress and egress for boarders shall be
through common exterior entrances. Entry access to all boarding rooms
shall be through the interior of the building. No exit doors from
individual boarding rooms shall lead directly to the exterior of the
building.
F. No cooking is permitted in any sleeping room. No cooking facilities are
permitted in any sleeping room. Residents must have access on site to
shared common areas for cooking and eating. A common kitchen facility
equipped for cooking meals located on site must be available to the
residents, or daily meals must be provided on site for the residents of
the boarding house.
G. Each floor must contain at least one fully equipped bathroom for each
five residents that is accessible from a common hallway.
H. Each boarding house shall have a resident manager.
I. All residents must execute a lease before occupancy. Rooms must be
leased to the same resident for at least seven consecutive calendar
days.
A. General regulations.
(1) All CLAs, except those located in a Single-Family Residential
District, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter before the
zoning, occupancy, and building permits can be issued.
(2) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility regardless of its capacity unless
Planning Commission and City Council agree to a reduction in
spacing.
§ 660-73 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-74
1:768
§ 660-75. Mobile home parks.
Mobile home parks are a residential development in which land is reserved
for individually sold or "air rights" containing mobile home units. The
standards as set forth in this section are the minimum standards for all
construction and sanitation facilities and other necessary facilities for the
safety, health and general welfare of the occupants. The following standards
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate that the total capacity of all
community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the City shall
not exceed 1% of the City's population (unless specifically
authorized by the City Council following a public hearing).
(4) Foster homes housing four or fewer children and licensed under
Wisconsin Statutes § 48.62 shall not be subject to Subsection A(1)
through (3) above.
B. Restrictions.
Table 4.1: Restrictions
Type
Districts
Permitted Statutory Restrictions
Foster family home
(domicile) licensed
under § 48.62, Wis.
Stats., up to 4 children
See Land Use
Matrix in
§ 660-5627
None
Other foster homes § 62.23(7)(i)1 and 2, Wis.
Stats.
Adult family home
(domicile) as defined in
§ 50.01(1), Wis. Stats.,
up to 4 adults, or more
if all adults are siblings
None
Other adult family
homes
§ 62.23(7)(i)1 and 2, Wis.
Stats.
CLA, 4 to 8 persons § 62.23(7)(i)1, 2, and 9,
Wis. Stats.
CLA, 9 to 15 persons § 62.23(7)(i)1, 2 and 9,
Wis. Stats.
CLA, 16+ persons § 62.23(7)(i)1, 2 and 9,
Wis. Stats.
Family day-care home
licensed under § 48.65,
Wis. Stats., up to 8
children
§ 66.1017, Wis. Stats.
27.Editor's Note: The Land Use Matrix is an attachment to this chapter.
§ 660-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-75
1:769
shall apply to all mobile home park lands and units. The standards shall
be in accordance with applicable state standards governing mobile home
parks.
A. Development standards for mobile home park district.
(1) Mobile home park developments shall comply with the provisions
of this chapter and Chapter 470, Mobile Home Parks, of the Code of
the City of Lake Mills before the zoning, occupancy, and building
permits can be issued.
(2) The minimum site area for a mobile home park development shall
be 10 acres.
(3) Principal structure height. No principal building or structure
erected will have a height greater than 35 feet.
(4) Lot setback requirements.
(a) Front yard abutting public ROW: 25 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(c) Sum of side yards: 25 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(5) Landscape requirements. Said yard shall be landscaped and
maintained in accordance with § 660-113.
B. Area and yard requirements for individual mobile home unit. Each
mobile home space shall have:
(1) Minimum area: 4,250 square feet.
(2) Minimum width: 35 feet.
(3) Minimum depth: 60 feet.
(4) Distance between residential mobile home units or other permitted
buildings or structures. A minimum separation of 15 feet shall be
required between all units and attached appurtenances.
(5) Accessory structures. Each mobile home unit shall be permitted
one accessory structures not to exceed 150 square feet.
(6) Each occupied manufactured home or mobile home shall have solid
skirting with an approved material around the entire structure.
C. Access, parking and traffic.
(1) Each mobile home park will abut a dedicated street improved to
applicable standards.
(2) Mobile home park design will be so arranged to avoid vehicular,
pedestrian and bicycle traffic congestion. Pedestrian, bicycle and
§ 660-75 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-75
1:770
§ 660-76. (Reserved)
§ 660-77. Automobile or motor vehicle repair in residential
districts.
The repair of an automobile or a motor vehicle in any residential zoning
district is subject to the following restrictions:
§ 660-78. Drive-through and car wash facilities.
vehicular safety will be protected, emergency vehicle access
maintained and no adverse impact to adjoining properties will be
created.
(3) All interior streets and access shall be hard surfaced, and shall
comply with City standards as enforced by the Public Works
Director.
D. Park/recreation area.
(1) Mobile home parks shall provide maintained and landscaped park
recreational area(s) for the use of the mobile home park residents.
(2) Park/recreational area(s) will total not less than 700 square feet of
land area for each unit.
E. Additional requirements.
(1) Each mobile home unit will be connected to municipal sanitary
sewer system.
(2) Service yards, storage areas and trash disposal areas will be
completely screened by a continuous visual barrier.
(3) Fire protection facilities will be installed within each mobile home
park in accordance with the requirements of the responsible fire
protection agency.
A. Minor repairs and maintenance. Minor repairs and maintenance may be
done on vehicles owned by the occupant of the structure. Such repairs
may include, but are not limited to, the changing and replenishment of
fluid levels, oil changes, electrical system repair and maintenance, tire
rotations, the replacement of brake pads and rotors, and the
replacement of drive belts and hydraulic lines.
B. Other repairs. Any other repairs on the motor vehicle or automobile
shall be restricted to totally enclosed spaces that are properly
ventilated or accomplished on privately registered vehicles lawfully
licensed.
A. Design. Drive-through facilities and car wash establishments shall be
designed so that:
§ 660-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-78
1:771
§ 660-79. Gas stations, convenience stores (including automotive
repair facilities and gas stations with automotive repair facilities)
and motor sales facilities (including automobile sales with
automotive repair facilities).
Gas stations, convenience stores, gas stations with automotive repair
facilities, automotive repair facilities, motor sales facilities, including
automobile sales with automotive repair facilities, shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) The minimum dimension of queuing spaces shall be nine feet in
width and 20 feet in length.
(2) Queuing spaces shall be placed in a single line up to the point of
service.
(3) Queuing spaces shall be located so that, when in use, they do not
obstruct ingress/egress to the site, they do not obstruct access to
required parking or loading spaces, and do not otherwise interfere
with vehicle circulation on the site.
(4) Vehicle queuing and equipment associated with the drive-through
or car wash shall be concealed from view from public streets and
surrounding property to the greatest extent possible by their
orientation, design or by screening. This will often involve orienting
the drive-through or car wash to the side or rear of the building,
away from the public street.
(5) On a lot in the B1 District, if a drive-through facility adjoins a public
street, the building shall be designed to extend over the drivethrough
lanes with windows located on this building extension
facing the street, in order to maintain the street wall. In the B1
District, establishments shall be limited to two drive-through lanes.
B. Required queuing length.
(1) The number of required queuing spaces shall be in accordance with
§ 660-41, Off-street parking.
(2) For a car wash, queuing spaces shall begin behind the last vehicle
being washed. For all other drive-through uses, queuing spaces
shall include the vehicle stopped at a last point of service, such as a
window.
(3) Maintenance. The operator of the drive-through facility shall
provide adequate on-site outdoor waste receptacles and shall
provide daily litter cleanup along the rights-of-way abutting the
property.
A. Direct access to arterial streets required. All gas stations shall have
direct access to an arterial street which is a federal, state, or county
designated highway, except where it is part of a nonresidential
§ 660-78 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-79
1:772
development where access is provided by a parallel access road or
reverse frontage road where nonresidential uses will be on both sides
of the street.
B. Architectural design. The buildings shall use the same architectural
materials on all sides of the building. All such buildings shall be
constructed of brick masonry, split-face concrete block, or stone.
Additionally, all convenience stores abutting residential uses and zoning
districts shall have pitched roofs matching the roof lines of adjoining
residential structures.
C. Fuel pump location. Any fuel pumps and pump islands shall be at least
40 feet from any street or abutting lot line and meet all other State of
Wisconsin regulations. Underground storage tanks shall be located in
compliance with state and federal regulations.
D. Canopies. The canopies provided over the pump islands of gas pumps
shall meet the yard requirements of a principal structure. In addition:
(1) Obstruction of visibility at rights-of-way prohibited. The canopy
shall not block visibility at intersections of rights-of-way or drives.
(2) Zoning district front yard requirements shall be met. All pump
islands, their surrounding structures, and the canopy overhang
shall meet the zoning district's front yard requirement.
(3) Canopies to be counted toward maximum permitted FAR. All
canopies shall be counted toward the maximum permitted floor
area ratio (FAR) of the nonresidential zoning district in which the
canopy is to be constructed.
(4) Maximum height. Under no circumstances shall the underside of
the canopy (as measured at the bottom of its exterior fascia) be
higher than 16 feet.
(5) Canopy roofs. Canopy roofs shall be architecturally consistent with
the main building. Signs or distinctive emblems may be considered
for the canopy.
E. Repair services. All repair services shall be done within a completely
enclosed building and shall meet the following requirements:
(1) No more than the required off-street parking set forth under the
provisions of § 660-41 of this chapter shall be allowed.
(2) All overnight storage of vehicles awaiting needed parts shall be
within the building or in an enclosed or screened-in yard. Said
screening shall consist of a masonry wall of a minimum height of six
feet.
(3) All damaged or inoperable parts shall be stored indoors until
removed from the premises.
§ 660-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-79
1:773
(4) An automotive repair facility shall store all vehicle parts within a
completely enclosed building.
(5) The maximum allowable number and size of tow trucks which can
be parked at the site shall be determined by the Plan Commission
as a condition of approval of the conditional use permit.
F. Outdoor storage and display of merchandise. The outdoor storage or
display of merchandise shall be permitted by conditional use as outlined
in § 660-195 and in accordance with § 660-22. Outdoor storage and
display of merchandise shall include, but not be limited to, ice storage
or vending boxes, vending machines, and/or propane tanks and or other
flammable materials.
G. Concrete curb and gutter required. Concrete curb and gutter shall be
required throughout all off-street parking, drive, and loading areas of
the development.
H. Hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be established by the Plan
Commission.
I. Financial institution uses as an accessory use. Financial institution uses
may be permitted as an accessory use if said use does not occupy more
than 25% of the floor area of the principal structure and is housed
completely within the principal structure. The Plan Commission may
impose hours of operation for the financial institution different from the
hours of operation of the principal use.
J. Prohibited signs. The following signs are hereby prohibited:
(1) Any sign which, or any part of which, is in motion by any means,
including fluttering or rotating, or other signs set in motion by
movement of the atmosphere. This includes decorative flags,
pennants, whirling objects, banners, or other entity(ies) attached to
strings or lines.
(2) Inflatable advertising devices or signs.
(3) Changeable copy and portable trailer signs, either fixed or
movable, except gas prices consistent with state and/or federal
regulations and practice of the industry.
(4) Banners or placards which are temporary signs or devices of paper,
fabric, plastic, or other flexible materials and are suspended by
wires or poles to advertise a special event (except as may be
permitted by Article VI, Signage).
(5) A sign on a motor vehicle or trailer parked on public or private
property so as to be seen from the public right-of-way for more than
three consecutive hours, which has attached thereto or located
thereon any sign for the purpose of advertising a product or
directing people to a business activity.
§ 660-79 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-79
1:774
§ 660-80. (Reserved)
§ 660-81. Mini-warehouses or self-storage facilities.
Mini-warehouse or self-storage facilities shall meet the following
requirements:
§ 660-82. Outdoor nursery and garden sales.
Outdoor nursery and garden sales, either as a principal use or accessory
use, shall meet the following requirements:
§ 660-83. Outdoor recreation facilities.
Outdoor recreational uses include all recreational land uses located on
public property (including school district property) which involves active
recreational activities. Such land uses include courts (tennis, basketball,
volleyball), fields (ball diamonds, football, soccer), tot lots, playgrounds,
(6) Exposed neon or similarly appearing signage.
K. Other requirements. Any other requirements and/or conditions deemed
appropriate by the Plan Commission and/or City Council.
A. Direct access to arterial streets required. All mini-warehouses shall
have direct access to an arterial street which is a federal-, state-, or
county-designated highway, except where it is part of a nonresidential
development where access is provided by a parallel access road or
reverse frontage road.
B. Limitations on use of facilities. Such facilities shall be used only for the
storage of materials or articles and shall not be used for assembly,
fabrication, processing or repair.
C. Services and sales activities prohibited. No services or sales shall be
conducted from any storage unit. Garage sales and/or flea market type
activities are prohibited.
D. Practice rooms, meeting rooms, and residences prohibited. Facilities
shall not be used for practice rooms, meeting rooms, or residences.
E. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
F. Storage of explosive or highly flammable material shall be prohibited.
A. Outdoor sales of merchandise to be accessory to enclosed building.
There shall be an enclosed building with outdoor sales of merchandise
accessory to said building.
B. No outdoor display permitted not accessory to enclosed building. No
outdoor display shall be permitted which is not accessory to an
enclosed building or which has not been approved by the City.
§ 660-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-83
1:775
swimming pools, beach areas, fitness courses, golf courses, and similar land
uses.
§ 660-84. Merchandise displays.
Merchandise displays may be permitted on sidewalks within the B1
Downtown District, provided said merchandise displays are in compliance
with the design standards set forth in the Downtown Design Guidelines28
and with the following:
§ 660-85. Breweries, manufacturers and rectifiers, and wineries.
[Amended 4-18-2017 by Ord. No. 1176
As enabled under §§ 125.10, 125.29, 125.52 and 125.53, Wis. Stats.,
breweries, manufacturers and rectifiers and wineries shall meet the
following requirements:
A. Site plan review and approval required. A BSO (building, site and
operation) Plan submittal and approval shall be required in accordance
with § 660-205 of this chapter.
B. Lighting facilities and structures shall be approved by conditional use
in accordance with § 660-195, and in accordance with § 660-142,
Exterior lighting, of this chapter.
A. No person shall obstruct or impede the pedestrian right-of-way of any
paved public sidewalk with any merchandise or personal property,
except as provided herein. A sidewalk merchandise display shall be
located adjoining the building from which it is marketed. Each display
shall not encroach more than 2 1/2 feet from the building facade, and in
all cases, the unobstructed sidewalk area must be at least five feet in
width and comply with Americans with Disability Act (ADA)
requirements, as from time to time amended.
B. Displayed merchandise shall be consistent to that sold within the
business. Displayed merchandise shall be maintained in good condition
and shall be removed each day at the close of business.
C. The property and business owners are jointly and severally liable for
any and all injury to any person or property directly and/or indirectly
caused by their joint or several negligence and/or activities occurring
on the paved sidewalk under this section.
A. Licensing.
(1) A brewery shall be licensed as outlined in § 125.29(1), Wis. Stats.
(2) A manufacturer or rectifier shall be licensed as outlined in
§ 125.52, Wis. Stats.
(3) A winery shall be licensed as outlined in § 125.53, Wis. Stats.
28.Editor's Note: See § 660-98.
§ 660-83 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-85
1:776
§ 660-86. Beer garden.
Beer gardens shall be subject to the following guidelines:
(4) Off-site retail premises established by manufacturers of
intoxicating liquors shall be outlined as outlined in § 125.51, Wis.
Stats.
B. Hours of operation.
(1) Manufacturing operations. The City shall not impose limitations on
the hours of manufacturing operations.
(2) Retail sales. Closing hours for retail sales shall be the same as for
Class "B" permitted premises, as set forth in § 125.32(3), Wis.
Stats.
C. Parking and loading.
(1) Parking shall be provided in accordance with § 660-41, Off-street
parking, for each use located or operating on the property.
(2) Loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with § 660-42.
D. Restaurants in breweries, manufacturers and rectifiers or wineries. The
following criteria will apply to any restaurant use:
(1) In Industrial Districts, the restaurant shall be limited to a maximum
size of 50% of the total floor area of the facility, excluding the area
devoted to the tap room, any outdoor seating area or areas for
retail sales of items other than intoxicating beverages.
(2) Additional parking for the restaurant may be required as outlined
in § 660-41, Off-street parking.
A. Licensing. Appropriate licensing of operations shall be required.
B. Closing hours.
(1) Liquor premises. The closing hours for all premises licensed under
a "Class B" liquor license or permit shall be as permitted in
§ 125.68(4), Wis. Stats.
(2) Beer premises. The closing hours for all premises licensed under a
Class "B" fermented malt beverage license or permit shall be as
permitted in § 125.32(3), Wis. Stats. Breweries shall have the same
closing hours.
C. Location of service area. The outdoor service area shall not be located
within any public right-of-way or within any required landscape area,
buffer yard, or front, side, or rear yard setback on the same parcel as
the restaurant, tavern, or brewery, not withstanding, however, outdoor
service area conditions which may be placed on the licensed premises
by the licensing agency.
§ 660-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-86
1:777
§ 660-87. Brewpubs. [Added 4-18-2017 by Ord. No. 1176]
§ 660-88. Kennels.
Kennels shall comply with the following standards:
§ 660-89. Agricultural land uses.
D. Parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with § 660-41, Offstreet
parking.
A. Licensing. A brewpub shall be licenses as outlined in § 125.295(1), Wis.
Stats.
B. Hours of operation.
(1) Manufacture. The City shall not impose limitations on the hours of
operation for the manufacturing of fermented malt beverages.
(2) Retail sales. Closing hours for retail sales shall be the same as for a
Class "B" premises, as set forth in § 125.32(3) Wis. Stats.
C. Parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with § 660-41, Offstreet
parking.
A. Outdoor runs and exercise areas shall be a minimum of 500 feet from
any residential zoning district.
B. All animals shall be kept either within completely enclosed structures
or under direct control of the kennel operator or staff at all times, and
shall be kept within completely enclosed structures between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
A. Crop, dairy, cattle, and tree farming, subject to the following:
(1) The keeping or raising of hogs, fur-bearing animals, or goats shall
not be permitted.
(2) The keeping or raising of domestic livestock, except for hogs and
fur-bearing animals which are absolutely prohibited in the City,
shall be permitted as part of a principal agricultural use of the
premises on farms of at least 35 acres in area on the basis of not
more than one animal unit per acre.
(3) Structures/stables for domestic livestock shall not be located closer
than 75 feet to any property line.
B. Chickens on residential lands. Keeping of chickens on lands zoned for
residential purposes shall be subject to the regulations outlined in
§ 255-6, Licensing of animals, Subsection D.
§ 660-86 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-90
1:778
§ 660-90. Utilities.
All local utility uses shall be permitted in all zoning districts without
limitation as to minimum lot area, yard, or other bulk requirements,
provided that the installation thereof shall comply with the requirements of
the applicable administrative authorities. Community/regional utility uses
shall be permitted only in accordance with the provisions of the zoning
district in which they are located.
§ 660-91. (Reserved)
§ 660-92. Convenient cash businesses and similar establishments.
A. Purpose; title; intent.
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide for the regulation of
convenient cash and other similar establishments. It is recognized
that convenient cash businesses have the potential to be harmful to
the public welfare, both in regards to the community harmony and
with respect to potential effects on the quality, aesthetics and
functional aspects of the community. The purpose of regulating
convenient cash services is to ensure compatibility with
surrounding uses and properties and to avoid an unchecked
proliferation of convenient cash services that may result in the
displacement of other necessary commercial and financial services.
(2) Such businesses tailor their services to make them attractive to
persons experiencing unfavorable economic circumstances, often
aggravating those circumstances. Additionally, it has been found
that through their business practices, convenient cash businesses
are susceptible to attracting criminals seeking to commit
robberies. Finally, when clustered in an area or strung out along an
arterial street, such concentration creates an unwarranted
negative impression regarding the economic vitality of a
commercial district and the community at large. Based on their
proliferation, their susceptibility to crime, and the negative effects
of their proliferation, the common council finds that the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Lake Mills should
be protected by legislation limiting the geographic proliferation of
convenient cash businesses.
(3) It is therefore the intent of this chapter to regulate the locations
and hours of operation of convenient cash businesses in the City of
Lake Mills.
B. Location and operation of convenient cash businesses.
(1) Convenient cash businesses shall not be located within 2,500 feet
of any other convenient cash business.
(2) Convenient cash businesses shall not be located within 250 feet
from a residential district as measured by the shortest line between
§ 660-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-92
1:779
§ 660-93. First Amendment-protected adult-oriented
establishments.
the parcel to be occupied by the proposed convenient cash facility
and the property line of the nearest residential property.
(3) Hours of operation. Convenient cash businesses shall not operate
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(4) Business shall keep a glass entrance and exit doors with all
windows clear of any signs or advertisements.
(5) The building or portion thereof that is dedicated to the checkcashing
use shall have a minimum size of 1,500 square feet of
building floor area.
(6) All convenient cash businesses shall operate one outdoor
surveillance camera and wireless subscription module.
C. Security plan. Applicant must provide a security plan to the City of Lake
Mills Police Department that addresses the following:
(1) Limits on amount of cash immediately available for withdrawal;
(2) Lighting plan for the business showing both exterior and interior
lighting;
(3) Plans for maintaining visibility into the interior of the checkcashing
facility;
(4) Plans for security of the check-cashing area of the facility;
(5) A program for graffiti and litter abatement;
(6) Hours of operation; and
(7) Use of security guards and cameras plan.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare
of the residents of the City of Lake Mills, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City of Lake
Mills. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor the
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the
First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it
the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
B. Findings of fact.
§ 660-92 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-93
1:780
(1) The City Council finds that adult-oriented establishments, as
defined and otherwise regulated by the City in Chapter 240, Adult-
Oriented Establishments, of the Code of the City of Lake Mills,
require special zoning in order to protect and preserve the health,
safety, and general welfare of the City.
(2) Based its review of studies conducted in Phoenix, AZ, Garden
Grove, CA, Los Angeles, CA, Whittier, CA, Indianapolis, IN,
Minneapolis, MN, St. Paul, MN, Cleveland, OH, Oklahoma City, OK,
Amarillo, TX, Austin, TX, Beaumont, TX, Dallas, TX, Houston, TX,
Newport News, VA, Bellevue, WA, Seattle, WA, New York, NY, St.
Croix County, WI, and the Report of the Attorney General's Working
Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June
6,1989, State of Minnesota), and statistics obtained from the
United States Department of Health and Human Services, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, and the findings incorporated
in City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986);
Coleman A. Young v. American Mini-Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S.
50(1976); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215(1990);
Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560(1991); City of Erie v.
Pap's A.M., 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000); East of the River Enterprises II
v. City of Hudson; 2000 Wisc. App. Lexis 734 (Ct. App. Aug. 1,
2000); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702, 2003 WL
132541 (7th Cir. 2003), the City Council finds that there is
convincing evidence that the secondary effects of adult-oriented
establishments include an increased risk of prostitution, high-risk
sexual behavior, crime, and other deleterious effects upon existing
businesses and surrounding residential areas, and decreased
property values.
(3) The City Council intends to control the impact of these secondary
effects in order to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizenry; protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve
the quality of life; preserve the property values and character of
surrounding neighborhoods and areas.
(4) It is not the intent of the City Council to suppress any speech
activities protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a
content-neutral ordinance which addresses the secondary effects of
adult-oriented establishments while providing an outlet for First
Amendment-protected activities.
(5) In order to minimize and control the secondary effects of adultoriented
establishments upon the City, it is the intent of the City
Council to prevent the location of adult-oriented establishments
within a certain distance of other specified locations which are
incompatible with and would suffer from the secondary effects of
adult-oriented establishments.
(6) Based upon its review of materials linking alcohol consumption and
high-risk sexual behavior and materials linking alcohol
§ 660-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-93
1:781
consumption and crimes such as sexual assault, the City Council
finds that a geographic separation of adult-oriented establishments
from alcohol beverage licensed premises is warranted.
C. Location of First Amendment-protected adult-oriented establishments.
(1) The First Amendment and other provisions of the United States
Constitution, as interpreted by the United States Supreme Court
and other courts, require that adult-oriented establishments, as
defined and otherwise regulated by the City in Chapter 240, are
entitled to certain protections, including the opportunity to locate
in the City. Therefore, if an adult-oriented establishment license
has been granted by the City, and if all the requirements of this
section have been met, an adult-oriented establishment shall be a
permitted use as a conditional use in the I-2 Zoning District and
shall be a prohibited use in any other zoning district.
(2) Distance requirements.
(a) Adult-oriented establishments shall be located at least 1,000
feet from:
[1] Any playground lot line, or public park lot line;
[2] Any place of religious worship, public or private school, or
youth facility as defined in Chapter 240, Adult-Oriented
Establishments, of the Code of the City of Lake Mills.
[3] Any structure housing an establishment which holds an
alcohol beverage license.
(b) Adult-oriented establishments shall be located at least 500 feet
from:
[1] Any structure used as a residence; or
[2] Any residential zoning district boundary.
(3) Distance measurements:
(a) Distance requirements are to be measured in a straight line in
any direction, regardless of intervening structures, from the
structure housing the adult-oriented establishment to the
residential district boundary lines, to the lot line of any lot used
for a park, playground, or the lot line of any structure listed
under Subsection C(2)above.
(b) The measurements from a structure shall be taken from the
farthest point a structure extends in the direction of the
measurement, including overhanging roofs or similar
projections.
(c) For adult-oriented establishments located in conjunction with
other buildings such as in a shopping center, and clearly
§ 660-93 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-93
1:782
separate from other establishments, measurements shall be
taken from the boundaries of the space occupied by the adultoriented
establishment.
(d) For any adult-oriented establishment located above ground
level in a multistory structure and clearly separate from other
establishments within the structure, the distance
measurements shall be taken from the ground floor public
entrance/exit nearest the adult-oriented establishment
(excluding emergency exits).
(4) A licensed adult-oriented establishment is not disqualified from
holding an adult-oriented establishment license by the location
subsequent to the grant or renewal of its license of any of the
establishments described in Subsection C(2) above, within 1,000
feet of the licensed premises.
§ 660-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-93
1:783

ARTICLE V
Design Guidelines and Regulations
§ 660-94. Nonresidential design.
A. General provisions.
(1) Purpose. Improve the overall quality of nonresidential development
in Lake Mills, ensure compatibility of nonresidential development
with surrounding land uses, enhance site design of nonresidential
development in the City, enhance pedestrian safety and walkability,
and improve user-friendliness of the document and review process.
(2) Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to the
following types of developments:
(a) Development of all projects in which the principal use is
commercial, industrial or institutional.
(b) Any accessory use to one of the principal uses listed in
Subsection A(2)(a), including but not limited to lighting,
accessory buildings over 300 square feet in floor area,
telecommunications facilities, and exterior building
alterations.
(c) Any addition to an existing use listed in Subsection A(2)(a)
which existed as of November 4, 2014 that results in a total
cumulative square foot expansion of 25% or more over the life
of the development for any of the following:
[1] Building floor area;
[2] Outdoor storage area; or
[3] Parking lot area.
(d) Where developments under Subsection A(2)(c) are proposed,
the project, building, and site shall comply with the provisions
of this section to the extent practical, given existing site and
building conditions.
(3) Exemptions. The following shall be exempted from the provisions of
this section:
(a) All single-family detached and two-family residences on
individual lots or zero lot line.
(b) All multiple-family residences shall comply with the provisions
of § 660-103.
(c) All development in the B1 Downtown Business District shall
comply with the provisions of § 660-98.
§ 660-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-94
1:785
(4) Process. All projects shall be reviewed and approved as a part of
the site plan review and approval procedures contained in
§ 660-205.
B. Site planning.
(1) Purpose. These guidelines and standards are intended to
encourage an orderly and logical pattern of commercial
development that is easily recognized by local residents, and that
enhances the convenience and livability of Lake Mills. It is also the
intent that these guidelines and standards encourage forethought
and consideration of both a development's external relationships as
well as its internal organization.
(2) Preservation of natural features.
(a) Purpose. Enhance local character; protect natural features'
important functions, such as stormwater management, air
purification, and provision of shade; preserve and integrate
natural features, including mature trees into new
development.
(b) Tree and vegetation preservation.
[1] Tree survey/plan requirement. Developers shall submit an
existing tree survey and preservation plan to show
compliance with these guidelines and standards.
[2] General guideline. Existing quality/specimen trees and
vegetation should be preserved whenever possible to act
as buffers between adjoining developments and as site
amenities within the development.
[3] Significant trees. For purposes of this section, "significant"
trees include the following:
[a] Deciduous trees with twelve-inch minimum caliper.
[b] Evergreen trees 12 feet or more in height.
[c] Groups or stands of 10 or more trees with a minimum
caliper of six inches.
[4] Significant tree preservation and replacement standards.
[a] At least 50% of significant trees shall be preserved or
transplanted on site, to the maximum extent
practicable.
[b] Significant trees in appropriate locations, such as
along drainages and along the perimeter of the site,
should be used to fulfill landscaping or buffering
requirements outlined in § 660-113.
§ 660-94 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-94
1:786
[c] Tree replacement. If a significant tree designated to
be preserved is removed or substantially damaged
during clearing, grading, or construction, the
developer shall replace the removed or damaged tree
with new trees. Replacement trees shall be the same
or similar species to the trees removed or damaged, or
alternately a species native to Jefferson County (as
listed in § 660-113) and a minimum planting size of 2.5
inches DBH. Trees removed or damaged shall be
replaced by the developer on a diameter inches for
diameter inches basis.
[d] Barrier fencing shall be installed during construction
to protect significant trees.
[e] Grading shall be avoided within the root area or drip
line of any existing preserved trees.
(3) Land disturbance.
(a) Intent. The natural rolling and vegetated topography is a key
element in distinguishing Lake Mills and defining its character.
Development should maintain natural site topography and
minimize land disturbance. Extensive grading or unusual site
improvements (e.g., large retaining walls) to force a design
onto a property is strongly discouraged. Modifying the design
of a commercial development to fit the site generally results in
a reduced potential for environmental problems and an
improved level of visual interest and variety.
(b) Design guidelines and standards.
[1] Prior approval of land disturbance. Where significant
topographical issues are identified at a preapplication
conference (for example, substantial differences in grade
on site), the City may require the applicant to submit a
preliminary grading plan. As applicable, no grading,
excavation, or tree/vegetation removal shall occur on a
site, whether to provide for a building site, for on-site
utilities or services, or for any roads or driveways, before
the City's approval of such preliminary grading plan.
[2] Natural topography. To the maximum extent feasible, the
layout of commercial developments shall maintain natural
site topography. Berms, channels, swales, and similar manmade
changes to the landscape shall be designed and
graded to be an integral part of the natural landscape and
to provide a smooth transition in changes of slope.
[3] Maximum slope on graded or filled man-made slopes. The
maximum slope shall be 3:1.
§ 660-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-94
1:787
[4] Site drainage patterns. Site drainage patterns shall be
designed to prevent concentrated surface drainage from
collecting on and flowing across pedestrian paths, walks,
and sidewalks. All site drainage shall comply with Chapter
565, Stormwater Management, of the Code of the City of
Lake Mills.
C. Site layout/development pattern.
(1) Intent. Site layout and building orientation often define the focus of
activity that occurs at the front door or along the street. These
standards are intended to use site planning and building
orientation in order to:
(a) Create a sense of place for users and passersby.
(b) Ensure that buildings relate appropriately to surrounding
developments and streets and create a cohesive visual identity
and attractive street scene.
(c) Ensure that site circulation promotes contiguous pedestrian
and vehicle circulation patterns.
(d) Ensure that parking areas provide safe and efficient access to
buildings.
(e) Create a unique and identifiable image for development in
Lake Mills.
(2) Location of parking. In order to reduce the scale of the paved
surfaces and to shorten the walking distance between the parked
car and the building, off-street parking for all commercial
developments shall be located according to one of the following
options:
(a) A minimum of 30% of the off-street surface parking spaces
provided for all uses contained in the development's primary
building shall be located other than between the front facade
of the primary building and the primary abutting street; e.g., to
the rear or side of the primary building(s); or
(b) More than 70% of the off-street surface parking spaces
provided for all uses contained in the development's primary
building may be located between the front facade of the
primary building(s) and the primary abutting street, provided
the amount of interior and perimeter parking lot landscaping
required by § 660-113B is increased by 50%.
(3) Multiple-building developments.
(a) Applicability. When there is more than one building in a
commercial development, the development shall comply with
the following standards, except that multiple-building
§ 660-94 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-94
1:788
developments located at the intersection of two thoroughfare
streets shall comply instead with the standards stated in
Subsection C(5), Site layout and building orientation at two
intersecting thoroughfare streets.
(b) Site layout and building orientation. All primary and pad site
buildings shall be arranged and grouped so that their primary
orientation complements adjacent, existing development and
either:
[1] Frames the corner of an adjacent street intersection;
[2] Frames and encloses a "main street" pedestrian and/or
vehicle access corridor within the development site;
[3] Frames and encloses parking areas, public spaces, or
other site amenities.
[4] Alternatives. An applicant may submit an alternative
development pattern, provided such pattern achieves the
intent of the above standards and this section. Strictly
linear or "strip commercial" development patterns shall be
avoided.
(4) Single-building developments.
(a) Applicability. Unless part of a larger planned development or
commercial center, when there is only one building in a
proposed commercial development, the development shall
comply with the following standards, except that singlebuilding
developments located at the intersection of two
thoroughfare streets shall comply instead with the standards
stated in § 660-94C(5), Site layout and building orientation at
two intersecting thoroughfare streets.
(b) Single-tenant building. Unless part of a larger planned
development or commercial center, when there is only one
building in a proposed commercial development that will be
occupied by a single tenant, such building shall be oriented
toward the primary abutting street and shall otherwise comply
with § 660-94C(2), Location of parking. Deep setbacks behind
large expanses of parking areas or vacant land shall be
avoided.
(c) Multi-tenant building. Unless part of a larger planned
development or commercial center, when there is only one
building in a proposed commercial development that will be
occupied by multiple tenants, at least 50% of the building's
"active" wall shall be oriented toward the primary abutting
street and shall otherwise comply with § 660-94C(2), Location
of parking. Deep setbacks behind large expanses of parking
areas or vacant land should be avoided. For purposes of this
§ 660-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-94
1:789
standard, the "active" wall shall be the side of the building
containing the majority of storefronts, customer entrances,
and windows.
(5) Site layout and building orientation at two intersecting
thoroughfare streets.
(a) Intent. Major intersections of commercial activity in Lake Mills
need special attention so that all four corners are linked and
function as a whole, and so that a sense of place and "arrival"
unique to Lake Mills is created. Development at key
intersections shall comply with the recommendations outlined
in the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Applicability. All new office, and commercial developments
located at the intersection of two thoroughfare (arterial)
streets shall comply with this subsection's site layout and
building orientation standards.
(c) Site layout and building orientation. To the maximum extent
practicable, within each intersection quadrant, primary
buildings and/or pad site buildings shall be arranged to orient
to the thoroughfare streets and to frame the corner at the
intersection of the two thoroughfares. Deep building setbacks
behind large expanses of parking areas or vacant land shall be
avoided.
(d) Focal point required. On each of the four corners of a
thoroughfare/thoroughfare street intersection, developments
shall provide a "focal point" within a two-hundred-foot radius
from the intersection of the center lines of the two
thoroughfare streets. A "focal point" shall be visible from the
intersecting thoroughfare streets and may be either:
[1] A distinctively designed building, which may include a pad
site building, preferably with a vertical element; but shall
not include drive-through facilities and automobile service
stations;
[2] An architectural feature that is a minimum of 15 feet tall
and a maximum 25 five feet tall (e.g., a clock tower, spire,
or interesting roof form);
[3] Public art or sculpture;
[4] Fountains or other water feature;
[5] Public plazas or other open space; or
[6] Landscape feature.
(6) Pad/outlot sites.
§ 660-94 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-94
1:790
(a) Intent. The siting and design of smaller retail stores, commonly
referred to as "pads" or "outlots," can create a more inviting
appearance in a larger development by visibly reducing the
project's scale and by expanding the range of activities and
businesses found within a single development. The location,
orientation of the entry, and architecture of pad site buildings
also provide opportunities to frame entries into larger
developments and contribute to the development's visual
interest by placing storefront spaces closer to the street and
creating a street scene. Accordingly, pad site structures shall
be compatible with the main buildings on a commercial site.
The layout of pad site buildings shall relate coherently to the
public street and surroundings (outward) as well as to the main
center (inward), and specific siting decisions shall further the
general intent of creating a "sense of place," focal points, site
amenities, and arrival into the commercial center.
(b) Design guidelines and standards.
[1] General guideline. The number, location, and design of
independent pad sites shall reinforce, rather than obscure,
the identity and function of a commercial development.
[2] Clustering of pad sites. To the maximum extent
practicable, pad sites shall be clustered together to define
street edges and entry points or to enclose and create
interesting places between buildings. Even dispersal of
pad sites in a widely spaced pattern within the
development, even if along the street edge(s), is
discouraged. Placement of pad sites shall be consistent
with the requirements for overall development pattern and
site layout set forth in § 660-94C, Site layout/development
pattern.
[3] Spaces between adjacent pad sites. Wherever practicable,
spaces between adjacent pad site buildings should be
improved to provide small pockets (preferably heavily
landscaped) of customer parking, pedestrian connections,
small-scale project amenities, or focal points. Examples
include, without limitation:
[a] A landscaped pedestrian walkway linking customer
entrances between two or more pad site buildings;
[b] A public seating or outdoor eating area;
[c] An area landscaped with a variety of living materials
emphasizing four-season colors, textures, and
varieties; or
[d] Sculptures or fountains.
§ 660-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-94
1:791
[4] Building orientation on pad sites. The primary facade of a
building located on a pad site, typically the facade
containing the primary customer entrance, may be
oriented in a variety of ways, including, without limitation,
toward the primary access street, toward an internal
"main street," framing a primary entrance to the
development or center, toward the side (especially when
that side faces another pad site building), or toward the
interior of the center.
[5] Pedestrian connections. See § 660-94F, Pedestrian access
and circulation.
[6] Pad site building design.
[a] Pad site buildings shall incorporate the same
materials and colors as those on the primary
commercial building(s) in the development or center.
[b] Pad site entrances are appropriate locations to
express individual building character or identity.
Customer entrances shall be emphasized through
incorporation of a building recess, projection, canopy,
or similar design element.
[c] The design of any pad site shall comply with
§ 660-94G, Building design.
(7) Freestanding kiosks/ATM structures/vending machines/outdoor
sales appurtenances.
(a) Intent. Ensure that freestanding kiosk structures, ATM
structures, vending machines, and other outdoor sales
appurtenances are compatible with the appearance and
function of the overall commercial development.
(b) Classification. All freestanding kiosk structures, ATM
structures, vending machines, and other outdoor sales
appurtenances shall be considered uses accessory to the
principal uses on the property.
(c) Design guidelines and standards.
[1] General guideline. All kiosk-type buildings and structures
shall be integrated with the overall commercial or center
development and shall be subject to the same guidelines as
all other buildings with the development.
[2] Location. Freestanding kiosks and drive-up ATM
structures shall not be located along the primary access
street frontage.
§ 660-94 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-94
1:792
[3] Access. Access to a freestanding kiosk or drive-up ATM
structure shall not be from the adjacent public streets.
Access shall be from drives and streets internal to the
development.
[4] Structure design. Freestanding kiosks and drive-up ATM
structures shall comply with the building design standards
applicable to pad sites set forth in Subsection C(6) above.
(8) Site amenities.
(a) Intent. Site amenities and pedestrian-scale features (e.g.,
outdoor plazas, street furniture, playgrounds, statuary,
sidewalk cafes) in commercial developments offer attractive
spaces for customer and visitor interaction and create an
inviting image for both customers and employees. The use of
site amenities can also provide pedestrian spaces at the entry
to buildings, can break up expanses of parking, enhance the
overall development quality, and contribute to the character of
an area.
(b) Design guidelines and standards.
[1] General guideline. Site amenities and gathering places can
vary widely in size, in type, and in degree of amenity.
Buildings, trees, walls, topography, and other site features
within a commercial development should be oriented and
arranged to enclose such gathering places and lend a
human scale.
[2] Permitted site amenities.
[a] Patio or plaza with seating area;
[b] Mini-parks, squares, or greens;
[c] Customer walkways or pass-throughs containing
window displays;
[d] Water feature;
[e] Clock tower; and/or
[f] Public art;
[g] Any other similar, deliberately shaped area and/or
focal feature that, in the City's judgment, adequately
enhances such development and serves as a gathering
place.
[3] Site amenities as focal points. A site amenity may qualify
as a focal point required under Subsection C(5), Site
layout and building orientation at two intersecting
thoroughfare streets, provided the site amenity meets all
§ 660-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-94
1:793
applicable requirements for focal points stated in
Subsection C(5)(d).
(9) Lighting. All lighting shall comply with the regulations outlined in
§ 660-142.
(10) Signage. All signage shall comply with the regulations outlined in
Article VI.
D. Relationship to surrounding development.
(1) Intent. Ensure convenient pedestrian and vehicle access and
connections to adjacent uses whenever practicable; encourage
architectural, land use, and open space transitions, such as
reduced building mass next to residential uses, reduced intensity
between commercial and residential uses, front-to-front building
orientations, green spaces, and preserved natural features.
(2) Connectivity between land uses. See § 660-94E and F for applicable
guidelines and standards.
(3) Transitions between land uses.
(a) Transitions shall be required in the following situations:
[1] Changes in use between adjoining properties, especially
from commercial to residential.
[2] Changes in intensity of use between adjoining properties,
such as from commercial centers to multifamily
residential.
[3] Views, uses, or activities on the commercial development
site that could be a nuisance for neighbors, such as
commercial loading and service areas.
(b) Preferred techniques. When a transition is required, an
applicant shall incorporate, to the maximum extent
practicable, the architectural and green/open space transition
techniques tools outlined below:
[1] Architectural transitions. To the maximum extent
practicable, commercial development incorporates the
following techniques to ensure compatibility with
surrounding development, including adjacent residential
development:
[a] Use similar building setback.
[b] Use similar building height.
[c] Use similar roof form.
§ 660-94 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-94
1:794
[d] Mitigate the larger mass of commercial buildings with
facade articulation as outlined in § 660-94G(2),
Building massing and façade treatment.
[e] Use front-to-front building orientations, especially
with commercial uses that are pedestrian-intensive
(e.g., restaurants, banks). Other building-to-building
orientations may be utilized except that a back-tofront
building orientation is not an acceptable
transition tool.
[2] Green/open space transitions. Commercial development
may employ the following technique to provide transitions
and ensure compatibility between the commercial
development and surrounding development:
[a] Use small green spaces, courts, squares, parks,
plazas, and similar spaces that can also function as
community gathering places.
[b] Use existing natural features as transitions, including
natural differences in topography (not retaining
walls), streams, existing stands of trees, and similar
features. When existing natural features are used as
transitions, the City may still require that adequate
pedestrian connections to adjacent land uses be
accommodated.
[3] Landscaping and screening transitions. Where other
transitions tools are not possible, or where the City
determines other transition tools by themselves do not
create an adequate transition to, or buffer for, less
intensive land uses, the landscaping and screening
requirements outlined in § 660-113B shall apply.
E. Vehicle connections with adjacent properties.
(1) Adjacent nonresidential uses.
(a) To the maximum extent feasible, connections between adjacent
nonresidential development parcels shall be provided by
constructing a logical array of access points continuous to the
adjacent development.
(b) To the maximum extent feasible, common or shared service
and delivery access shall be provided between adjacent parcels
and/or buildings.
(c) The City may require access easements to ensure that pad
sites or adjacent parcels have adequate access if ownership
patterns change.
§ 660-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-94
1:795
(2) Adjacent residential uses. Commercial drives or on-site streets
shall not align with access to adjacent residential developments.
Exceptions may be made in cases where physical constraints
dictate that no other option is possible.
(3) Emergency access. All commercial developments shall comply with
the currently adopted building code provisions regarding
emergency vehicle access and fire lanes.
F. Pedestrian access and circulation. Applicants shall submit a detailed
pedestrian circulation plan with all development applications that
shows compliance with the following guidelines and standards:
(1) Required pedestrian connections. An on-site system of pedestrian
walkways shall be designed to provide direct access and
connections to and between the following:
(a) The primary entrance or entrances to each commercial
building, including pad site buildings.
(b) Any sidewalks or walkways on adjacent properties that extend
to the boundaries shared with the commercial development.
(c) Any public sidewalk system along the perimeter streets
adjacent to the commercial development [see Subsection F(3),
Pedestrian connections to perimeter public sidewalks].
(d) Where practicable and appropriate, adjacent land uses and
developments, including but not limited to adjacent residential
developments, retail shopping centers, office buildings, or
restaurants.
(e) Where practicable and appropriate, any adjacent public park,
greenway, or other public or civic use including but not limited
to schools, places of worship, public recreational facilities, or
government offices.
(2) Pedestrian connections from buildings to parking areas, pad sites,
and site amenities. In addition to the connections required in
Subsection F(1), Required pedestrian connections, on-site
pedestrian walkways shall connect each primary entrance of a
commercial building to a pedestrian network serving:
(a) All parking areas or parking structures that serve such primary
building; and
(b) Site amenities or gathering places provided pursuant to
§ 660-94C(8).
(3) Pedestrian connections to perimeter public sidewalks. Connections
between the on-site (internal) pedestrian walkway network and any
public sidewalk system located along adjacent perimeter streets
shall be provided at regular intervals along the perimeter street as
§ 660-94 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-94
1:796
appropriate to provide easy access from the public sidewalk to the
interior walkway network.
(4) Walkways along buildings. Continuous pedestrian walkways no less
than five feet wide shall be provided along the full length of a pad
site building along any facade featuring a customer entrance and
along any facade abutting customer parking areas. Such walkways
shall be located at least three feet from the facade of the building to
provide planting beds for foundation landscaping, except where
features such as arcades or entryways are part of the facade.
(5) Walkways through vehicle areas. At each point that the on-site
pedestrian walkway system crosses a parking lot or internal street
or driveway, the walkway or crosswalk shall be clearly marked
through the use of a change in paving materials distinguished by
their color, texture, or height, and have a minimum width of seven
feet.
G. Building design.
(1) Intent. Create commercial developments with a recognizable image
as a distinct place; vary massing to provide visual interest; as
applicable, ensure compatibility with surrounding developments;
and use building height and massing to emphasize important
corners, designate points of entry, and create a visible skyline to
differentiate Lake Mills' new commercial areas from other activity
nodes.
(2) Building massing and facade treatment except where noted. All
new commercial development shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) Variation in massing. A single, large, dominant building mass
shall be avoided.
(b) Building facade treatment standards.
[1] Architectural style. Style is not restricted; evaluation of
the appearance of a project shall be based on professional
quality of its design, architectural interest and variety,
relationship to surroundings and the community,
relationship to human scale.
[2] Four-sided architecture. Continuing an architectural
theme on all exposed exterior surfaces through the use of
the same building materials shall be required.
[3] Minimum wall articulation. There shall be no blank,
unarticulated building walls exceeding 30 feet in length.
All building walls shall be designed to meet all the
following standards:
§ 660-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-94
1:797
[a] All building walls shall consist of a building bay or
structural building system visually established by
architectural features such as columns, ribs or
pilasters, piers, changes in wall planes, changes in
texture or materials, and fenestration pattern.
[b] Long walls shall include at least one change in wall
plane, such as projections or recesses, having a depth
of at least four feet and extending at least 20% of the
entire length of the facade.
[c] All building walls shall include materials and design
characteristics consistent with those on the front.
(c) Building walls facing public areas. In addition to Subsection
G(2)(b)[3] above, building walls that face public streets,
connecting walkways, or adjacent development shall be
subdivided and proportioned using features such as windows,
entrances, arcades, arbors, awnings, trellises with vines, or
alternate architectural detail that defines human scale. All
improvements shall comply with § 573-20, Privileges in streets.
[1] Customer entrances. See Subsection G(4), Customer
entrances, below.
[2] Awnings.
[a] Awnings shall be no longer than a single storefront
[b] Fabric awnings are encouraged; canvas awnings with
a matte finish are preferred. Awnings with high-gloss
finish are discouraged. Illuminated, plastic awnings
are prohibited.
[c] Rigid frame awnings are allowed, but shall stop at the
top section and shall not be included in the valance.
[d] Awning colors shall be compatible with the overall
color scheme of the facade from which it projects.
Solid colors or subtle striped patterns are preferred
[e] Awnings for rectangular openings shall be simple shed
shapes.
[3] Downspouts. All downspouts shall be concealed. No
exposed downspouts shall be used. The view through
scuppers shall be screened
(3) Building materials/colors. All commercial development shall
comply with the following design guidelines and standards:
(a) Intent. Achieve unity of design through compatible materials
and colors throughout commercial developments; select
§ 660-94 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-94
1:798
building materials that are durable, attractive and have low
maintenance requirements; and utilize colors that reflect
natural tones found in the environment of Lake Mills.
(b) Submittal requirement. Applicants shall submit a color palette
and building materials board as part of their BSO plan
application.
(c) Building materials.
[1] Commercial structures.
[a] Materials shall have good architectural character (i.e.,
strength, durability and quality) and shall be selected
for harmony of the building with adjacent buildings
and the surrounding community. Buildings shall have
the same materials, or materials that are
architecturally harmonious, used for all building walls
and other exterior building components wholly or
partly visible from public streets.
[b] Brick, architectural panels, precast concrete,
architectural wood, architectural composites, or
decorative (architectural) masonry block shall be
utilized for at least 75% of the exterior treatment of all
buildings, exclusive of fenestration.
[c] Natural materials (i.e., cedar siding, brick, stone) are
preferred materials for the exterior treatment of
structures.
[d] Metal or steel external siding shall not be permitted as
a construction material for building elevations. The
use of metal/steel for roofing material is permissible
and may be approved by the Zoning Administrator
based upon context and overall site design.
[e] Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS) or
Dryvit® are permitted building materials and may be
approved by the City based upon context and overall
site design.
[2] Industrial structures.
[a] Materials shall have good durability and quality and
shall be selected for compatibility with adjacent
buildings and the surrounding developments.
[b] The facade of any building facing a public right-of-way
shall be faced with brick, brick veneer, architectural
panels, precast concrete, architectural wood,
architectural composites, decorative (architectural)
masonry block, stone, glass, or similar materials.
§ 660-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-94
1:799
[c] Metal siding shall not be utilized for any building
elevation abutting a public right-of-way and may only
be utilized for other elevations in conjunction with a
brick or stone wainscoting. The use of metal/steel for
roofing material is permissible and shall be approved
by the Zoning Administrator based upon context and
overall site design.
[d] Building elevations along a public right-of-way shall
wrap around a minimum of 20 feet or to a natural
dividing point. Elevations facing side or rear yards
shall be finished with materials complementary to the
street elevations. Side and rear elevations that do not
incorporate a significant proportion of the building
material outlined above shall incorporate enhanced
landscape and screening measures. Appropriateness
and effectiveness shall be subject to Zoning
Administrator approval.
[e] Building elevations abutting a residential land use
shall be enhanced with brick, brick veneer,
architectural panels, precast concrete, decorative
(architectural) masonry block, stone, glass, or similar
materials. Landscape and screening measures shall
comply with the regulations outlined in § 660-113,
Landscape and buffers.Appropriateness and
effectiveness shall be subject to Zoning Administrator
approval.
(d) Building color.
[1] Color schemes shall tie building elements together, relate
separate (freestanding) buildings within the same
development to each other, and shall be used to enhance
the architectural form of a building.
[2] Color schemes should utilize earth and other natural tones
as found in the soil types and/or plant material found in
Lake Mills and, more specifically, that area immediately
adjacent to the development site.
[3] All building projections, including, but not limited to,
chimneys, flues, vents, and gutters, shall match or
complement the color of the surface from which they
project.
[4] Intense, bright, black, or fluorescent colors shall be used
sparingly and only as accents; such colors shall not be
used as the predominant color on any wall or roof of any
building. Permitted sign areas shall be excluded from this
standard.
§ 660-94 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-94
1:800
(4) Customer entrances. All commercial development shall comply
with the following design guidelines and standards.
(a) Number of entrances required.
[1] Each principal commercial building greater than 50,000
square feet (gross floor area) shall provide at least two
customer entrances, each of which shall be on separate
building facades that are oriented to a public street.
[2] Principal commercial buildings smaller than 50,000
square feet (gross floor area) are encouraged to provide
multiple customer entrances on sides of the building that
face an abutting public street.
[3] Where additional stores will be located in the primary
building, each such store may have an exterior customer
entrance, which shall comply with the prominent entrance
requirement below.
(b) Prominent entrances required. Each primary building on a site,
regardless of size, shall have clearly defined, highly visible
customer entrances incorporating some of the following design
features:
[1] Canopies or porticos.
[2] Overhangs.
[3] Recesses/projections.
[4] Arcades.
[5] Raised corniced parapets over the door.
[6] Peaked roof forms.
[7] Arches.
[8] Outdoor patios.
[9] Display windows.
[10] Architectural detail such as tile work and moldings
integrated into the building structure and design.
[11] Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate
landscaped areas and/or places for sitting.
(5) Multiple buildings in commercial centers. Commercial centers that
contain multiple buildings, including pad sites, shall comply with
the following design guidelines and standards:
(a) Use of similar building materials in a commercial center. In
order to achieve unity between all buildings in a commercial
§ 660-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-94
1:801
center, all buildings in the center, including pad site buildings,
shall be constructed of building materials from the color and
materials palette approved for the center.
(b) Use of similar architectural styles or theme in a commercial
center. A consistent architectural style or theme should be
used throughout a commercial center, and in particular to tie
outlying pad site buildings to the primary building. Building
entrances are appropriate locations to express individual
building character or identity.
H. Service, loading, outdoor storage and mechanical areas.
(1) Purpose. Landscaping or other forms of screening shall be provided
around outdoor service, storage, loading and mechanical areas to
provide sensory (visual, olfactory, auditory) screening from
adjacent properties, streets, affected pedestrian circulation routes,
and affected pedestrian-oriented spaces.
(2) General. Integrate outdoor storage areas and loading facilities into
the site design to minimize their size, reduce visual impact, and
where appropriate allow for pedestrian and vehicular movement
between sites.
(3) Outdoor storage areas. All outdoor storage and/or merchandise
display areas shall comply with the regulations outlined in
§ 660-22.
(4) Loading areas. All loading areas shall comply with the regulations
outlined in § 660-42.
(5) Mechanical/utility equipment. Mechanical and utility equipment
can detract from the quality of a development and the character of
an area. These standards mitigate the negative visual and acoustic
impacts of mechanical and utility equipment systems located in a
commercial development.
(a) For new projects, all utilities to serve buildings shall be run
underground to reduce visual clutter.
(b) Window air-conditioning units shall not be installed on any
building facade that faces a street.
(c) Locate and screen mechanical equipment so that the
equipment is not visible when viewed from ground level of
adjacent properties. Low-profile mechanical units on rooftops
that are not visible from public ways should be used.
Mechanical units shall be set back from the building edge and
located in areas that are not visible or obtrusive. Screen or
match the color of roof-mounted equipment with the exposed
color of the roof to minimize visual impacts when roof-mounted
§ 660-94 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-94
1:802
§ 660-95. through § 660-97. (Reserved)
§ 660-98. Downtown design.
equipment is visible from nearby buildings and higher
elevations.
(d) Locate and screen utility meters, electrical conduit, and other
service and utilities apparatus so as not to be visible from
adjoining and nearby streets.
(6) Trash areas.
(a) Trash enclosures shall be located in convenient but not
prominent areas, such as inside parking courts, or at the end of
parking bays. They should be well screened with landscaping
and designed to protect adjacent uses from noise and odors. A
clear and safe pedestrian route shall be established to each
trash area.
(b) Trash enclosures shall be constructed from solid materials and
adequately screened from adjacent units with landscaping.
Architectural screening elements should be constructed of the
same materials and finishes as adjacent buildings, and the
color should also be compatible with the adjacent buildings.
Gates should be of a solid material and painted to match the
architectural screening elements on nearby fences and walls.
(c) Trash receptacles should be accessible for trash collection but
should not block circulation drives near loading areas or
conflict with parking. For security reasons, trash enclosure
locations should not create blind spots or hiding areas.
A. General provisions.
(1) Purpose. These standards are intended to direct the design of
buildings and sites within the Downtown Business District, in
compliance with the City's Comprehensive Plan. The standards will
promote quality development and reinforce the City's identity in
the downtown area — a vision of an attractive, pedestrian-oriented,
small-town downtown in scale and atmosphere. Buildings and sites
should convey a sense of permanence, attention to detail, quality
and investment. The standards are not intended to slow or restrict
development, but rather to add consistency and predictability to
the development process.
(2) Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to properties
within the B1 Downtown Business District as follows:
(a) New construction, addition, or reconstruction of a principal
building.
§ 660-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-98
1:803
(b) Principal building's floor area expansion by more than 25%.
Upon the initial expansion of the building, a sum will be totaled
for that parcel.
[1] Floor area expansion greater than 25%. The front facade
shall comply with the standards for this section.
[2] Floor area expansion greater than 50% (whether over a
series of expansions or from an initial expansion): The
entire building shall meet all standards and requirements
of this section.
(c) Primary building facade exterior alteration or renovation.
(d) Use of available economic incentives will require conformance
with the standards of this section.
(e) Exceptions.
[1] Existing building and site improvements may remain in
their current condition as long as no additions are added
to the existing building.
[2] The standards and requirements of this section may be
waived for buildings officially designated as historic if they
would result in an unacceptable modification of the
original, historic appearance of the building as determined
by the Plan Commission.
[3] Routine maintenance is exempt from the standards and
requirements of this section.
(3) Process. All projects shall be reviewed and approved as a part of
the building site and operation plan procedures contained in
§ 660-205.
B. Relationship to adjacent properties.
(1) Purpose. To promote functional and visual compatibility between
adjacent properties while avoiding negative impacts in a historic
downtown setting.
(2) Design standards.
(a) Proposed development shall coordinate with surrounding site
planning and development efforts on adjacent properties.
(b) Development shall consider the following design features to
create visual continuity between the proposed development
and adjacent neighborhoods and the community:
[1] Site design features: building setbacks, placement of
structures, location of pedestrian and vehicular facilities;
and spacing from adjoining buildings.
§ 660-98 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-98
1:804
[2] Planting design features: composition of plant materials;
type and quantity of plant materials; and street trees.
[3] Building design features: scale; massing, proportion;
spacing and location of windows, doorways and other
features; roof silhouette; facade proportions and
orientation; location of entries; surface material, finish,
color and texture of surrounding development; and style of
architecture.
(c) Properly link proposed development to existing and planned
pedestrian, vehicular, drainage and utility systems, and assure
efficient continuation of such systems.
(d) Building mass, color, lighting, and design shall be compatible
with existing and planned adjacent public and private open
spaces, parks and recreation areas.
C. Relationship to streetfront.
(1) Purpose. To create an active, safe pedestrian environment; to
upgrade facades and streetscape to establish visual identity for
downtown Lake Mills; to unify streetscapes; to create visual
interest and increased activity and public points at street corners.
(2) Design standards.
(a) The street edge shall be defined by the building, landscaping,
or other pedestrian-oriented features.
(b) All buildings shall comply with the bulk regulations outlined in
§ 660-57.
(c) Along downtown streets:
[1] Principal pedestrian building entries must have direct
access to the public sidewalk (entries may be on the side of
buildings but they must be visible from the street and
connected by a pedestrian pathway).
[2] Outdoor displays shall comply with the regulations
outlined in § 660-22.
[3] No vending machines are permitted to be visible from the
street.
D. Service, loading, outdoor storage and mechanical areas.
(1) Purpose. Landscaping or other forms of screening shall be provided
around outdoor service, storage, loading and mechanical areas to
provide sensory (visual, olfactory, auditory) screening from
adjacent properties, streets, affected pedestrian circulation routes,
and affected pedestrian-oriented spaces.
§ 660-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-98
1:805
(2) General. Integrate outdoor storage areas and loading facilities into
the site design to minimize their size, reduce visual impact, and
where appropriate, allow for pedestrian and vehicular movement
between sites.
(3) Outdoor storage areas. All outdoor storage and/or merchandise
display areas shall comply with the regulations outlined in
§ 660-22.
(4) Loading areas. All loading areas shall comply with the regulations
outlined in § 660-42.
(5) Mechanical/utility equipment. Mechanical and utility equipment
can detract from the quality of a development and the character of
an area. These standards mitigate the negative visual and acoustic
impacts of mechanical and utility equipment systems located in a
commercial development.
(a) For new projects, all utilities to serve buildings shall be run
underground to reduce visual clutter.
(b) Window air-conditioning units shall not be installed on any
building facade that faces a street.
(c) Locate and screen mechanical equipment so that the
equipment is not visible when viewed from ground level of
adjacent properties. Mechanical units shall be set back from
the building edge and located in areas that are not visible or
obtrusive, such as low-profile mechanical units on rooftops that
are not visible from public ways. Screen or match the color of
roof-mounted equipment with the exposed color of the roof to
minimize visual impacts when roof mounted equipment is
visible from nearby buildings and higher elevations.
(d) Locate and screen utility meters, electrical conduit, and other
service and utilities apparatus so as not to be visible from
adjoining and nearby streets.
(6) Trash areas.
(a) Trash enclosures shall be located in convenient but not
prominent areas, such as inside parking courts, or at the end of
parking bays. They should be well screened with landscaping
and designed to protect adjacent uses from noise and odors. A
clear and safe pedestrian route shall be established to each
trash area.
(b) Trash enclosures shall be constructed from solid materials and
adequately screened from adjacent units with landscaping as
outlined in § 660-113. Architectural screening elements should
be constructed of the same materials and finishes as adjacent
buildings, and the color should be compatible with the adjacent
§ 660-98 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-98
1:806
buildings. Gates should be of a solid material and painted to
match the architectural screening elements on nearby fences
and walls.
(c) Trash receptacles should be accessible for trash collection but
should not block circulation drives near loading areas or
conflict with parking. For security reasons, trash enclosure
locations should not create blind spots or hiding areas.
E. Building design character.
(1) Purpose: to reflect a traditional "Main Street" character, a
collection of structures designed and built in the early 1900s when
structures were composed of simple forms expressed through
commonly available materials such as brick, masonry, stone and
ornamental trim.
(2) Design standards.
(a) The general form of structures is to be simple, threedimensional
forms characteristic of early 1900s main streets
that orient to and participate in the activities of the street.
(b) Structures with multiple component forms are to be integrated
for visual unity.
(c) Visually expose components that support and/or stabilize
structures when compatible with design.
(d) Avoid excessively themed architecture, corporate or franchise
architecture that is not compatible with traditional main street
character.
(e) Adapt building access to site conditions for level, convenient,
obvious entry.
F. Building scale and mass.
(1) Purpose. To encourage the use of building components that are
human scale; to provide rhythm and facade scaling elements; and
to encourage architectural scale of development that is compatible
with desired existing adjacent development. See Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Appropriate Downtown Building Rhythm and
Massing for Vacant Areas
§ 660-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-98
1:807
(2) Design standards.
(a) Buildings should maintain the alignment of key horizontal
elements along the block or street edge. Long, uninterrupted
horizontal elements should be avoided and interrupted with
windowsills, moldings and mid-belt cornices. Building
articulation should be accomplished with design elements and
regular articulation intervals.
[1] Repeating distinctive window patterns at intervals less
than the articulation interval.
[2] Providing a porch, patio, deck or covered entry for each
articulation interval.
[3] Providing a balcony or bay window for each articulation
interval.
[4] Changing the roofline by alternating parapet heights.
[5] Changing materials with a change in building plane.
[6] Providing lighting fixtures, trellis, tree or other landscape
feature within each interval.
(b) Vertical "articulation." To moderate the vertical scale of
buildings, the design shall include techniques to clearly define
the building's cornice, middle and bottom. See Figure 5.1. The
following techniques are suggested methods of achieving
vertical articulation:
[1] Top. Strong eave lines, cornice treatments, horizontal
architectural detailing. This treatment should return into
alleyways and the full length of any facades clearly visible
to the public.
[2] Middle. Windows with thoughtful solid-to-void ratios that
exhibit window patterns of adjacent traditional buildings,
balconies, material changes, railings and similar
treatments that unify the building design.
[3] Bottom. Pedestrian-oriented storefronts, large windows,
pedestrian scale building detail, kick plates below
windows, sign band awnings, and arcades.
[4] Where appropriate, the applicant should coordinate the
horizontal elements (i.e., cornices, window lines, arcades,
etc.) in a pattern and height to reflect similar elements on
neighboring buildings that exhibit the City's desired scale
and character for the area.
§ 660-98 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-98
1:808
Figure 5.2: Appropriate Architectural Elements for
Downtown Buildings
G. Building exteriors.
(1) Purpose. To ensure that buildings have design integrity at all
observable distances; to ensure that exterior finishes are
compatible with traditional main street character; to enhance
buildings with appropriate design details; to encourage pedestrianfriendly
street facades along streets and public parks or open
spaces; to architecturally accentuate building corners at street
intersections; to encourage the use of high-quality, permanent,
compatible materials that will upgrade the visual image of
Downtown Lake Mills; to reduce the visual impact of large,
undifferentiated walls.
(2) Design standards.
(a) Vernacular. Material finishes shall reflect the early 1900s
"Main Street" vernacular for building materials for new
building construction and buildings constructed before 1930. A
new design that draws upon the fundamental similarities
among older buildings in the area without copying them is
preferred. This will allow the new project to be construed as a
product of its own time, yet be compatible with its historic
neighbors.
(b) Facades.
[1] Existing buildings. Retain facades that reflect the heritage
of the City. Facades of vintage buildings may be adapted to
contemporary use with compatible materials. Use of metal
or plywood siding, metal screening, plastic, plywood, sheet
wood products, or fiberglass to cover over existing facades
is prohibited. Wood should not be used to cover over
existing brick or stone masonry.
§ 660-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-98
1:809
[2] New buildings. Building facades located adjacent to a
sidewalk along downtown streets shall include transparent
window area or window displays along the majority of the
ground floor facade between two feet and eight feet above
ground level and the following elements:
[a] Storefront with recessed entrance(s).
[b] Sign band (horizontal) or projecting sign.
[c] Prominent building address.
[d] Seasonal planters/landscaping.
(c) Building entrances and fenestration. Building entrances should
appear similar to those used historically. See Figure 5.1.
Clearly define the primary entrance with traditional
architectural detailing, landscape features such as ornamental
paving, tile work, planters and/or planting beds, or canopies. A
contemporary interpretation of a traditional building entry,
which is similar in scale and overall character to those seen
historically, is encouraged in new buildings. The arrangement,
proportion and design of windows and doors shall conform to
the following:
[1] The height-to-width ratio of single openings and group
openings are to be proportionately scaled to the wall and
adjacent buildings.
[2] Door and window details and trim suitably scaled to the
wall and adjacent buildings.
[3] Reduce large expanses of glass used in windows and doors
to smaller component windows reminiscent of traditional
main street vernacular when adjacent to sidewalks or
other pedestrian use areas.
[4] The total square footage of windows along a facade facing
a street shall be a minimum of 15% of the square footage
of the facade.
Figure 5.3: Appropriate Period Window Treatments
for Downtown Buildings
§ 660-98 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-98
1:810
(d) Ornamentation. New buildings should incorporate the
following measures compatible with early 1900s "Main Street"
buildings:
[1] Decorative rooflines. An ornamental molding, entablature,
frieze or other roofline device visible from the ground
level.
[2] Decorative treatment of windows and doors. Decorative
molding/framing details around all ground floor windows
and doors, decorative glazing, or door designs located on
facades facing streets or public parks or open spaces.
[3] Decorative light fixtures. Decorative light fixtures with a
diffuse visible light source such as a globe or "acorn" that
is nonglaring or a decorative shade or mounting.
[4] Decorative materials. Natural building materials,
including masonry, brick, tone, wood clapboard, or other
materials with similar decorative or textural qualities.
(e) Building materials. Building exteriors shall be constructed
from high-quality, durable materials.
[1] Preferred exterior building materials that reflect the City's
desired traditional main street character are as follows:
[a] Masonry;
[b] Cast stone;
[c] Wood clapboard siding;
[d] Other materials subject to approval by the City.
[2] The following materials are prohibited in visible locations:
[a] Corrugated or beveled metal siding.
[b] Vinyl or plywood siding.
[c] Tinted or mirrored glass (except stained glass) as a
major building element.
[d] Corrugated fiberglass.
[e] Chain-link fencing.
[f] Crushed rock/crushed tumbled glass.
[g] Exterior Insulation Finish Systems (EIFS) when used
for the dominant facade material.
(f) Colors. Exterior finish colors are to express the integral color
of building materials (i.e., brick, cast stone). Colors should be
§ 660-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-98
1:811
neutral shades of natural colors found in nature in the local
region, and include limited compatible accent colors. The color
of neighboring buildings that comply with this section should
be considered when selecting colors for repainting or
remodeling of existing structures and for new structures.
(g) Corner buildings. Buildings located at the intersection of
streets should include design elements or treatments to the
building corner facing the intersection.
[1] Provide a corner entrance to a store, courtyard, building
lobby, atrium, pedestrian pathway, or pedestrian-oriented
space.
[2] Include corner architectural elements.
[3] Special treatment of pedestrian weather protection
canopy at the corner of the building.
[4] Other similar treatment or element approved by the City.
(h) Blank walls. Blank walls shall not be visible from a street,
public park or open space. Treatment of blank walls is to be
proportional to the front facade. The applicant must submit
architectural plans and elevations showing proposed
treatments for approval.
(i) Franchise/corporate architecture. Prototype design for
franchises should use customized components that are
consistent with the desired traditional main street character
and that reinforce visual consistency with other adjacent
buildings. No franchise architecture will be allowed unless it
can be shown that it is harmonious with the elements of typical
early 1900s architectural detail.
(j) Awnings.
[1] Materials. Awnings shall be constructed of high-quality
materials such as matte finish canvas or vinyl-coated
canvas, and shall be of simple, historically compatible
design typical to early 1900s downtown Lake Mills
buildings. Awnings shall not be installed so as to obscure
significant architectural details of a building. Bubble, box,
or shiny plastic awnings shall be prohibited. Mansard
awnings shall be prohibited in the B1 District.
Architectural metal awnings may be permitted with
approval of the Zoning Administrator.
[2] Colors. Solid color or two-color striped awnings are
permitted. Corporate colors on awnings are permitted only
if they are architecturally compatible with the building on
§ 660-98 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-98
1:812
§ 660-99. through § 660-102. (Reserved)
§ 660-103. Multifamily residential design.
which the awning is attached. Overly iridescent or
fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
[3] Signage. Signage on awnings shall be limited to the
vertical drip or flat face (perpendicular to the street or
sidewalk) of an awning, and shall not be permitted on the
sides or top slope of an awning.
[4] Length. Awnings shall not exceed the width of a single
building or building module. Awnings shall not be installed
so as to extend across more than one storefront.
[5] Illumination. Backlit or internally lit awnings shall be
prohibited.
A. General provisions.
(1) Purpose. Improve overall quality of multifamily development in
Lake Mills, ensure compatibility of multifamily development with
surrounding land uses, and improve user-friendliness of the
document and review process.
(2) Applicability. Multifamily residential design shall apply to:
(a) New multifamily development of three units or more.
(b) Major rehabilitation, renovation, restoration, modification,
addition, or retrofit of a three-unit or more multifamily
structure or site that exceeds 50% of its current appraised
value as established by the City of Lake Mills. Major
rehabilitation shall not include routine maintenance and repair
of a structure or other feature on the surrounding site, such as
roof replacement or general repairs to a parking area or other
site feature.
(3) Process. All projects shall be reviewed and approved as a part of
the building site and operation plan procedures contained in
§ 660-205.
B. Site planning.
(1) Purpose. Enhance the image of the City, reflect unique site
characteristics, and provide strong neighborhood environments;
maintain local character by preserving and incorporating natural
site features, significant natural areas, open space, and historic
structures; preserve and integrate healthy and mature existing
trees for the benefits of natural shading, air quality, stormwater
management, and aesthetic value.
§ 660-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-103
1:813
(2) Common open space. Common open space areas are to have easy
access by residents, provide focal points for community recreation
and interaction and add to the overall quality of life for residents.
Common open space should be integrated purposefully into the
overall design of a development, not merely as residual areas left
over after buildings and parking lots are sited.
(a) Common open space required. At least 15% of the total land
area shall be common open space. Clustering of buildings is
encouraged to minimize small, narrow, unassigned strips in
front of and between buildings. Designated common open
space may be natural, landscaped for more formal courtyards
or plazas, or may be developed for active or passive recreation.
(b) Areas not allowed for common open space. The following shall
not count toward common open space set-aside requirements:
[1] Private lots, yards, balconies and patios dedicated for use
by a specific unit.
[2] Public right-of-way or private streets and drives.
[3] Open parking areas and driveways for dwellings.
[4] Land covered by structures except for ancillary structures
associated with the use of the open space such as gazebos
and picnic shelters.
[5] Designated outdoor storage areas.
[6] Land areas between buildings and parking lots or
driveways of less than 40 feet.
[7] Required perimeter setbacks.
[8] Detention/retention facilities, including drainage swales,
except that detention or retention areas and stormwater
management structures or facilities may be used to meet
up to 100% of the required common open space amount,
provided such areas or facilities are accessible and usable,
as determined by the City, as year-round community
amenities by the residents of the development (e.g., picnic
areas, passive recreation areas, playgrounds, ponds for
fishing and/or boating, etc.).
(3) Preservation of natural features. Preserving significant natural
features enhances local character while benefitting stormwater
management, air quality, and natural shade.
(a) General guideline. Integrate existing natural features,
required open space, and existing on-site historic structures or
cultural resources into the overall development.
§ 660-103 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-103
1:814
(b) Preservation of existing trees and vegetation.
[1] An existing tree survey and plan for tree preservation and
replacement shall be submitted with a required
preliminary plan or site plan to show compliance with the
guidelines and standards below.
[2] General guideline. Existing trees and vegetation should be
preserved whenever possible to act as buffers between
adjoining developments and as community amenities
within the multifamily development.
[3] Significant trees. Significant trees shall be preserved or
transplanted on-site to the maximum extent practicable.
For purposes of this section, "significant" trees include the
following:
[a] Deciduous trees with twelve-inch minimum caliper;
[b] Evergreen trees 12 feet or more in height; or
[c] Groups or stands of 10 or more trees with a minimum
caliper of six inches. Significant trees in appropriate
locations, such as along drainages and along the
perimeter of the site, should be used to fulfill
landscaping or buffering requirements as outlined in
§ 660-113.
[4] Tree replacement. If a significant tree is removed or
substantially damaged during clearing, grading or
construction, the applicant or developer shall replace the
removed or damaged tree with new trees. Replacement
trees shall be the same or similar species to the trees
removed or damaged, or alternately a species native to
Jefferson County and approved by the Zoning
Administrator. For every one inch of tree caliper removed
or damaged, the applicant or developer shall install the
equivalent diameter inches of replacement tree caliper.
[5] Tree protection during construction. Significant trees shall
be protected during construction with barrier fencing.
Grading shall be avoided within the root area or drip line
of any existing preserved trees.
C. Site layout and development pattern.
(1) Purpose. Site layout and building orientation often define the focus
of activity that occurs at the front door or along the street. The
layout of the site also establishes the sense of community for a
neighborhood by providing opportunities for people to gather.
These standards are intended to use site planning and building
orientation to:
§ 660-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-103
1:815
(a) Ensure that buildings relate appropriately to surrounding
developments and streets and create a cohesive visual identity
for the neighborhood and attractive street scene;
(b) Promote efficient site layout in terms of vehicular and
pedestrian circulation patterns;
(c) Create a unique and identifiable image for new multifamily
development in Lake Mills;
(d) Ensure occupants' privacy through careful siting of buildings
within a multifamily development (e.g., address sight line of
window to window in adjacent buildings, limit buildings'
primary orientation to parking lots).
(2) Site layout guidelines and standards for multifamily developments.
(a) Building organization. Individual buildings within a multifamily
development shall be:
[1] Clustered or grouped to form neighborhoods.
[2] Organized around a common open space, public open
space (e.g., a greenway), natural features located on the
site (e.g., a stream corridor), or community amenities such
as swimming pools or other recreational facilities.
[3] Oriented or arranged in a manner to enclose required
common open spaces to the maximum extent practicable.
[4] Oriented to primary perimeter streets, including
thoroughfares, or boundaries; or through-access drives.
(b) Building orientation to street edges. To the maximum extent
practicable, buildings along a public street should be oriented
to avoid multiple parallel orientations to a public street.
Instead, a variety of building orientations, including
perpendicular and canted, or intervening open spaces should
be provided to lessen the mass of buildings along the street.
Multiple buildings may line up parallel to a public street if:
[1] A building entrance faces the perimeter street;
[2] Common open space is centrally located in the interior of
the site and accessible by all units.
(c) Privacy assurance. If any portion of a multifamily development
is located adjacent to single-family residential uses, then
accessory structures, including garages and recreational
facilities, shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the
adjacent single-family residential property line. The developer
shall provide a buffer between the structure and adjacent
property. The buffer may be a fence, wall, heavy landscaping,
§ 660-103 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-103
1:816
or combination thereof. Fences and walls used for buffer
purposes shall comply with the regulations outlined in
§§ 660-14 and 660-15.
D. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation and access.
(1) Purpose. These guidelines and standards are intended to:
(a) Create a hierarchy of streets and drives for new multifamily
development.
(b) Design streets and drives to create identifiable, safe
neighborhood environments.
(c) Provide safe and efficient vehicular circulation patterns within
and between developments. Residential and collector drive
design within a multifamily development should be designed to
encourage building clusters that define identifiable
neighborhoods within the multifamily development. So that a
multifamily development should not become an isolated island
in the surrounding community, the internal drive system
should also offer connectivity between adjacent residential
neighborhoods.
(d) Use internal drives to define and protect important views.
(e) Provide safe, identifiable pedestrian circulation patterns within
and between developments.
(2) Vehicle access and circulation.
(a) Internal drive hierarchy. The organization of the internal drive
system in a multifamily development should provide a
hierarchy of three types of drives:
[1] Low-volume, residential drives that serve individual
building clusters.
[2] Collector drives that distribute traffic within the
development and connect separate building clusters.
[3] Through-access drives that typically connect to the
development's perimeter and to the public street system.
(b) Internal drive design. The internal drive network should
respond to topography, intended traffic speed, pedestrian
usage and safety, and views. Excessively straight and wide
drives encourage high traffic speed and do not have a
residential scale. Accordingly, internal drive design within a
multifamily development's boundaries shall comply with the
following guidelines and standards:
[1] The internal drive system shall connect to the perimeter
public street system to provide multiple direct connections
§ 660-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-103
1:817
to and between local destinations such as parks, schools
and shopping.
[2] Interconnectivity. The internal drive system shall connect
to the perimeter public street system to provide for both
intra- and inter-neighborhood connections to knit separate
developments together, rather than forming barriers
between them. Accordingly, the internal drive system shall
provide vehicle connections, other than primary vehicle
access, to each adjoining residential or collector street.
[3] Multifamily developments greater than five acres shall
include a minimum of one "through-access drive," which
typically will be a private drive but may be a dedicated
street, with detached sidewalks and landscaped planting
strips between the sidewalk and curb. The through-access
drive shall be continuous through the site, and connect to
a perimeter public street on either end.
[4] The design of all through-access drives shall be consistent
with, and aligned with, residential drives or throughaccess
drives on adjacent properties.
[5] The internal drive system should be arranged to utilize
both parallel and perpendicular streets in identifiable
blocks or clusters, as well as occasional curvilinear or
diagonal streets, except where sensitive natural areas
would be unduly disturbed by such a pattern. "T"
intersections are also encouraged in locations where views
of important public spaces or natural or open areas can be
highlighted.
[6] To the maximum extent practicable, drives should follow
the natural contours of the site.
(c) Vehicle access and circulation. Primary vehicle access to a
multifamily development shall be from thoroughfare or
collector streets. To the maximum extent practicable, unless
required for emergency access, a multifamily development
shall not have primary vehicle access from a local street that
also serves single-family residences. Large multifamily
developments shall have multiple primary access points from
thoroughfare streets as required to ensure public safety.
(3) Pedestrian access and circulation.
(a) Minimum width. All on-site pedestrian walkways and sidewalks
shall be a minimum of four feet wide, except walkways
adjacent to a parking area, where cars may overhang the
walkway, shall be a minimum of six feet wide.
§ 660-103 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-103
1:818
(b) Pedestrian connections. An on-site system of pedestrian
walkways shall be designed to provide direct access and
connections to and between the following:
[1] The primary entrance or entrances to each principal
multifamily building;
[2] To any sidewalks or walkways on adjacent properties that
extend to the boundaries shared with the multifamily
development.
[3] Any sidewalk system along the perimeter streets adjacent
to the multifamily development as outlined in Subsection
D(3)(d) below.
[4] Any adjacent commercial land uses, including but not
limited to retail shopping centers, office buildings,
restaurants, or personal service establishments; and
[5] Any adjacent public park, greenway, or other public or
civic use including but not limited to schools, places of
worship, public recreational facilities, or government
offices.
(c) Connections to primary entrances. In addition to the
connections required in Subsection D(3)(b) above, on-site
pedestrian walkways shall connect each primary entrance of
each principal multifamily building to the following:
[1] Parking areas or parking structures that serve the
principal multifamily building;
[2] Community amenities, such as swimming pools,
community centers, other recreational facilities, or
common open space; and
[3] Sub-community facilities intended to serve the particular
multifamily building, such as mail centers.
(d) Connections to perimeter street. Connections between the onsite
(internal) pedestrian walkway network and any public
sidewalk system located along adjacent perimeter streets shall
be provided at an average spacing of 1,320 feet along the
perimeter street. In this way, pedestrians along the perimeter
public streets will be able to find a sidewalk connection into the
interior walkway system without walking more than 1/4 mile
along the perimeter street.
(e) Connection markings. Each point at which the on-site
pedestrian walkway system must cross a parking lot or internal
street or driveway to make a required connection shall be
clearly marked through the use of change in paving materials,
height, or distinctive colors.
§ 660-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-103
1:819
E. Building design.
(1) Purpose.
(a) Create and add to the visual interest of Lake Mills streets;
(b) Ensure distinctive quality and consistency in building
architectural character and style;
(c) Ensure building design and architectural compatibility within a
multifamily development.
(d) Promote compatibility with adjacent development, as
applicable considering the context of adjacent residential
neighborhoods, including the height, scale, mass, form, and
character of surrounding development.
(e) Provide building design details to avoid featureless building
massing and reduce the visual scale of large multifamily
buildings;
(f) Achieve unity of design through the use of similar materials
and colors;
(g) Ensure use of durable and attractive building materials;
(h) Encourage private open spaces for residents' enjoyment; and
(i) Ensure accessory structures are compatible in design with the
primary buildings they serve.
(2) Building height, mass, and form.
(a) Building height. All structures shall comply with the building
height standards outlined in § 660-57, Bulk regulations.
(b) Building mass and form.
[1] Building length/number of units. No more than six
townhouse dwelling units shall be attached in any single
row.
[2] Building design shall provide complex massing
configurations with a variety of different wall planes and
roof planes. Wall and roof planes shall contain offsets or
setbacks with a horizontal plane differential at least every
50 linear feet. Plain, monolithic structures with long,
monotonous, unbroken wall and roof surfaces of 50 feet or
more are prohibited.
[3] The facades of single-family attached townhouses should
be articulated to differentiate individual units.
[4] Multifamily building design should incorporate visually
heavier and more massive elements at the building base,
§ 660-103 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-103
1:820
and lighter elements above the base. A second story, for
example, should not appear heavier or demonstrate
greater mass than that portion of the building supporting
it.
(c) Small multifamily buildings. To the maximum extent
practicable, the massing and use of exterior materials on small
multifamily buildings of eight units or less should be arranged
so as to give the building the appearance of a large singlefamily
detached home.
(3) Architectural detail. Style, roof form, building facades, and
fenestration.
(a) Purpose. Provide a distinctive quality, architectural character
in new multifamily developments, incorporating architectural
details to reduce the visual scale of large multifamily buildings
and development.
(b) Consistency in architectural style. Each building in a
multifamily development should have a definitive, consistent
style. Mixing of various architectural styles on the same
building is discouraged.
(c) Four-sided design required. All sides of a multifamily building
shall display a similar level of quality and architectural
interest. The majority of a building's architectural features and
treatments shall not be restricted to a single facade.
(d) Pedestrian-scale entrance required. All building entries
adjacent to a collector or residential (local) public street or to a
public street or private drive with on-street parking shall be
pedestrian-scaled. Pedestrian-scaled entries are those that
provide an expression of human activity or use in relation to
building size. Doors, windows, entranceways, and other
features such as corners, setbacks, and offsets can be used to
create pedestrian scale.
(e) Articulated building fronts. Fronts of buildings should be
articulated through the use of bays, insets, balconies, porches,
or stoops related to entrances and windows.
(f) Windows. All multifamily building elevations shall contain
windows, except when necessary to assure privacy for adjacent
property owners. Windows should be located to maximize the
possibility of occupant surveillance of entryways, recreation
areas, and laundry areas.
(g) Garage doors. Garage doors of attached garages shall not
comprise more than 50% of the total length of a multifamily
building's front facade, and every two single-bay garage doors
§ 660-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-103
1:821
or every double garage door shall be offset by at least four feet
from the plane of an adjacent garage door(s).
(h) Roofs.
[1] All multifamily buildings with pitched roofs shall have a
pitched roof with a minimum slope ratio of 6:12.
[2] On buildings where sloping roofs are the predominant roof
type, each building shall have a variety of roof forms. For
instance, a gable or hip configuration should be used with
complementary sheds, dormers, and other minor
elements. Other roof forms will be considered on a caseby-
case basis.
[3] On buildings where flat roofs are the predominant roof
type, parapet walls shall vary in height and/or shape at
least one every 50 feet of building wall length.
[4] Roof forms shall be designed to correspond and denote
building elements and functions such as entrances and
arcades.
(4) Mechanical/utility equipment screening.
(a) Intent. Mitigate the detracting visual and acoustic impacts of
mechanical and utility equipment systems located in a
multifamily residential development.
(b) Design standards. Mechanical/utility screening shall be an
integral part of the building structure and architecture rather
than appearing "tacked on" to the exterior surfaces. Screening
shall be provided through the use of fencing, landscape
materials, or other materials compatible with the primary
structure.
(5) Mailboxes.
(a) Mailboxes shall be located in highly visible, heavy-use areas for
convenience, and to allow for casual social interaction, and to
promote safety.
(b) Incorporation of design features, such as a built frame
consistent with the development's architectural style, is
encouraged.
(6) Trash and storage areas.
(a) Trash enclosures shall be located in convenient but not
prominent areas, such as inside parking courts, or at the end of
parking bays. They should be well screened with landscaping
and designed to protect adjacent uses from noise and odors. A
clear and safe pedestrian route shall be established to each
§ 660-103 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-103
1:822
trash area. Residents should not have to wind their way
through a parking lot to the trash area.
(b) Trash enclosures shall be constructed from solid materials and
adequately screened from adjacent units with landscaping. All
trash enclosures should be covered with a trellis or similar
structure. Architectural screening elements should be
constructed of the same materials and finishes as adjacent
buildings, and the color should also be compatible with the
adjacent buildings. Gates should be of a solid material and
painted to match the architectural screening elements on
nearby fences and walls.
(c) Trash receptacles should be accessible for trash collection but
should not block circulation drives near loading areas or
conflict with parking. For security reasons, trash enclosure
locations should not create blind spots or hiding areas.
F. Building materials.
(1) Purpose. Achieve unity of design with similar materials and colors
throughout multifamily developments.
(2) Design guidelines and standards.
(a) Multifamily development over 100 units. Subtle variations in
color and materials shall be used where practicable to define
neighborhoods in multifamily development of more than 100
units.
(b) Exterior materials. High-quality building materials that are
durable, attractive, and have low maintenance requirements
shall be utilized.
[1] For all multifamily buildings and single-family townhouses,
an amount equal to 40% of the total net exterior wall area
of each building elevation, excluding gables, windows,
doors, and related trim, shall be brick, stone, or
architectural block.
[2] Exterior building materials shall not include the following:
rough sawn or board-and-batten wood, smooth-faced or
gray concrete block, painted concrete block, tilt-up
concrete panels, field-painted or pre-finished standard
corrugated metal siding, or standard single- or double-tee
concrete systems.
[3] The rehabilitation of existing multifamily structures shall
comply with the requirements for exterior building
materials to the maximum extent practicable. Use of
alternate materials is subject to approval by the Zoning
Administrator.
§ 660-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-103
1:823
§ 660-104. through § 660-107. (Reserved)
§ 660-108. Traditional neighborhood development (TND) design.
(c) Roof materials. Predominant roof materials shall be high
quality, durable material such as, but not limited to: wood
shake shingles, clay or concrete tiles, composition shingles,
and asphalt shingles. Other materials, such as standing-seam
metal, will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
A. General provisions.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow the optional
development and redevelopment of land in the City of Lake Mills
consistent with the design principles of traditional neighborhoods.
A traditional neighborhood:
(a) Is compact;
(b) Is designed for the human scale;
(c) Provides a mix of uses, including residential, commercial, civic,
and open space uses in close proximity to one another within
the neighborhood;
(d) Provides a mix of housing styles, types, and sizes to
accommodate households of all ages, sizes, and incomes;
(e) Incorporates a system of relatively narrow, interconnected
streets with sidewalks, bikeways, and transit that offer
multiple routes for motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists and
provides for the connections of those streets to existing and
future developments;
(f) Retains existing buildings with historical features or
architectural features that enhance the visual character of the
community;
(g) Incorporates significant environmental features into the
design;
(h) Is consistent with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Application procedure and approval process. Shall comply with the
procedures as outlined in § 660-208, Traditional neighborhood
development (TND).
(3) Subdivision of land. If the traditional neighborhood development
involves the subdivision of land as defined in Chapter 650,
Subdivision Regulations, the applicant shall submit all required
land division documents in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 650, Subdivision Regulations, of the Code of the City of
Lake Mills and Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes. If there is a
§ 660-103 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-108
1:824
conflict between the design standards of Chapter 650, Subdivision
Regulations, and the design guidelines of this section, the
provisions of this section shall apply.
(4) Ownership and maintenance of open space. Provision shall be
made for the ownership and maintenance of streets, squares,
parks, open space, and other public spaces in a traditional
neighborhood development.
B. Traditional neighborhood development design standards.
(1) Neighborhood uses. In order to achieve the proximity necessary to
make neighborhoods walkable, it is important to mix land uses. A
traditional neighborhood development should consist of a mix of
residential uses, a mixed-use area, and open space as provided
below:
(a) A mix of residential uses of the following types can occur
anywhere in the traditional neighborhood development. For
infill development, the mix of residential uses may be satisfied
by existing residential uses adjacent to the traditional
neighborhood development.
[1] Single-family detached dwellings;
[2] Single-family attached dwellings, including duplexes,
townhouses, row houses;
[3] Multifamily dwellings, including senior housing;
[4] Secondary dwelling units, such as mother-in-law units, as
allowed by §§ 660-67 and 660-68;
[5] "Special needs" housing, such as community living
arrangements and assisted-living facilities.
(b) Mixed-use area, of commercial, residential, civic or
institutional, and open space uses, as identified below. All
residents should be within approximately 1/4 mile or a fiveminute
walk from existing or proposed commercial, civic and
open space areas. Individual businesses should not exceed
6,000 square feet in size.
[1] Commercial uses.
[a] Food services (neighborhood grocery stores; butcher
shops; bakeries; restaurants, not including drivethroughs;
cafes; coffee shops; neighborhood bars or
pubs);
[b] Retail uses (florists or nurseries; hardware stores;
stationery stores; bookstores; studios and shops of
artists and artisans);
§ 660-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-108
1:825
[c] Services (day-care centers; music, dance or exercise
studios; offices, including professional and medical
offices; barber; hair salon; dry cleaning);
[d] Accommodations (bed-and-breakfast establishments,
small hotels or inns).
[2] Residential uses.
[a] Single-family attached dwellings, including duplexes,
townhouses, row houses;
[b] Multifamily dwellings, including senior housing;
[c] Residential units located on upper floors above
commercial uses or to the rear of storefronts;
[d] "Live/work" units that combine a residence and the
resident's workplace;
[e] Special needs housing, such as community living
arrangements and assisted-living facilities.
[3] Civic or institutional uses.
[a] Municipal offices, fire stations, libraries, museums,
community meeting facilities, and post offices;
[b] Transit shelters;
[c] Places of worship;
[d] Educational facilities.
[4] Open space uses.
[a] Central square;
[b] Neighborhood park;
[c] Playground.
[5] Open space uses identified below should be incorporated
in the traditional neighborhood development as
appropriate. Large outdoor recreation areas should be
located at the periphery of neighborhoods rather than
central locations.
[a] Environmental corridors;
[b] Protected natural areas;
[c] Community parks;
[d] Streams, ponds, and other water bodies;
§ 660-108 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-108
1:826
[e] Stormwater detention/retention facilities;
(2) Development units. The number of residential dwelling units and
the amount of nonresidential development (excluding open spaces)
shall be determined as follows:
(a) In areas devoted to mixed residential uses:
[1] The number of single-family attached and detached units
permitted shall be five to eight dwelling units per net acre;
[2] The number of multifamily units shall be eight to 12
dwelling units per net acre.
[3] Secondary dwelling units shall be permissible in addition
to the number of dwelling units authorized under this
section. However, the total number of secondary dwelling
units shall not be more than 10% of the total number of
single-family attached and detached units.
[4] For each affordable housing unit provided under this
section, one additional dwelling unit shall be permitted, up
to a maximum 15% increase in dwelling units.
(b) In mixed-use areas:
[1] The number of single-family and multifamily dwelling units
permitted shall be calculated the same as above plus an
additional number of units not to exceed 10% of the
amount permitted above.
[2] All dwelling units constructed above commercial uses shall
be permissible in addition to the number of dwelling units
authorized under this section. However, the total number
of dwelling units shall not be increased by more than 10
dwelling units or 10%, whichever is greater.
[3] The total ground floor area of nonresidential development
uses, including off-street parking areas, shall not exceed
25% of the traditional neighborhood development.
(3) Open space. At least 20% of the gross acreage of the traditional
neighborhood development must be open space. Open space may
include undevelopable areas such as steep slopes and wetlands,
and stormwater detention and retention basins. Ninety percent of
the lots within the areas devoted to mixed residential uses shall be
within 1/4 mile or a five-minute walk from common open space.
(4) Stormwater management. The design and development of the
traditional neighborhood development should minimize off-site
stormwater runoff, promote on-site filtration, and minimize the
discharge of pollutants to ground and surface water. Natural
topography and existing land cover should be maintained/protected
§ 660-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-108
1:827
to the maximum extent practicable. New development and
redevelopment shall meet the requirements as outlined in the
City's stormwater management regulations.
(5) Lot and block standards.
(a) Block and lot size diversity. Street layouts should provide for
perimeter blocks that are generally in the range of 200 feet to
400 feet deep by 400 feet to 800 feet long. A variety of lot sizes
should be provided to facilitate housing diversity and choice
and meet the projected requirements of people with different
housing needs.
(b) Widths. Lot widths should create a relatively symmetrical
street cross-section that reinforces the public space of the
street as a simple, unified public space.
(c) Building setback, front: mixed-use area. Structures in the
mixed-use area have no minimum setback. Commercial and
civic or institutional buildings should abut the sidewalks in the
mixed-use area.
(d) Building setback, front: areas of mixed residential uses. Singlefamily
detached residences shall have a building setback in the
front between zero feet and 25 feet. Single-family attached
residences and multifamily residences shall have a building
setback in the front between zero feet and 15 feet.
(e) Building setback, rear: areas of mixed residential uses. The
principal building on lots devoted to single-family detached
residences shall be set back no less than 30 feet from the rear
lot line.
(f) Side setbacks. Provision for zero-lot-line, single-family
dwellings may also made, provided that a reciprocal access
easement is recorded for both lots and townhouses or other
attached dwellings, provided that all dwellings have pedestrian
access to the rear yard through means other than the principal
structure.
(6) Circulation standards. The circulation system shall allow for
different modes of transportation. The circulation system shall
provide functional and visual links within the residential areas,
mixed use area, and open space of the traditional neighborhood
development and shall be connected to existing and proposed
external development. The circulation system shall provide
adequate traffic capacity, provide connected pedestrian and bicycle
routes (especially off-street bicycle or multiuse paths or bicycle
lanes on the streets), control through traffic, limit lot access to
streets of lower traffic volumes, and promote safe and efficient
mobility through the traditional neighborhood development.
§ 660-108 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-108
1:828
(a) Pedestrian circulation. Convenient pedestrian circulation
systems that minimize pedestrian-motor vehicle conflicts shall
be provided continuously throughout the traditional
neighborhood development. Where feasible, any existing
pedestrian routes through the site shall be preserved and
enhanced. All streets, except for alleys, shall be bordered by
sidewalks on both sides in accordance with the specifications
listed in Table 5.1 below in this section. The following
provisions also apply:
[1] Walkways in residential areas. Clear and well-lighted
walkways, three to five feet in width, depending on
projected pedestrian traffic, shall connect all dwelling
entrances to the adjacent public recreational trails.
[2] Walkways in mixed-use areas. Clear and well-lighted
walkways shall connect building entrances to the adjacent
public walkways and to associated parking areas. The
Public Works Commission shall determine the width of
such walkways.
[3] Disabled accessibility. Walkways shall comply with the
applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
[4] Crosswalks. Intersections of walkways with streets shall
be designed with clearly defined edges. Crosswalks shall
be well lit and clearly marked with contrasting paving
materials at the edges or with striping.
(b) Bicycle circulation. Bicycle circulation shall be accommodated
on streets and/or on dedicated bicycle paths. Where feasible,
any existing bicycle routes through the site shall be preserved
and enhanced. Facilities for bicycle travel may include offstreet
bicycle paths (generally shared with pedestrians and
other nonmotorized users) and separate, striped, four-foot
bicycle lanes on streets. If a bicycle lane is combined with a
lane for parking, the combined width should be 14 feet.
(c) Public transit access. Where public transit service is available
or planned, convenient access to transit stops shall be
provided. Where transit shelters are provided, they shall be
placed in highly visible locations that promote security through
surveillance, and shall be well lighted.
(d) Motor vehicle circulation. Motor vehicle circulation shall be
designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and bicycles.
Traffic-calming features such as "queuing streets," curb
extensions, traffic circles, and medians may be used to
encourage slow traffic speeds. Traffic circulation within a
traditional neighborhood development shall comply with the
regulations outlined in § 660-40 and the following:
§ 660-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-108
1:829
[1] Street hierarchy. Each street within a traditional
neighborhood development shall be classified according to
the following (arterial streets should not bisect a
traditional neighborhood development):
[a] Collector. This street provides access to commercial or
mixed-use buildings, but it is also part of the City's
major street network. On-street parking, whether
diagonal or parallel, helps to slow traffic. Additional
parking is provided in lots to the side or rear of
buildings. Figure 5.6 is a schematic sketch of a typical
collector street cross-section. Table 5.1 lists the
recommended dimensions of each component: (A)
building setback from street right-of-way; (B)
sidewalks; (C) landscape median; (D) parking lane; (E)
bicycle lane; (F) travel lane.
Figure 5.4: Collector Street Schematic
[b] Subcollector. This street provides primary access to
individual residential properties and connects streets
of lower and higher function. Design speed is 25 mph.
Figure 5.6 is a schematic sketch of a typical
subcollector street cross-section. Table 5.5 lists the
recommended dimensions of each component: (A)
building setback from street right-of-way; (B)
sidewalks; (C) landscape median; (E) bicycle lane; (F)
travel lane.
Figure 5.5: Subcollector Street Schematic
[c] Local street. This street provides primary access to
individual residential properties. Traffic volumes are
relatively low, with a design speed of 20 mph. Figure
§ 660-108 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-108
1:830
5.6 is a schematic sketch of a typical local street crosssection.
Table 5.6 lists the recommended dimensions
of each component: (A) building setback from street
right-of-way; (B) sidewalks; (C) landscape median; (F)
travel lanes.
Figure 5.6: Local Street Schematic
[d] Alley. These streets provide secondary access to
residential properties where street frontages are
narrow, where the street is designed with a narrow
width to provide limited on-street parking, or where
alley access development is desired to increase
residential densities. Alleys may also provide delivery
access or alternate parking access to commercial
properties.
Table 5.1: Attributes of Streets in a Traditional
Neighborhood Development.
CollectorSubcollector
Local
Street Alley
Average
daily
traffic
750 or
more
750 to
1,500
Less
than
250
Not
applicable
ROW
width
76 to 88
feet
48 to 72
feet
35 to 50
feet
12 to 16
feet
A Setback Building setbacks in the TND will vary
according to the proposed land use,
development type, and building
height. Setbacks shall be determined
as part of the design review process
with the GDP and PIP, and typically
establishes a maximum setback from
the public right-of-way.
B Sidewalks Both
sides, 5
feet
minimum
Both
sides, 3
to 5 feet
Both
sides, 3
to 5
feet
None
C Planting
strips
Minimum
6 feet
Minimum
6 feet
Minimum
6 feet
None
§ 660-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-108
1:831
Table 5.1: Attributes of Streets in a Traditional
Neighborhood Development.
CollectorSubcollector
Local
Street Alley
D Parking Both
sides, 8
feet
None, 1,
or both
sides, 8
feet
None or
1 side,
8 feet
None
E Bicycle
lanes
Two
6-foot
lanes
combined
with
parking
lanes
4-foot
lanes
with no
parking,
or 6-foot
lanes
combined
with
parking
lanes
None None
F Travel
lanes
Two or 3
12-foot
lanes
Two
10-foot
lanes
Two
10-foot
lanes,
or 1
14-foot
(queuing)
lane
Two
8-foot
lanes for
two-way
traffic,
or 1
12-foot
lane for
one-way
traffic
[2] Street layout. The traditional neighborhood development
should maintain the existing street grid, where present,
and restore any disrupted street grid where feasible. In
addition:
[a] Intersections shall be at right angles whenever
possible, but in no case less than 75°. Roundabouts
are encouraged at intersections to significantly reduce
accidents without the use of traffic controls.
[b] Curb cuts for driveways to individual residential lots
shall be prohibited along arterial streets and shall
comply with the regulations outlined in § 660-38,
Roadway visibility.
[c] The orientation of streets should enhance the visual
impact of common open spaces and prominent
buildings, create lots that facilitate passive solar
design, and minimize street gradients. All streets shall
§ 660-108 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-108
1:832
terminate at other streets or at public land, except
local streets may terminate in stub streets when such
streets act as connections to future phases of the
development. Local streets may terminate other than
at other streets or public land when there is a
connection to the pedestrian and bicycle path network
at the terminus.
[3] Parking requirements. Parking areas shall be in
conformance with § 660-41, Off-street parking.
[4] Service access and loading facilities. Access and loading
facilities for service vehicles shall be in conformance with
§ 660-42, Off-street loading facilities.
C. Architectural standards. A variety of architectural features and building
materials is encouraged to give each building or group of buildings a
distinct character. The standards and guidelines as outlined in § 660-94,
Nonresidential design, § 660-98, Downtown design, § 660-103,
Multifamily residential design, shall apply. In addition, the following
shall apply:
(1) Guidelines for existing structures.
(a) Existing structures, if determined to be historic or
architecturally significant, shall be protected from demolition
or encroachment by incompatible structures or landscape
development.
(b) Standards. The regulations outlined in § 660-63D, Historic
Preservation Overlay (HPO) District, shall be used as the
criteria for renovating historic or architecturally significant
structures.
(2) Guidelines for new structures.
(a) Height. New structures within a traditional neighborhood
development shall be no more than three stories for singlefamily
residential, or four stories for commercial, multifamily
residential, or mixed use.
(b) Entries and facades.
[1] The architectural features, materials, and the articulation
of a facade of a building shall be continued on all sides
visible from a public street.
[2] The front facade of the principal building on any lot in a
traditional neighborhood development shall face onto a
public street.
[3] The front facade shall not be oriented to face directly
toward a parking lot.
§ 660-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-108
1:833
§ 660-109. through § 660-112. (Reserved)
[4] Porches, pent roofs, roof overhangs, hooded front doors or
other similar architectural elements shall define the front
entrance to all residences.
[5] For commercial buildings, a minimum of 50% of the front
facade on the ground floor shall be transparent, consisting
of window or door openings allowing views into and out of
the interior.
[6] New structures on opposite sides of the same street should
follow similar design guidelines. This provision shall not
apply to buildings bordering civic uses.
(3) Guidelines for garages and secondary dwelling units. Garages and
secondary dwelling units may be placed on a single-family
detached residential lot within the principal building or an
accessory building, provided that the secondary dwelling unit shall
not exceed 1,000 square feet. The plan-view diagrams of four
alternative garage locations on a single-family housing lot shall
apply.
Figure 5.7: Plan View Diagrams of Alternative Garage
Locations on a Single-Family Lot
(4) Guidelines for exterior signage. A comprehensive sign program is
required for the entire traditional neighborhood development that
establishes a uniform sign theme. Signs shall share a common style
(e.g., size, shape, material). All signage shall comply with the
provisions outlined in Article VI, Signage.
(5) Guidelines for lighting. Streetlighting shall be provided along all
streets. Generally more, smaller lights, as opposed to fewer, highintensity
lights, should be used. All lighting shall comply with the
regulations outlined in § 660-142, Exterior lighting.
D. Landscaping and screening standards. Overall composition and
location of landscaping shall complement the scale of the development
and its surroundings. In general, larger, well-placed contiguous
planting areas shall be preferred to smaller, disconnected areas. All
landscaping shall comply with the standards outlined in § 660-113,
Landscape and buffers.
§ 660-108 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-113
1:834
§ 660-113. Landscape and buffers.
A. General provisions.
(1) Purpose. Uniform landscape, screening and tree preservation
standards for development of property in the City and the review of
plans to ensure that the City remains attractive, safe and
comfortable.
(2) Applicability. This section shall apply to all developments except
detached single-family and attached two-family residentially used
and zoned structures. Every development shall provide sufficient
landscaping so that neighboring properties are shielded from
detracting visual aspects, and the appearance and desirability of
development contributes to the overall attractiveness and
economic health of the City.
(3) Plan requirements.
(a) Landscape plan required. A landscape plan following the
standards set forth in this section shall be required for all
projects requiring BSO plan review. The landscape plan shall
be prepared by a landscape architect, certified nursery
professional, or master gardener. Landscaping on any existing
or proposed street right-of-way shall comply with the
requirements as set forth by the City of Lake Mills Parks and
Forestry Director. Landscape plans shall be reviewed and
approved as a part of the site plan review and approval
procedures contained in § 660-205.
(b) Content of landscape plan. All landscape plans shall include or
have attached thereto the following information:
[1] North arrow, scale, date of plan and any subsequent
revisions.
[2] The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
buildings, structures, parking lots and driveways,
roadways and rights-of-way, sidewalks, bicycle paths,
signs, refuse disposal areas, fences, freestanding electrical
equipment, light fixtures, other surface utility structures,
and other freestanding structural features, recreational
facilities, setbacks and easements. The landscape plan
shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than one inch equals
100 feet.
[3] The location, quantity, size at planting, and both scientific
and common names of all proposed plant materials.
[4] Existing and proposed contours, including the location of
all proposed berming, at a one-foot contour interval. Also
included shall be the location, extent and general
§ 660-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-113
1:835
elevations of all detention and retention areas and
drainageways.
[5] Specification of the type and boundaries of all proposed
ground cover, including both scientific and common names
of all proposed plant materials.
[6] The designation, location, type, and size of all existing
trees four inches and larger in diameter measured one foot
above natural grade. Any trees to be removed should be
clearly identified. Trees which will be used to meet
landscape requirements shall also be indicated. If required
for reasons of clarity, this information may be placed on an
additional illustration. Where existing trees are grouped in
a dense cluster, an overall tree mass may be used without
a specific delineation of individual trees. If this technique
is used, protected trees used to meet site landscape
requirements must be tagged on site and identified on the
plan in tabular form.
[7] Details of all fences and walls proposed to be constructed
on the site.
[8] Elevations, cross-sections and other site or construction
details determined to be necessary by the Zoning
Administrator.
[9] The following notes shall be included on the face of all
plans:
[a] The landscape installer must receive approval from
the Zoning Administrator for any substitutions or
alterations to the plan.
[b] It is the responsibility of the landscape installer to
have underground utilities located by Diggers Hotline
prior to installation.
[10] Name and contact information of the property owner.
[11]Name and contact information of the person/company who
prepared the plan.
(4) Timing of landscape improvements. All required landscaping shall
be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The
best times for planting in this area are early spring and early fall.
Plants planted in the summer run the risk of dehydration. If
weather conditions or other circumstances beyond the developer's
control prevent installation of all or portions of the landscape
materials and all other requirements for the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy have been meet, a letter of credit or a
performance guarantee approved by the City Attorney to insure
§ 660-113 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-113
1:836
completion of approved landscaping shall be filed with the City
Treasurer. The amount of the performance guarantee and the
required completion date shall be based on a cost estimate
submitted to the Zoning Administrator. If such a letter of credit
or performance guarantee has already been submitted for the
proposed landscape improvements, the City Council may permit
the developer to extend the performance guarantee for an
additional specified period of time.
(5) Guarantee. All plantings shall be guaranteed to be in a healthy and
flourishing condition for a period of 18 months.
B. Landscape requirements. The following shall establish standards for
the landscape improvements required to be installed as part of the
development of new buildings, structures and uses of land governed by
this section:
(1) Types of landscaped areas. This article regulates landscaping of
four distinct areas of a parcel as follows:
(a) Interior parkway.
(b) Perimeter landscape area.
(c) Foundation area.
(d) Parking lots.
Figure 5.8: Landscaping Areas on a Typical
Nonresidential Lot
(2) Landscaped criteria.
(a) Interior parkway landscaping. An interior parkway shall be
provided in all zoning districts identified in the following table:
§ 660-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-113
1:837
Table 5.2: Recommended Landscape Area Interior
Parkway Depth by Zoning District
Zoning District
Minimum Interior
Parkway Depth
(feet)
Multifamily Residential-12 (R3-12)
District
15
Neighborhood Business (B2) District 15
Planned Business (PB) District 20
Downtown Business (B1) District 0
Planned Industrial (PI) District 25
General Industrial (I1) District 25
Heavy Industrial (I2) District 25
[1] Except for access drives, interior parkways shall be
landscaped as follows:
[a] Where parking is provided in the street yard, one tree
per 40 feet of street frontage shall be provided. At
least 50% of the required trees shall be large
deciduous or evergreen trees as identified in the
Recommended Trees, Shrubs, Evergreen and Ground
Cover List outlined in § 660-113C(3). Variety of
species may vary depending on design intent.
[i] In addition, shrub planting shall screen the
parking area from the roadway. This shrub
planting shall be a minimum of three feet in
height and be located within the interior parkway.
At intersections of access drives and streets,
vision clearance triangles shall be maintained to
allow unobstructed visibility between 2 1/2 feet
and eight feet above grade, as shown in § 660-38,
Figure 2.1. A maximum of 25% of the parking lot
frontage may be left unscreened to permit design
flexibility. The remainder of the interior parkway
shall be planted with ground cover, flowers, or
grass.
§ 660-113 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-113
1:838
Figure 5.9: Interior Parkway Landscaping
with Parking along a Street Yard
[b] Where no parking spaces will be located in the front
yard, one tree per 50 feet of street frontage shall be
provided. At least 50% of the required trees shall be
large deciduous or evergreen trees as identified in the
Recommended Trees, Shrubs, Evergreen, and Ground
Cover List. Tree type may vary depending on design
intent. The remainder of the interior parkway shall be
planted with shrubs, ground cover, flowers, or grass.
Figure 5.10: Interior Parkway Landscaping with
No Parking along a Street Yard
[c] For corner lots, interior parkways shall be provided
along both streets.
(b) Perimeter landscape area.
[1] The perimeter area shall be equal to the required zoning
district side and rear yard setbacks for the property as
outlined in § 660-57, Bulk regulations.
§ 660-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-113
1:839
[2] Within the perimeter areas, berming, trees, and shrubs
shall be provided to create a visual separation between
properties. Appropriate berm height will depend on the
width of the landscape area, with no berm having a slope
greater than 3:1. A minimum of 40% of the length of the
perimeter shall be planted with shrubs that will reach a
height of at least four feet. Trees shall be provided in a
quantity equal to one tree per 75 feet of perimeter length.
Tree spacing shall be determined by tree species and
design considerations. Up to 50% of the required trees in
this screening alternative may be small deciduous trees.
(c) Buffer yard screening.
[1] Screening between adjacent residential and
nonresidential uses. To provide a substantial buffer
between residential and nonresidential uses. One of the
following three buffering alternatives shall be required.
The property owner may select the buffering alternative
which best meets the configuration of the site and the
proposed development. All fences, walls and hedges shall
comply with §§ 660-14 and 660-15.
[a] Alternative A: The buffering area shall be a minimum
of eight feet in width for this alternative. An opaque
brick or other approved decorative masonry wall six
feet high shall be constructed along the entire
perimeter, excluding area within the required front
yard setback. The wall may be continued within the
front yard, provided the height is reduced to four feet.
Large deciduous trees in a quantity equal to one tree
per 75 feet of perimeter length shall be provided. Tree
spacing shall be determined by tree species and
design considerations, and are not required to be
evenly spaced.
Figure 5.11: Alternative "A" Screening between
Adjacent Residential and Nonresidential Uses
[b] Alternative B: A minimum twelve-foot average buffer
area shall be required for this alternative. A fence of
§ 660-113 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-113
1:840
wood or other approved material six feet high and
at least 75% opaque shall be constructed along the
entire perimeter, excluding area within the required
front yard setback. The fence may be continued within
the front yard, provided the height is reduced to four
feet. Shrubs shall be planted within the buffer area
at a minimum rate of 10 feet per 100 feet, massed
appropriately in clusters. Large deciduous trees shall
be provided in a quantity equal to one tree per 60 feet
of perimeter length. Tree location shall be determined
by tree species and design considerations.
Figure 5.12: Alternative "B" Screening between
Adjacent Residential and Nonresidential Uses
[c] Alternative C: A minimum twenty-five-foot buffer area
shall be required for this alternative. A berm at least
three feet in height with a maximum 3:1 slope shall be
constructed along the entire perimeter. Breaks in the
berm may be provided as appropriate to accommodate
drainage. The berm shall be planted with shrubs four
feet or greater in height to provide screening along at
least 75% of the perimeter length. Trees shall be
provided in a quantity equal to one tree per 60 feet of
perimeter length. Tree spacing shall be determined by
tree species and design considerations. Up to 25% of
the required trees in this screening alternative may be
small deciduous trees.
§ 660-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-113
1:841
Figure 5.13: Alternative "C" Screening between
Adjacent Residential and Nonresidential Uses
[2] Screening of parking areas. If a nonresidential parking lot
will be located adjacent to a residential use, then
screening regulations outlined in Subsection B(2)(c)[1]
above apply. If a parking lot will be placed along a
perimeter such that parked cars face abutting
nonresidential property, shrubs and trees shall be
required. Shrubs shall be provided along at least 50% of
the length of the parking area. Shrubs shall be a minimum
of three feet in height at maturity when screening a
parking lot. Trees shall be provided in a quantity equal to
one large deciduous tree per 60 feet of parking lot length.
Tree spacing shall be determined by tree species and
design considerations. Up to 25% of the required trees in
this screening alternative may be small deciduous trees.
Figure 5.14: Screening Between Adjacent
Nonresidential Uses
[3] Screening between single- and multifamily residential
uses. This landscape screening is generally required
between single- and multifamily residential areas.
Berming, trees, and shrubs shall be provided to create a
visual separation between properties. Appropriate berm
height will depend on the width of the landscape area, with
no berm having a slope greater than 3:1. A minimum of
§ 660-113 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-113
1:842
60% of the length of the perimeter shall be planted with
shrubs that will reach a height of at least six feet. Trees
shall be provided in a quantity equal to one tree per 60 feet
of perimeter length. Tree spacing shall be determined by
tree species and design considerations. Up to 25% of the
required trees in this screening alternative may be small
deciduous trees.
Figure 5.15: Screening Between Single- and
Multifamily Residential Uses
(d) Foundation area landscaping.
[1] Purpose. To soften large expanses of building walls, accent
building entrances and architectural features, and screen
mechanical equipment. Where extended roofs or canopies
are used to provide a covered walkway adjacent to a
building, foundation plantings are not required.
Landscaping is required to separate vehicular areas from
buildings.
[2] Location. Foundation landscaping areas shall be located
along or adjacent to each applicable front, side or rear of a
building; provided, however, where a portion of the front,
side or rear of a building is devoted to pedestrian ingress/
egress, vehicular ingress/egress, loading or dropoff zones,
foundation landscaping areas may be aggregated into one
or more locations along or abutting such front, side or rear
of a building.
[3] Relationship to buildings. Foundation landscaping areas
shall be located adjacent to the building; or begin within
12 feet of the building (in the case of a walkway which runs
adjacent to the building).
[4] Area. Foundation landscaping areas shall have a total area
in square feet of not less than two feet times the length of
the wall (two feet x length of wall = area in square feet for
§ 660-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-113
1:843
foundation landscaping) to which the foundation
landscaping is oriented.
[5] Plantings. Foundation landscaping areas shall be
landscaped with grass, trees, or shrubs/hedge plants, or in
combination with other suitable ground cover materials
and maintained.
[6] Minimum dimension. Foundation landscaping areas shall
maintain a minimum depth in the smallest dimension of six
feet; provided, however, the Zoning Administrator may
approve up to 25% of a foundation landscaping area to be
included in aboveground planters having a minimum
dimension of three feet.
(e) Parking lot landscaping. For parking lots with more than 10
parking spaces, the following standards shall apply:
[1] There shall be a minimum seven-foot-wide planting island
at the ends of parking rows and driveway entrances. The
seven-foot dimension may be reduced to accommodate the
triangular shape resulting from angled parking. The depth
of the planting island shall be equal to the depth of the
parking stalls.
Figure 5.16: Trees in Parking Lot Landscape Islands
§ 660-113 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-113
1:844
Figure 5.17: Parking Lot Landscape Islands Options
and Dimensions
[2] All trees within a landscape island shall be pruned to have
branching starting no less than six feet above the
pavement.
[3] To break up long expanses of parking rows, landscape
islands are required.
[a] One of the following alternatives shall be used to
divide rows of parking spaces.
[i] Alternative A. A continuous curbed landscape
island between rows may be provided in lieu of
full stall planting islands between parking bays.
Where such a continuous island is provided, it
shall be a minimum of seven feet in width and
shall contain a minimum of one tree per 10 lineal
parking spaces.
[ii] Alternative B. One landscape island shall be
constructed for every 10 parking stalls. A curbed
island at least seven feet wide and as deep as the
parking stalls shall be provided to divide the bay
length. There shall be a minimum of one large
deciduous tree per island.
[b] In addition to required trees, an appropriate planting
of shrubs, ground cover plants, flowers, sod lawn and
mulch shall be provided within all landscape islands.
To insure vehicular visibility, shrubs shall not exceed a
mature height of 30 inches above pavement on
landscape islands at the end of parking rows.
[4] As an alternative to standards in Subsection B(2)(e)[1]
through [3] above, a parking landscaping plan may be
§ 660-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-113
1:845
submitted, with or without curbing, consistent with other
provisions contained in § 660-113B(2)(e). Such plan shall
provide landscaping for at least 7% of the interior parking
lot area.
(3) Landscape design requirements. Functional activities within and
adjoining the development site must be considered in the design of
landscape improvements, including consideration of the following:
(a) Service area screening. All service areas shall be screened
from view through the use of evergreen plant materials, a
fence, or masonry screen wall compatible with the proposed
building design.
[1] Trash dumpsters and other waste receptacles or
equipment shall be screened with a fence or three-sided
brick or other approved masonry walls at least six feet in
height, with a solid, attractive single or double access gate
on one side only.
[2] All utility equipment (air conditioners, transformers, etc.)
shall be provided with appropriate planting screens. All
dish antennas greater than 36 inches in diameter shall be
adequately screened from adjoining properties by an
opaque wall, fence, hedge or berm.
[3] All loading areas shall be fully screened so as not to be
visible from adjoining rights-of-way and property zoned for
any residential use.
[4] All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and
products within 500 feet of a residential district shall be
effectively screened and enclosed by a solid wall or fence
eight feet in height. If materials to be stored outdoors are
in excess of eight feet in height, then landscape screening
shall be provided in addition to the fence or wall installed
along the outside perimeter of the fence or wall, equal or
exceeding the height of the materials to be stored
outdoors.
(b) Intersection visibility. Landscaping must be designed and
installed to minimize potential obstruction of critical sight
lines. Landscape planting shall be so designed as to avoid
obstruction of a motorist's vision at the intersections of outlot
access drives and ring roads, access roads, alleys or municipal
streets. Unobstructed visibility between 2 1/2 feet and eight
feet above the height of the paved surface of the access road
must be maintained at all intersections. To maintain this
visibility, no shrubs or other landscape material which will
reach a mature height greater than 2 1/2 feet shall be
permitted in the sight triangle (see Fig. 2.1 in § 660-38). Trees
§ 660-113 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-113
1:846
are allowed in these critical visibility areas if the lowest
branching begins not less than six feet above the pavement.
(c) Berming shall not exceed a maximum slope of 3:1 except in
parking islands, where the maximum slope shall not exceed
2:1.
(d) Mulch materials shall be shredded bark or other organic
material best suited for the City of Lake Mills. Gravel and stone
mulches are not permitted, unless specifically approved in
writing by the Zoning Administrator.
(e) All fences proposed to be used to meet landscape requirements
shall comply with § 660-14 of this chapter.
C. Landscape plan and design review.
(1) Standards for plant materials.
(a) The quality and size of plant material selected shall comply
with the latest edition of the "American Standard of Nursery
Stock" published by the American Association of Nurserymen
unless otherwise indicated.
(b) No artificial plants of any type shall be used to meet the
requirements of this chapter in any landscape area within the
parcel.
(c) Minimum sizes for plant materials at time of installation for all
landscape areas shall be as follows:
[1] Deciduous trees shall be a minimum size of 2 1/2 inches
caliper when installed. Evergreen trees shall be a
minimum six feet in height when installed.
[2] Deciduous shrubs (other than dwarf varieties) shall be a
minimum of 30 inches in height at time of installation if
used as a perimeter screen planting, and 24 inches in
height for all other installations. Dwarf varieties and
plants normally measured by spread shall be a minimum of
18 inches in height/spread.
[3] Ground cover shall be so planted and spaced that complete
coverage can be obtained within two years after date of
installation.
[4] Flower beds and the use of native grasses is encouraged
and shall be mass planted in acceptable areas to create
color, texture, and interest. Annual flower beds should be
replanted annually with flowers adapted to the City of
Lake Mills.
§ 660-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-113
1:847
(d) Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining all
landscaping shown on the approved landscape plan throughout
the life of the development. All dead plants shall be replaced
with plants which meet original requirements. No changes
shall be permitted without the approval of the Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee.
(2) Guide for landscape planting. The plant materials recommended in
Subsection C(3) below have minimal maintenance requirements.
However, all landscape material must receive a certain degree of
care, especially during and immediately after planting. To protect
an investment in new landscaping, proper horticultural techniques
should be followed. The following recommendations are provided
as a guide for planting based on current horticultural practice.
(a) The best times for planting are early spring and early fall.
Plants planted in the summer run the risk of dehydration.
(b) Plant trees and shrubs at least three feet from the back of curb
along head-in parking spaces to prevent damage from car
overhangs. Mulch, lawn or planted ground cover shall be used
to further help avoid damage.
(c) Dig tree pits at least one foot wider than the root ball.
(d) Especially in areas where construction activity has compacted
the soil, the bottom of the pit should be scarified or loosened
with a pick ax or shovel.
(e) After a pit is dug, observe subsurface drainage conditions.
Where poor drainage exists, special provisions should be made
to ensure proper drainage around the tree.
(f) Backfill should include a proper mix of soil, peat moss, and
nutrients. All roots must be completely covered. Backfill should
be thoroughly watered as it is placed around the roots.
(g) Plants should remain plumb and level. Newly planted trees
may be supported with stakes and ties to hold them firmly in
place. Remove stakes and ties after one year.
(h) Spread at least two inches of mulch over plant beds in order to
retain moisture and keep down weeds. A three-inch-deep
saucer should be provided to form a basin around the trunk of
the tree. This saucer helps catch and retain moisture.
(i) The lower trunks of new trees may be wrapped with burlap or
paper to prevent evaporation and sun scald. The wrapping
should remain on the tree for at least one year.
(3) Lists of recommended trees, shrubs, evergreen, and ground cover.
The following lists indicate plantings which will meet the landscape
requirements of this chapter. The lists are by no means
§ 660-113 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-113
1:848
comprehensive and are intended merely to suggest the types of
flora which would be appropriate for these purposes. Plants were
selected for inclusion on these lists according to four principal
criteria:
(a) General suitability for the climate and soil conditions of this
area;
(b) Ease of maintenance;
(c) Tolerance of City conditions; and
(d) Availability from area nurseries. All plantings shall be
approved by the Parks and Forestry Director.
Table 5.3: Recommended Trees, Shrubs, Evergreen and
Ground Cover
Botanical Name Common Name Height/Spread
Trees
*Acer freemanii Freeman maple H:40-80/S:25-50
Acer nigrum Black maple H 50-75/S 50
*Acer platanoide Norway maple H 40-50/S 35-40
*Acer rubrum Red maple H 40-60/S 30-50
*Acer saccharium Sugar maple H 50-75/S 50
*Acer Tataricumi Tartarian maple H 15-20/S 15-20
*Amelanchier Serviceberry H 25-30/S 25-30
Betula alleghaniensis Yellow birch H 50-75/S 35-50
Betula nigra River birch H 50-75/S 35-50
Betula papyrifera Paper birch H 50/S 35
Betula populolia Whitespire birch H 20-40/S 10-20
Carpinus caroliniana Musclewood H 25-30/S 25-30
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry H 60-75/S 40-60
Cercis Canadensis Eastern redbud H 20-30/S 25-35
Cladrastis kentukea American
yellowwood
H 30-50/S 40-55
Cornus alternifolia Pagoda dogwood H 10-15/S 15-20
*Crataegus Hawthorn H 20-30/S 20-30
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo H 40-80/S 30-40
*Gleditsia tricanthos Honeylocust H 30-60/S 30-45
Gymnocladus dioica Kentucky
coffeetree
H 50-60/S 50-60
*Magnolia Magnolia H 20-30/S 15-35
§ 660-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-113
1:849
Table 5.3: Recommended Trees, Shrubs, Evergreen and
Ground Cover
Botanical Name Common Name Height/Spread
*Malus Crabapple H 15-30/S 15-30
Ostrya virginiana Ironwood H 30/S 20
Prunus maacki Amur
chokecherry
H 20-30/S 20-30
Pyrus calleryana Callery pear H 30-50/S 20-35
Quercus bicolor Swamp white
oak
H 50-60/S 50-60
Quercus bicolor x
macrocarpa
Swamp white x
bur oak
H 75/S 70
Quercus macrocarpa Bur oak H 70-90/S 60-80
Quercus
muehlenbergii
Chinkapin oak H 45-80/S 50-80
Quercus robur English oak H 40-60/S 40-60
Quercus alba White oak H 50-80/S 40-70
Syringa reticulate Japanese tree
lilac
H 20/S 15
*Tilia Linden H 50-70/S 35-50
*Ulmus Elm hybrid H 50-70/S 45-60
Shrubs
*Amelanchier Serviceberry
*Aronia Chokeberry
*Berberis Barberry
*Buddleia Butterfly bush
*Cornus Dogwood
*Corylus Hazelnut
*Cotinus Smokebush
*Cottoneaster Cotoneaster
*Euonymus alatus Burning bush
*Forsythia Forsythia
*Hydrangea Hydrangea
*Hypericum St. Johns wort
*Philadelphus Mockorange
*Physocarpus Ninebark
*Potentilla Potentilla
*Rhus Sumac
§ 660-113 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-113
1:850
Table 5.3: Recommended Trees, Shrubs, Evergreen and
Ground Cover
Botanical Name Common Name Height/Spread
*Ribes Alpine currant
*Rosa Rose
*Salix Willow
*Sambucus Elderberry
*Spirea Spirea
*Syringa Lilac
*Viburnum Viburnum
*Weigelia Weigelia
*Yucca Yucca
Evergreens
Abies concolor Concolor fir H:30-50/S:15-30
Abies balsamea Balsam fir H 45-75/S 20-25
Abies fraseri Fraser fir H 30-40/S 20-25
*Picea Spruce H 40-60/S 15-40
*Pinus Pine H 50-80/S 20-40
*Thuja Arbor vitae H 10-60/S 6-30
Tsuga Canadensis Canadain
hemlock
H 40-70/S 25-35
Larix decidua Common larch H 70-75/S 25-30
Larix laricina Tamarack H 40-80/S 15-30
Evergreen Shrubs
*Juniperus Juniper
*Taxus Yew
Microbiota Russian cypress
*Thuja Arborvitae
(globe and
compact)
Evergreen Broad Leaf
*Azalea Azalea
*Buxus Boxwood
*Euonymus Euonymus
Ilex crenata Holly
Ilex verticillata Winterberry
*Rhododendron Rhododendron
* Indicates many cultivars in each species
§ 660-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-113
1:851

ARTICLE VI
Signage
§ 660-114. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to indicate the requirements for signage for
all properties within the jurisdiction of this chapter. This article regulates
the location, type, size, and height of signage within the jurisdiction of
this chapter. This article is designed to ensure the implementation of the
Comprehensive Plan of the City of Lake Mills, particularly in regard to the
implementation of the desired overall character of the community, and its
constituent zoning districts.
§ 660-115. (Reserved)
§ 660-116. General signage and iconic displays.
The regulations contained in this section apply to signs and iconic displays
in all districts.
A. Sign prohibitions and limitations.
(1) No sign shall use any word, phrase, symbol, shape, form or
character in such manner as to interfere with moving traffic,
including signs that incorporate typical street-type and/or trafficcontrol-
type signage designs and colors.
(2) No fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise moving
signs, pennants or other decorations shall be permitted, except for
time and/or temperature signs, and decorative flag signs according
to limitations in § 660-12, Definitions.
(3) No illuminated flashing signs shall be permitted. Flashing signs are
those that change their appearance more than once every 30
seconds, except for time and/or temperature signs.
(4) No mobile or portable signs, as defined in § 660-12, shall be
permitted.
(5) No advertising signs, as defined in § 660-12, shall be permitted,
except as provided within the right-of-way of Interstate 94, per
applicable State of Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 660-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-116
1:853
Rationale: The adoption of Subsection A(5), above, reflects a
formal finding of fact on the part of the City of Lake Mills Plan
Commission and City Council that the prohibition of advertising
signage furthers two compelling government interests: (a) the
general public interest of reducing visual clutter caused by
advertising signage that the City has determined is a significant
cause of unsafe traffic conditions; and (b) the public interest
served by furthering the implementation of the purposes of this
chapter and the City of Lake Mills Comprehensive Plan in terms
of limiting the spread of strip commercial development — of which
advertising signs are a primary contributor. Furthermore, the City
of Lake Mills advocates that this regulation leaves ample and
adequate alternative channels of commercial speech
communication for the messages portrayable on such advertising
signs - namely, distributed print media, broadcast media, and
point-of-purchase display, and are narrowly defined so as to limit
said prohibition to commercial speech on exterior signage.
(6) No inflatable signs shall be permitted.
B. Sign location requirements.
(1) No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where, by
reason of its position, working, illumination, size, shape or color, it
may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be
confused with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device.
(2) No sign shall be located within a required buffer yard or within a
permanently protected green space area.
(3) No sign shall be mounted on a roof or extend above the roof, if
attached to the building.
(4) No sign, temporary or otherwise, shall be affixed to a tree or utility
pole unless otherwise authorized by the Director of Public Works.
(5) Permanent private signs shall not be allowed within road right-ofway
lines.
(6) Projecting signs located over a vehicle circulation or pedestrian
walkway shall be prohibited, unless a conditional use permit
therefor has been granted.29 Such conditional use permit, in
addition to whatever other conditions are imposed, shall comply
with all other applicable ordinances in this chapter, and shall cause
the sign permit to expire every two years unless the Zoning
Administrator has inspected the sign and its supports for the safety
of vehicles and/or pedestrians. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
failure of the Zoning Administrator to inspect the sign or the
findings of the Administrator upon inspection shall not give rise to a
29.Editor's Note: See § 573-20.
§ 660-116 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-116
1:854
§ 660-117. Sign and iconic display measurement.
cause of action against the City, its employees, or its agents, unless
such failure or such findings are the result of intentional actions by
the Administrator.
(7) Pylon signs are not permitted in any residential district or in the
B2, PB, or B1 Districts.
(8) The location of signs shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission
whenever a design review process under Article V is required.
C. Iconic display requirements.
(1) Iconic displays shall only be permitted in the B1 Downtown
Business District. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) A permit shall be required for an iconic display in accordance with
the regulations outlined in § 660-189, Sign permits.
(3) One iconic display shall be permitted on a building in addition to
other wall signs permitted under this chapter.
(4) Iconic displays shall not exceed 27 cubic feet in area.
(5) No iconic display shall be backlit.
(6) Iconic displays shall be mounted or attached to the facade similar
to a projecting sign. No iconic display shall be mounted on a roof or
extend above the ridgeline of the roof.
(7) No iconic display shall be erected or maintained at any location
where, by reason of its position, size, shape, or color, it may
obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused
with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device.
(8) Iconic displays located over a vehicle circulation or pedestrian
walkway shall be prohibited, unless approval for "privileges in
streets" has been approved in accordance with § 573-20 of the
Code of the City of Lake Mills.
A. Ground level. The average elevation of the ground upon which the sign
supports are placed, except when the sign supports rest upon a berm or
other area elevated above the surrounding ground. In such cases, the
average elevation of the base of such berm or other area shall be
considered as the ground level.
B. Sign area shall be measured in square feet in the following manner:
(1) In the case of a sign placed within a frame, marquee sign, or other
structure, sign area consists of the entire surface area of the sign
on which the message could be placed. The supporting structure or
bracing of a sign shall not be counted as a part of the message.
§ 660-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-117
1:855
§ 660-118. Signage in residential districts.
In all residential zoning districts, signage shall be permitted per the
requirements of §§ 660-114, 660-189, 660-117 and 660-120, 660-124,
660-125, and per the following:
Where a sign has two or more display faces, the total area of the
largest sign face shall be considered the sign face area.
(2) In the case of a sign whose message is fabricated together with the
background that borders or frames that message, sign face area
shall be the total area of the entire background.
(3) In the case of a sign whose message is applied to a background that
provides no border or frame, sign face area shall be the area of the
smallest rectangle that can encompass all words, letters, figures,
emblems, and other elements of the sign message.
C. An iconic display shall be measured in cubic feet in the following
manner:
(1) The area shall be computed by means of the smallest cube or box
that will encompass the extreme limits of the representation,
emblem, or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the display.
(2) The supporting structure or bracing of a sign shall not be counted
as a part of the display.
A. Only wall and monument signs may be permitted in residential zoning
districts. Other forms of signage are prohibited.
B. For each single-family lot, or multifamily lot containing four or fewer
dwelling units, one identification sign, not to exceed two square feet in
area, is permitted for each dwelling unit. Said identification sign may
include one or more of the following: name, address, and/or home
occupation title.
C. For each multifamily or institutional residential lot containing more
than four dwelling units, one identification sign, not to exceed 16
square feet in area, is permitted. The sign shall indicate nothing more
than the name and address of the premises and the name and phone
number of the management company or the on-site name, address and
phone number of the manager of the premises.
D. Permanent subdivision identification signs are authorized, if approved
as part of a subdivision plat. Detailed plans of proposed signs must be
submitted at the time of subdivision review or may be approved
subsequently through the granting of a conditional use permit. Such
sign shall comply with visibility standards of this chapter.
E. For any permitted principal use, other than those specified in
Subsections B through D, above, one sign, not to exceed 16 square feet
§ 660-117 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-118
1:856
§ 660-119. Signage in nonresidential districts.
In all nonresidential zoning districts, signage shall be permitted per the
requirements of §§ 660-114, 660-189, 660-117, 660-120 through 660-124,
and per the following:
in area, is permitted. The sign shall indicate nothing more than the
name and address of the premises and the schedule of services or other
information relevant to the operation of the premises.
F. Temporary signs, including rummage or garage sale signs, are
permitted per the requirements of § 660-120, Temporary signs.
A. The owners of multi-tenant properties will be allowed to allocate sign
size to each business up to a specified maximum for the entire property.
This would allow the owner to allocate much of the allowed sign area to
one business and none to another business if he or she saw fit to do so.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, one sign per tenant shall be permitted
and, if the total sign area for the property would exceed the maximum
area permitted; a conditional use permit may be granted for the
additional sign area.
B. The total surface area of all business signs on a lot shall not exceed the
maximum permitted by Table 6.1 or using a combination of the
following calculation methods:
(1) For on-building signs (wall, canopy, projecting, or marquee) use the
listed ratio of sign area in square feet to linear feet of exposed
exterior building wall length on that wall of the building, except for
walls directly abutting residentially zoned property. Permitted sign
area may not be transferred from one wall to another or combined
in any other manner. The number of permitted on-building signs
(one per wall) may be transferred from one wall to another, but the
total combined sign area of all signs on the receiving wall shall still
be limited by its length ratio of said wall.
(2) Freestanding signs (monument or pylon) are limited to a maximum
of 50 square feet per street frontage. Permitted sign area may not
be transferred from one street to another, or combined in any other
manner. The requirements shown in Table 6.2 of this section shall
also apply to freestanding signs.
C. The number and area of business and group signs for a business use
shall not exceed the number or area shown in Table 6.1.
D. Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted to be erected on each
public street frontage of a lot. Such sign may be either a business sign
or a group sign. All signs shall be located so that no part of the sign
shall project beyond the lot line or impede visibility. Where visibility is
not a problem, the minimum required setbacks for freestanding signs
vary by zoning district. Within the B2 Neighborhood Business District,
the minimum required setback shall be 10 feet from the right-of-way
§ 660-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-119
1:857
line. Within the PB Planned Business District, and within the PI, I1, and
I2 Industrial Districts, the minimum required setback shall be 12 feet.
There shall be no permitted pylon signs in the B2, PB, and B1 Business
Districts.
E. Auxiliary signs may be permitted, provided said signage is calculated
independently of the requirements of Subsection A above, and it shall
not exceed 50% of the maximum permitted area.
F. Maximum sign sizes for nonresidential districts shall be permitted per
the requirements of Table 6.1: Maximum Sign Sizes, below.
G. Temporary signs are permitted per the requirements of § 660-120.
§ 660-119 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-119
1:858
Table 6.1. Table of Maximum Sign Areas and Sizes
Sign Area Ratio Calculation
Methods
Zoning
District
On-Building
Signs: Building
Wall Length
Ratio1,2,4
Freestanding
Signs: Public
Street
Frontage
Ratio3
Maximum
Number Of
Signs
Business
Zoning
Districts B2,
B1, and PB
Aggregate total
of sign area on
front facade shall
be determined as
follows:
Facade Length/
Max. Size (sq. ft.)
<15 feet/32
16 to 20 feet/36
21 to 25 feet/40
26 to 30 feet/44
31 to 35 feet/48
36 to 40 feet/52
41 to 45 feet/56
46 to 60 feet/60
>60 feet/1
square feet per
linear foot of
facade
Total sign area
on side and back
facades shall be
permitted up to
1/2 the maximum
sign area allowed
per length of
facade, as shown
above for front
facade
1 sign up to 50
square feet,
excepting B1
District
Building frontage
wall: 1 onbuilding
sign per
fronting business
or per group of
businesses
Side-street facing
wall: 1 onbuilding
sign per
business facing
the side street or
per group of
businesses
Rear-facing wall
viewable by
pedestrian or
vehicular traffic:
1 on building sign
for all businesses
in the building,
except for onpremises
directional signs
1 freestanding
sign per public
street frontage
§ 660-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-119
1:859
Table 6.1. Table of Maximum Sign Areas and Sizes
Sign Area Ratio Calculation
Methods
Zoning
District
On-Building
Signs: Building
Wall Length
Ratio1,2,4
Freestanding
Signs: Public
Street
Frontage
Ratio3
Maximum
Number Of
Signs
Industrial
Zoning
Districts PI, I1,
and I2
1 square foot of
sign area per 1
linear foot of
exposed exterior
wall length on
that wall
1 sign up to 50
square feet
Building frontage
wall: 1 onbuilding
sign per
fronting business
or per group of
businesses.
Side-street facing
wall: 1 onbuilding
sign per
business facing
the side street or
per group of
businesses.
Rear-facing wall
viewable by
pedestrian or
vehicular traffic:
1 on building sign
for all businesses
in the building,
except for onpremises
directional signs.
1 freestanding
sign per each
public street
frontage
NOTES:
1 Applies to all buildings regardless of the number of businesses
located within, except all tenants in a multi-tenant building shall
be permitted a minimum of one sign, under provisions of
§ 660-119A.
2 Building wall length is defined as the length of the exposed
exterior portion of the structure housing the principal use(s) at the
foundation line.
§ 660-119 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-119
1:860
§ 660-120. Temporary signs.
Except as provided by Subsections A through E below, any one lot is
permitted to display a temporary sign for a maximum of 30 days within any
NOTES:
3 Applies to all buildings regardless of the number of businesses
located within, except all tenants in a multi-tenant building shall
be permitted a minimum of one sign, under the provisions of
§ 660-119A.
4 Maximum sign area for on-building signs is the total combined
permitted sign area for on-building signs on said measured wall(s).
Table 6.2. Table of Freestanding Sign Standards1,2
Maximum Height Minimum Setbacks
Zoning
District
Monument
Sign Pylon Sign
Monument
Sign
Pylon
Sign
B2, PB 8 feet from
ground level
Maximum height
may be
increased by
obtaining a
conditional use
permit, provided
said sign is
located on
property in the
PB Zoning
District and
within 40 feet of
the CTH V rightof-
way
10 feet
from
right-ofway
line
I1, PI, and
I2
8 feet from
ground level
The height of a
pylon sign at the
lot line shall not
exceed 25 feet
from the elevation
of the nearest
point from the
nearest street.
12 feet
from
right-ofway
line
12 feet
from
right-ofway
line
NOTES:
1 No freestanding signs are permitted in the B1 Downtown Business
District
2 No pylon signs are permitted in the B2 and PB Districts.
§ 660-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-120
1:861
twelve-month period. Furthermore, any one lot is limited to a maximum of
two temporary signs in any twelve-month period (political signs are exempt
from this restriction).
§ 660-121. Sidewalk signs and movable sign boards.
A. For each lot. One "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign, not more than 12 square
feet in area is permitted.
B. For construction on or development of a lot, one sign not more than 32
square feet in area, indicating the name of the contractors, engineers or
architect, or products being used in the construction of a building is
permitted, but only during the time that construction or development is
actively underway.
C. For a temporary event of public interest, such as a neighborhood
garage sale or church fair, one sign, not over 32 square feet in area,
located upon the site of the event, will be permitted. Such sign shall not
be erected more than 30 days before the event and shall be removed
immediately after the event.
D. Temporary political signs do not require a permit and they are
permitted in all zoning districts. Such signs are subject to the
restrictions pertaining to safety of persons or property, as required
under this chapter. Political signs may be placed on private property
with the consent of the property owner or the person entitled to
possession of the property. No political sign shall be larger than 16
square feet, and the total area of all political signs per lot shall not
exceed 32 square feet. All such signs may be displayed 60 days before
the election or vote to which they pertain, and they shall be removed
within 10 days thereafter.
E. For each real estate subdivision that has been approved in accordance
with the subdivision regulations of Chapter 650, a minimum of two
temporary development project identification signs are permitted to be
located on some portion of the subject subdivision. Each such sign shall
be not more than 32 square feet in area. One additional similar sign
shall be permitted for each 100 lots in the subdivision in excess of said
original 100 lots. These signs shall comply with the visibility standards
of this chapter. These signs shall be permitted to remain within the
subject subdivision until a time at which building permits have been
issued for 80% or more of the lots in the subdivision.
A. Sidewalk sign. A sidewalk sign may be permitted, through issuance of a
sign permit, on sidewalks within the B1 District, provided such signs in
compliance with the design standards set forth in the downtown design
guidelines, the visibility standards contained in § 660-38 of this chapter,
and in compliance with the following:
(1) Each permitted sidewalk sign shall not exceed 2 1/2 feet in width or
30% of the sidewalk width, whichever is less, and shall not exceed
§ 660-120 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-121
1:862
four feet in height. There shall not be any lighting allowed on the
sign. The sign itself shall be movable, shall not be attached in any
way to the sidewalk, and shall not be chained or attached in any
way to street furniture, other signs, street trees, other landscaping,
or other fixtures or appurtenances on or in the sidewalk. Signs
shall also not be placed on any section of the sidewalk in a way
that narrows the effective width of the sidewalk for pedestrian
movement to less than six feet.
(2) Each sidewalk sign permitted under this section shall be
maintained in good condition, shall be removed each day at the
close of business, and be replaced or removed when the
appearance of the sign deteriorates through damage, weathering,
or other causes.
(3) The property and business owners are jointly and severally liable
for any and all injury to any person or property directly and/or
indirectly caused by their joint or several negligence and/or
activities occurring on the paved sidewalk under this article.
B. Movable signage boards in business districts other than B1 Downtown
District. Placement of movable signage boards to display daily specials
(such as sandwich boards) shall be permitted according to the
following:
(1) Limited to one sign board per tenant/business with the total area of
the sign, not exceeding seven square feet per business.
(2) All signage boards shall be designed, printed and mounted on
durable signage board.
(3) Signage shall be limited to the advertisement and sales of
merchandise or services directly associated with the business type.
(4) Such signage shall be permitted to be displayed on pedestrian
walkways located adjacent or nearly adjacent to the entrance of an
establishment. The unobstructed sidewalk area must be at least six
feet in width and comply with Americans with Disability Act (ADA)
requirements. Such signage shall not be placed in any drive or
access area, nor placed within any landscape area. Such signage
shall not be used as a replacement for directional signage.
(5) Such signage shall be located a maximum of 10 feet from a public
entrance to an establishment.
(6) Such signage shall be brought inside at dusk or close of business
day each day.
(7) Such signage shall not block or impede pedestrian rights-of-way or
walkways.
(8) Such signage shall not be internally or externally directly
illuminated.
§ 660-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-122
1:863
§ 660-122. (Reserved)
§ 660-123. Signs applicable to properties abutting Interstate 94.
A. On-premises, freestanding signs facing Interstate 94 are allowed,
subject to the following standards:
(1) Applicability.
(a) Signs shall be located on parcels zoned PB. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
(b) Signs shall be located on parcels that have direct frontage on
the Interstate 94 right-of-way.
(2) Approval. A conditional use shall be required as outlined in
§ 660-195, Conditional uses, and a permit as outlined in § 660-189,
Sign permits.
(3) Number. One freestanding sign shall be permitted for identification
of a business park, retail center or education facility that has a
minimum of 300 feet of direct frontage on the Interstate 94 right-ofway.
(4) Size. A freestanding sign shall not exceed 100 square feet per sign
face and 200 total square feet.
(5) Location.
(a) A freestanding sign shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet and
a maximum of 25 feet from the Interstate 94 right-of-way.
(b) The height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed 25 feet
above the elevation of the center line of nearest traveling lane
of Interstate 94.
(6) Appearance. The sign structure shall have architectural interest
consistent with the materials and characteristics of the site's
buildings and designed proportionate to the building as well as to
the surrounding context of the site. The sign structure may have
more than two sides; however, the sign face shall only be displayed
on two sides of the structure.
(7) Display of tenants. The face of the freestanding sign is limited to
displaying two tenant panels.
B. On-premises wall signs facing Interstate 94 are allowed, subject to the
following standards:
(1) Number. One wall sign per tenant facing Interstate 94 is permitted.
(2) Approval. A permit shall be required as outlined in § 660-189, Sign
permits.
§ 660-122 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-123
1:864
§ 660-124. Construction and maintenance of signage.
(3) Size. The size of wall signage facing Interstate 94 shall comply with
the regulations outlined in § 660-119, Table 6.1: Table of Maximum
Sign Areas and Sizes.
(4) Appearance.
(a) All wall signs shall be channel letters.
(b) All wall signs as part of one development site shall have a
consistent backing or structural support frame, if one is
proposed, or affixing mechanism.
(c) All wall signs shall have architectural interest and colors
consistent with the materials and characteristics of the
buildings on the site.
C. Prohibited signs facing Interstate 94.
(1) Electronic message signs.
(2) Pole or pylon-type signs.
(3) Off-premises signage.
D. Illumination of signs facing Interstate 94. Illumination: all signage shall
comply with the regulations outlined in § 660-142, Exterior lighting.
A. All signage within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall remain in a state
of proper maintenance.
B. Proper maintenance shall be the absence of loose materials, including
peeling paint, paper or other materials; the lack of excessive rust; the
lack of excessive vibration or shaking; and the presence of the original
structural integrity of the sign, its frame and other supports, its
mounting, and all components thereof.
C. The repainting, changing of parts, and preventive maintenance of signs,
which completely conform to the requirements of this chapter and
result in absolutely no change in the appearance of the sign from that
originally approved, shall not be deemed alterations requiring a sign
permit.
D. The owner, lessee, or manager of a sign, and the owner of the land on
which the same is located, shall keep grass or weeds and other growth
cut and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot on
which the sign is located.
E. Any signs that may be, or may hereafter become rotted, unsafe, or in a
state that is not properly maintained shall be repaired or removed by
the licensee or owner of the sign, or owner of the property upon which
the sign stands upon notice of the Zoning Administrator.
§ 660-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-124
1:865
§ 660-125. Nonconforming signs.
F. All signs shall be constructed and mounted so as to withstand a wind
pressure of 30 pounds per square foot.
G. Signage found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties of § 660-210 of this chapter.
A. Nonconforming signs.
(1) Signs existing as of the effective date of this chapter, which do not
conform to the provisions of this chapter, shall be nonconforming
signs and shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection B of this
section. Nonconforming signs may be maintained. No
nonconforming sign shall be altered or moved to a new location
without being brought into compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
(2) Business signs on the premises of a nonconforming use or building
may be continued per Subsection B of this section, but such signs
shall not be allowed to expand in number, area, height, or
illumination. New signs, not to exceed the maximum allowable
aggregate sign area, may be erected only upon the complete
removal of all other nonconforming signs existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter.
(3) Nonconforming signs shall be removed when the principal
structure located on the premises undergoes a change of use,
unless the signs are altered within their existing frames or other
structure defining the size and shape of the signs, or shall be
removed per Subsection B of this section. Closing businesses must
remove their signs within 60 days of closing.
(4) Signage not in compliance with the provisions of Subsection A of
this section shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection B of this
section.
B. Removal of nonconforming signs.
(1) Alteration of signs.
(a) For the purposes of this section, alteration of a sign is
considered to be any change to the exterior appearance of any
part of the sign's frame, supporting structure, or lighting
including changing the material, height, or location of the sign.
(b) Altering a sign does not include maintaining the existing
appearance of the sign, or replacing the supporting structure
with identical materials, or replacing the message of the sign,
provided the size and shape of the sign within its existing
frame does not change.
§ 660-124 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-125
1:866
§ 660-126. Abandoned signs.
(2) All signs found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be removed within 30 days of receiving written notice
of noncompliance and removal from the Zoning Administrator.
(3) The penalties of § 660-210 shall be applicable to violations of the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Any sign that advertises or identifies any activity, business, product or
service no longer conducted or available on the site on which the sign is
located is prohibited. Abandoned signs must be removed by the owner
of the sign or by the owner of the premises within 120 days of closing of
the establishment to which the sign pertained, or within 120 days of
cessation of the use to which the sign pertained.
B. Any abandoned sign existing upon enactment of this article shall be
removed within 120 days.
C. After the 120 days have elapsed, under Subsection A or B above, the
abandoned sign is deemed to be a nonconforming sign subject to the
provisions of § 660-125B.
§ 660-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-126
1:867

ARTICLE VII
Natural Resource Protection Regulations
§ 660-127. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to set the requirements for the mandatory
protection of natural resources and permanently protected green space
areas with the City of Lake Mills. The districts will limit allowed
development in order to protect resource and open space areas — or
resource-based uses such as farming, forestry, and recreation — from
incompatible development and to avoid potential hazards to the public and
to individual property owners, such as in designated flood hazard or water
supply source protection areas. The provisions of this article are designed
to ensure the implementation of the City of Lake Mills Comprehensive Plan
and Wis. Stats. §§ 62.231 and 87.30.
§ 660-128. Wellhead Protection Overlay (WPO) District.
A. Authority. These regulations are established pursuant to the authority
granted by the Wisconsin Legislature in 1983, Wisconsin Act 410
(effective May 11, 1984), which specifically added groundwater
protection to the statutory authorization for municipal planning and
zoning in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.30 Areas
appropriate for protection in the WPO are established in the Well Head
Protection Plan for City of Lake Mills, Wisconsin, dated October 1998,
and the Well Head Protection Plan for the City of Lake Mills, dated
November 2007, hereinafter the "plans," or if referred to separately,
"1998 Plan" and "2007 Plan." Both plans were prepared by Strand
Associates, Inc. The plans are hereby incorporated herein by this
reference, and a copy of the 1998 Plan and the 2007 Plan are on file in
the office of the City Clerk.
B. Applicability.
(1) Zone 1. The regulations specified in this section shall apply to lands
within those portions of the five-year time of travel (TOT) of Well
No. 6 shown on the 1998 Plan, Protection Area Map (see Appendix
E, Figure 2 of WHP), and to lands within the minimum separation
distances from potential sources of contamination described in
§ NR 811.12(5)(d) of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (WDNR) Code, which areas also lie within the City of
Lake Mills corporate limits.
(2) Zone 2. The regulations specified in this section shall apply to lands
within those portions of the five-year TOT of Well No. 4 shown on
the 2007 Plan, Protection Area Map (see Appendix E, Figure 2 of
WHP), and to lands within the minimum separation distances from
potential sources of contamination described in § NR 811.12(5)(d)
30.Editor's Note: See § 62.23(7)(c), Wis. Stats.
§ 660-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-128
1:869
of the Department of Natural Resources Code, which areas also lie
within the City of Lake Mills corporate limits.
(3) Zone 3. The regulations specified in this section shall apply to lands
within those portions of the five-year TOT of Well No. 5 shown on
the 2007 Plan, Protection Area Map (see Appendix E, Figure 2 of
WHP), and to lands within the minimum separation distances from
potential sources of contamination described in § NR 811.12(5)(d)
of the Department of Natural Resources Code, which areas also lie
within the City of Lake Mills corporate limits.
(4) The City's Wellhead Protection Map shows the Zones of Influence of
lands where these regulations apply at each of the wells, No. 4, No.
5, and No. 6.
C. Wellhead protection areas (WPAs).
(1) Intent. The area to be protected is the Lake Mills WPA (as
determined by the plans) contained within the City boundary limits.
(a) These areas are designated on the Map that is attached, as
well as the Map within the plans. These lands are subject to
land use and development restrictions because of their close
proximity to the TOT and the corresponding high threat of
contamination.
(b) Minimum separation distances from potential sources of
contamination as defined in the DNR Code § NR 811.12(5)(d),
latest version, shall also be maintained when these separation
distances exceed the dimensions of the wellhead protection
area illustrated on the Map.
(2) Permitted uses. The following are the only permitted uses within
the WPA.
(a) Any existing use, even though listed on prohibited uses, below,
located within such areas to the extent that use currently
exists, subject to the requirements for existing prohibited uses,
Subsection C(3) below.
(b) Those uses permitted under Lake Mills Zoning Code consistent
with the Zoning Map, as amended by action of the Lake Mills
City Council and which are not prohibited under Subsection
C(3) below.
(3) Prohibited uses. The following uses, if created after the adoption of
the WHP Ordinance, as adopted in 1998 or as amended in 2008, are
prohibited uses within the wellhead protection areas designated on
the Map. These uses are prohibited based on the high probability
that activities routinely associated with these uses (storage, use,
and handling of potential pollutants) will cause groundwater
contamination. Uses not listed are not considered permitted uses.
§ 660-128 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-128
1:870
(a) Underground storage tanks of any size.
(b) Septage and/or sludge spreading.
(c) Animal waste landspreading.
(d) Animal waste facilities.
(e) Animal confinement facilities.
(f) Gas stations.
(g) Vehicle repair establishments, including auto body repair.
(h) Printing and duplicating businesses.
(i) Bus or truck terminals.
(j) Repair shops.
(k) Landfills or waste disposal facilities.
(l) Wastewater treatment facilities.
(m) Spray wastewater facilities.
(n) Junkyards or auto salvage yards.
(o) Bulk fertilizer and/or pesticide facilities.
(p) Asphalt products manufacturing.
(q) Dry-cleaning businesses.
(r) Salt storage.
(s) Electroplating facilities.
(t) Exterminating businesses.
(u) Paint and coating manufacturing.
(v) Hazardous and/or toxic materials storage.
(w) Hazardous and/or toxic waste facilities.
(x) Radioactive waste facilities.
(y) Recycling facilities.
(z) Cemeteries.
(4) Where any of the uses listed in Subsection C(3) above exist within
the WPA on the effective date of this article when adopted in 1998
or when amended in 2008, owners of these facilities will be allowed
to upgrade such uses to facilitate or enhance groundwater
protection. The Plan Commission and Public Works Board must
§ 660-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-128
1:871
§ 660-129. Shoreland-Wetland Overlay (SWO) District.
approve plans for the proposed upgrade and the appropriate
permit issued by the City Building Inspector/Zoning
Administrator's office prior to any work being initiated.
(5) Requirements for existing prohibited uses, Subsection C(3) above.
(a) Such uses shall provide copies of all federal, state and local
facility operation approvals or certificate to the City Zoning
Administrator and ongoing environmental monitoring results
to the City Director of Public Works.
(b) Such uses shall provide additional environmental or safety
structures/monitoring as deemed necessary by the City, which
may include but are not limited to stormwater runoff
management and monitoring.
(c) Such uses shall replace equipment or expand in a manner that
improves the existing environmental and safety technologies
already in existence.
(d) Such uses shall have the responsibility of devising and filing
with the City a contingency plan satisfactory to the City Zoning
Administrator for the immediate notification of City officials in
case of an emergency.
D. Enforcement.
(1) In the event the individual and/or facility engaging in permitted
use(s) under this article causes the release of any contaminants
which endanger the WPA, the activity causing said release shall
immediately cease and a cleanup satisfactory to the City shall
occur.
(2) The individual/facility causing the release of contaminants shall be
responsible for all costs of cleanup. The costs of cleanup shall
include, but not be limited to, City consultant fees, at the invoice
amount plus administrative costs for oversight, review and
documentation.
(3) Following any such discharge, the City may require additional test
monitoring and/or bonds/sureties as it deems necessary and
reasonable.
(4) Penalties for noncompliance shall be provided pursuant to
applicable sections of the code and Wisconsin Statutes.
A. Statutory authorization. This section is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23 and 62.231 for cities and §§ 87.30
and 281.31, Wis. Stats.
§ 660-128 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-129
1:872
B. Finding of fact and purpose. Uncontrolled use of the shorelandwetlands
and pollution of the navigable waters of the municipality
would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, and
general welfare and impair the tax base. The Legislature of Wisconsin
has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to:
(1) Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare;
(2) Maintain the storm and flood water storage capacity of wetlands;
(3) Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which
filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic
compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
(4) Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife
by preserving wetlands and other aquatic habitat;
(5) Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area;
and
(6) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal
of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland
excavation, filling and other earthmoving activities.
C. Compliance. The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within
the shoreland area of the municipality shall be in full compliance with
the terms of this section and other applicable local, state or federal
regulations. (However, see Subsection L of this section for the
standards applicable to nonconforming uses.) All permitted
development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit unless
otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this section.
D. Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to
comply with this section and obtain all necessary permits. State
agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways
and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt
when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
E. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(1) This section supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under § 62.23 or 87.30, Wis. Stats., which relate
to floodplains and shoreland-wetlands, except that where another
municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than this section,
that section shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of
the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(2) This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However,
§ 660-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-129
1:873
where this section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of
this section shall prevail.
F. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this section shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the municipality and shall not be deemed
a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes. Where a provision of this section is required by a standard in
Chapter NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the section provision is
unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Chapter NR
117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this section or in
effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this section.
G. Severability. Should any portion of this section be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
this section shall not be affected.
H. Annexed areas. The Jefferson County shoreland zoning provisions in
effect on the date of annexation remain in effect administered by the
municipality for all areas annexed by the municipality after May 7,
1982, unless any of the changes allowed under Wis. Stats. § 59.692, as
amended by 1993 Wis. Act 329, occur. These annexed lands are
described on the municipality's Official Zoning Map. The Jefferson
County shoreland zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for
the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of
the municipal Zoning Administrator.
I. Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District.
(1) Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Maps. The following maps are hereby
adopted and made part of this section and are on file in the office of
the City Clerk.
(a) Wisconsin Wetland Inventory maps stamped "FINAL" on May
13, 1994.
(b) Floodplain Zoning Maps titled FIRM Flood Insurance Rate
Map, Community Panel #550195 0005 C, and dated July 2,
1987.
(c) Zoning Maps titled "City of Lake Mills Zoning" and dated
August 31, 1993.
(d) United States Geological Survey Map titled "Lake Mills
Quadrangle Photoinspected 1976."
(2) District boundaries.
(a) The Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District includes all wetlands in
the City which are five acres or more and are shown on the
final Wetland Inventory Map that has been adopted and made a
part of this section and which are.
§ 660-129 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-129
1:874
[1] Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of
navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or
flowages in the City shall be presumed to be navigable if
they are shown on the United States Geological Survey
quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have
been incorporated by reference and made a part of this
section.
[2] Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of
navigable rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and
streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are
designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways
on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps
or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated
by reference and made a part of this section. Floodplain
Zoning Maps adopted in Subsection I(1) shall be used to
determine the extent of floodplain areas.
(b) Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark
location shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator.
When questions arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact
the appropriate district office of the Department for a final
determination of navigability or ordinary high-water mark.
(c) When an apparent discrepancy exists between the Shoreland-
Wetland District boundary shown on the Official Zoning Maps
and actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted,
the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district
office of the Department to determine if the Shoreland-Wetland
District boundary, as mapped, is in error. If Department staff
concur with the Zoning Administrator that a particular area
was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or
deny a zoning permit in accordance with the regulations
applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct
wetland mapping errors or acknowledge exempted wetlands
designated in Subsection I(2)(d) and (e), the Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for initiating a map
amendment within a reasonable period.
(d) Filled wetlands. Wetlands which are filled prior to May 13,
1994, the date on which the municipality received final
wetland inventory maps, in a manner which affects their
wetland characteristics to the extent that the area can no
longer be defined as wetland, are not subject to this section.
(e) Wetlands landward of a bulkhead line. Wetlands located
between the original ordinary high water mark and a bulkhead
line established prior to May 7, 1982, under § 30.11, Wis.
Stats., are not subject to this section.
§ 660-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-129
1:875
J. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted subject to the
provisions of Chapters 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., and the provisions of
other local, state and federal laws, if applicable.
(1) Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning
permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs.
(a) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling
and boating;
(b) The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss,
wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is
not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops;
(c) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning
and harvesting of timber;
(d) The pasturing of livestock;
(e) The cultivation of agricultural crops; and
(f) The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
(2) Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and
which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent
specifically provided below.
(a) The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water
level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate
abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse
impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not
corrected;
(b) The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland
alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and
harvesting cranberries;
(c) The maintenance or repair of existing drainage systems to
restore preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum
amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil,
provided that the filling is otherwise permissible and that
dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible;
(d) The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing
of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary
for such construction or maintenance;
(e) The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways,
observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including
limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction
or maintenance;
(f) The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the
purpose of draining lands outside the Shoreland-Wetland
§ 660-129 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-129
1:876
Zoning District, provided that such installation or maintenance
is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts
upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in
§ 660-198D of this chapter; and
(g) The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of
existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating
and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair,
replacement or reconstruction.
(3) Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use
permit and which may include wetland alterations only to the
extent specifically provided below.
(a) The construction and maintenance of roads which are
necessary for the continuity of the municipal street system, the
provision of essential utility and emergency services or to
provide access to uses permitted under Subsection J of this
section, provided that:
[1] The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside
the wetland;
[2] The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse
impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in
§ 660-198D of this chapter;
[3] The road is designed and constructed with the minimum
cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended use;
[4] Road construction activities are carried out in the
immediate area of the roadbed only; and
[5] Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the
construction or maintenance of the road.
(b) The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings,
provided that:
[1] The building is used solely in conjunction with a use
permitted in the Shoreland-Wetland District or for the
raising of waterfowl;
[2] The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located
outside the wetland;
[3] The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area;
and
[4] Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide
structural support for the building is allowed.
(c) The establishment and development of public and private
parks and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic,
§ 660-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-129
1:877
natural and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas,
fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and
animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching
ramps, provided that:
[1] Any private development allowed under this subsection
shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose;
[2] Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the
development of public boat launching ramps, swimming
beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar
structures is allowed;
[3] The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for
the uses permitted under this paragraph are allowed only
where such construction and maintenance meets the
criteria in Subsection J(3)(a) of this section; and
[4] Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish
and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and
animal farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the
purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise
enhance wetland values.
(d) The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone
transmission lines, water and gas distribution lines and sewage
collection lines and related facilities and the construction and
maintenance of railroad lines, provided that:
[1] The utility transmission and distribution facilities and
railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located
outside the wetland;
[2] Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such
construction or maintenance is allowed; and
[3] Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner
designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural
functions of the wetland listed in § 660-198D of this
chapter.
K. Prohibited uses.
(1) Any use not listed in Subsection J of this section is prohibited,
unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by
amendment of this chapter in accordance with § 660-198 of this
chapter.
(2) The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction
or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary
high-water mark of any navigable waters are prohibited.
§ 660-129 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-129
1:878
L. Nonconforming structures and uses. The lawful use of a building,
structure or property which existed at the time this section, or an
applicable amendment to this section, took effect and which is not in
conformity with the provisions of the section, including the routine
maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued, subject
to the following conditions:
(1) The shoreland-wetland provisions of this section authorized by
§ 62.231, Wis. Stats., shall not limit the repair, reconstruction,
renovation, remodeling or expansion of a nonconforming structure
in existence on the effective date of the shoreland-wetland
provisions, or of any environmental control facility in existence on
May 7, 1982, related to such a structure. All other modifications to
nonconforming structures are subject to § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats.,
which limits total lifetime structural repairs and alterations to 50%
of current fair market value.
(2) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the
building, structure or property shall conform to this section.
(3) Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve
the use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption
or subsequent amendment of this section adopted under § 62.231,
Wis. Stats., may be continued although such use does not conform
with the provisions of this section. However, such nonconforming
use may not be extended.
(4) The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which
are located below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable
waters shall comply with the requirements of § 30.121, Wis. Stats.
(5) Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be
permitted to continue as nonconforming uses.
(6) Restoration of certain nonconforming structures in the Shoreland-
Wetland District. Restrictions applicable to damaged or destroyed
nonconforming structures in this section shall not apply if the
nonconforming structure is restored to the size, location and use
that it had immediately before the damage or destruction occurred,
provided both of the following apply:
(a) The nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed on or
after the effective date of this subsection;
(b) The damage or destruction was caused by violent wind,
vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation.
(7) The size of such nonconforming structure to which Subsection L(6)
applies may be enlarged if such enlargement is made necessary for
the structure to comply with applicable state and federal
requirements.
§ 660-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-130
1:879
§ 660-130. Floodplain Overlay (FPO) District.
A. General provisions.
(1) Statutory authorization. This section is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in § 62.23, Wis Stats.; and the requirements in
§ 87.30, Stats. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) Finding of fact. Uncontrolled development and use of the
floodplains and rivers of this municipality would impair the public
health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base.
(3) Areas to be regulated. This section regulates all areas that would
be covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other maps approved by DNR.
Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH
Zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and
AO zones. Regional Flood Elevations (RFE) may be derived from
other studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the
most restrictive information shall apply.
(4) Official Maps and revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain
districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps
based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) listed below. Any change
to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries
of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and
FEMA through the Letter of Map Change process (see § 660-199,
Floodplain zoning administration and procedures) before it is
effective. No changes to RFE's on non-FEMA maps shall be
effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are
on file in the office of the City Clerk, 200 Water Street, Lake Mills,
Wisconsin. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most
restrictive information shall apply.
(a) Official Maps:
[1] Based on the FIS: 55055CV001B and 55025CV002B.
[2] Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers
55055C0156F, 55055C0157F, 55055C0158F,
55055C0159F, 55055C0167F, and 55055C0170F, dated
2-4-2015; with corresponding profiles that are based on
the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated 2-4-2015, volume
number 55055CV001B and 55055CV002B;
[3] Approved by: the DNR and FEMA.
(b) Official Maps. Based on other studies. Any maps referenced in
this section must be approved by the DNR and be more
§ 660-130 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-130
1:880
restrictive than those based on the FIS at the site of the
proposed development.
[1] One-Hundred-Year Dam Failure Floodplain Map, Dam
Failure Analysis: Lake Mills Dam, dated December 2013,
prepared by Mead & Hunt. Dam nonexistent (no dam)
condition. Approved by: The DNR on January 7, 2014.
[2] Jefferson County Flood Storage District Map, Panel 2 of
13, dated 2-4-2015; Approved by: The DNR.
(5) Establishment of districts. The regional floodplain areas are
divided into four districts, as follows:
(a) The Floodway Overlay District (FWO) is the channel of a river
or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the
channel required to carry the regional floodwaters and are
contained within AE Zones as shown on the FIRM.
(b) The Flood-Fringe Overlay District (FFO) is that portion
between the regional flood limits and the floodway and
displayed as AE Zones on the FIRM.
(c) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that may
be covered by floodwater during the regional flood and does
not have a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A,
AH and AO zones on the FIRM.
(d) The Flood Storage District (FSD) is that area of the floodplain
where storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the
regional flood discharge.
(6) Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries
on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map and actual field conditions
shall be resolved using the criteria in Subsection A(6)(a) or (b)
below. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended
according to § 660-199D. The Zoning Administrator can rely on a
boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land
use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The
Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual
predevelopment field conditions and the basis upon which the
district boundary was determined and for initiating any map
amendments required under this section. Disputes between the
Zoning Administrator and an applicant over the district boundary
line shall be settled according to § 660-130A(4) and the criteria in
Subsection A(6)(a) and (b) below. Where the flood profiles are
based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA
must approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to
§ 660-199, Floodplain zoning administration and procedures.
§ 660-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-130
1:881
(a) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations
shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base
flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
(b) Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary
shall be determined by the map scale, visual on-site inspection,
and any information provided by the Department.
Note: Where the flood profiles are based on established base
flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must also approve any
map amendment pursuant to § 660-130A(4).
(7) Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions
of this section shall not be grounds for removing land from the
floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or
base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the
floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to § 660-199,
Floodplain zoning administration and procedures.
Note: This procedure does not remove the requirements for the
mandatory purchase of flood insurance. The property owner must
contact FEMA to request a Letter of Map Change (LOMC).
(8) Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by
this section shall be in compliance with the terms of this section,
and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
(9) Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are
required to comply with this section and obtain all necessary
permits. State agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis.
Stats., applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and
repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department
of Transportation is exempt when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
(10) Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(a) This section supersedes all the provisions of any municipal
zoning ordinance enacted under § 62.23, Wis. Stats.; or
§ 87.30, Stats., which relate to floodplains. If another
ordinance is more restrictive than this section, that ordinance
shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the
greater restrictions, but not otherwise. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(b) This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this
section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
section shall prevail.
(11) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this section are the minimum requirements liberally
§ 660-130 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-130
1:882
construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on
or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
If a provision of this section, required by Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm.
Code, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the
standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this section or
in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this
section.
(12)Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards
in this section are based on engineering experience and scientific
research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not
imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted
floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. Nor
does this section create liability on the part of, or a cause of action
against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damage that may result from reliance on this section.
(13) Severability. Should any portion of this section be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this section shall not be affected.
(14) Annexed areas for cities and villages. The Jefferson County
floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation
shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for
all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an
ordinance which meets the requirements of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm.
Code and 44 CFR 59-72, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
These annexed lands are described on the municipality's Official
Zoning Map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated
by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are
on file in the office of the municipal Zoning Administrator. All plats
or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and
the floodway location.
(15) General development standards. The community shall review all
permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites
will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is
in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with floodresistant
materials; be constructed to minimize flood damages and
to ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the equipment during conditions of flooding.
Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above
standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home
parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data
for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this
§ 660-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-130
1:883
section and all other requirements in § 660-199B. Adequate
drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and
all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages.
B. General standards applicable to all floodplain districts.
(1) Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
(a) No floodplain development shall:
[1] Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other
development, increasing regional flood height; or
[2] Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to
floodplain storage area lost.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined
the proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any
increase in the regional flood height, based on the officially
adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of
§ 660-199, Floodplain zoning administration and procedures,
are met.
(2) Watercourse alterations.
(a) No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a
mapped floodplain shall be issued until the Zoning
Administrator has notified in writing all adjacent
municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional offices, and
required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal
permits. The standards of § 660-199B(2) must be met and the
flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse
shall be maintained. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(b) As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after
the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation and
pursuant to § 660-199, Floodplain zoning administration and
procedures, the community shall apply for a Letter of Map
Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be
reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the
LOMC process.
(3) Chapters 30, 31, Wis. Stats., Development. Development which
requires a permit from the Department, under Wis. Stats. Chapter
30 and Chapter 31, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges,
culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the
necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance are made according to § 660-199.
§ 660-130 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-130
1:884
(4) Public or private campgrounds. Public or private campgrounds
shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the
following provisions:
(a) The campground is approved by the Department of Health
Services;
(b) A land use permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning
Administrator;
(c) The character of the river system and the campground
elevation are such that a seventy-two-hour warning of an
impending flood can be given to all campground occupants;
(d) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the
campground that offers the minimum notice required under
this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure
shall include a written agreement between the campground
owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and
the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood
elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel
responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning
systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk
parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for
conducting the evacuation;
(e) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at
which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated, by
the officials identified in Subsection B(4)(d), to remain in
compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of
the state Department of Health Services and all other
applicable regulations;
(f) Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and
ready for highway use are allowed;
(g) The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground
for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping
unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24
hours;
(h) All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days
shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground
operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the
campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a
camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall
ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section;
(i) The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations
issued by the campground operator to assure compliance with
the terms of this section;
§ 660-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-130
1:885
§ 660-131. Floodway Overlay (FWO) District.
(j) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180
consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in
either § 660-131, 660-132 or 660-133 for the floodplain district
in which the structure is located;
(k) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all
entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for
evacuation when a flood warning is issued; and
(l) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse
collection, electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage
systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the
Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified pursuant to § 660-133D.
B. Permitted uses. The following open space uses are allowed in the
floodway district and the floodway areas of the General Floodplain
District, if they are not prohibited by any other ordinance; they meet
the standards in Subsections C and D; and all permits or certificates
have been issued according to § 660-199.
(1) Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading
areas, parking areas and airport landing strips.
(3) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis
courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing
areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill
limitations of Subsection C(4).
(4) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as
historic structures that comply with Subsections C and D.
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with
Subsection C(4).
(6) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or
wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river
crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis.
Stats. Chapter 30 and Chapter 31.
(7) Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with Subsection
C(3).
C. Standards for developments in floodway areas.
§ 660-130 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-131
1:886
(1) General.
(a) Any development in floodway areas shall comply with
§ 660-130B and have a low flood damage potential.
(b) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the
effects of the proposal according to § 660-130B(1).
[1] A cross-section elevation view of the proposal,
perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed
development will obstruct flow; or
[2] An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on
regional flood height.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if
the project will increase flood elevations upstream or
downstream 0.01 foot or more, based on the data submitted for
Subsection C(1)(b) above.
(2) Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or
functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by
permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
(a) Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood
damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage.
(b) Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls
having a total net area not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such
openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The
openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
(c) Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
(d) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation.
(e) It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase
in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
(3) Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and
bridges may be allowed by permit, if:
(a) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation.
(b) Construction meets the development standards of § 660-130B.
(4) Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may
be allowed by permit, if:
§ 660-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-131
1:887
§ 660-132. Flood-Fringe Overlay (FFO) District.
(a) The requirements of § 660-130B are met.
(b) No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a
permit is issued by the Department pursuant to Ch. 30, Stats.,
and a permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344
has been issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of
this section are met.
(c) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading.
(d) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
D. Prohibited uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in Subsection B
are prohibited, including the following uses:
(1) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential,
or those not associated with permanent open space uses;
(2) Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious
to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other
aquatic life;
(3) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the
adjoining districts;
(4) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that
are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with
recreational areas and WDNR-approved campgrounds that meet
the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis.
Adm. Code;
(5) Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water,
except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of
local ordinances and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
(6) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(7) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those
permitted under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code;
(8) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service
existing or proposed development located outside the floodway
which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area
occupied.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all flood-fringe areas shown on the
floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified pursuant to § 660-133D.
B. Permitted uses. Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in
the Flood-Fringe District if the standards in Subsection C are met, the
§ 660-131 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-132
1:888
use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or regulation and
all permits or certificates specified in § 660-199 have been issued.
C. Standards for development in flood-fringe areas. Section 660-130B
shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the
use requested. Any existing structure in the flood-fringe must meet the
requirements of § 660-134.
(1) Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home,
which is to be newly constructed or moved into the flood-fringe,
shall meet or exceed the following standards. Any existing
structure in the flood-fringe must meet the requirements of
§ 660-134.
(a) The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation on fill unless the requirements of
Subsection C(1)(b) below can be met. The fill shall be one foot
or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least
15 feet beyond the limits of the structure.
(b) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional
flood elevation if it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the
regional flood elevation.
(c) Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure
to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in
Subsection C(1)(d) below.
(d) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with Subsection C(1)(c) impractical, the
municipality may permit new development and substantial
improvements where access roads are at or below the regional
flood elevation, if:
[1] The municipality has written assurance from police, fire
and emergency services that rescue and relief will be
provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a
regional flood event; or
[2] The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency
evacuation plan. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be
constructed on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional
flood elevation.
(3) Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected,
altered or moved into the flood-fringe area shall meet the
requirements of § 660-132C(1). Subject to the requirements of
§ 660-132C(5), storage yards, surface parking lots and other such
§ 660-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-132
1:889
uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning
system exists to protect life and property.
(4) Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or
industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the
flood-fringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in
§ 660-135D. Subject to the requirements of Subsection C(5),
storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be
placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to
protect life and property.
(5) Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal,
plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood
protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with
§ 660-135D. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such
materials will not enter the water body during flooding.
(6) Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges
shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans; and
(a) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would
endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are
deemed essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall
only be permitted if they are designed to comply with
§ 660-135D.
(b) Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at
lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces
to the regional flood elevation.
(7) Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood water into the system,
pursuant to § 660-135D to the flood protection elevation and shall
meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(8) Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system, pursuant to § 660-135D,
to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of
Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(9) Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in flood-fringe areas.
(10) Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this section.
(11) Manufactured homes.
§ 660-132 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-132
1:890
§ 660-133. General Floodplain (GFP) District.
(a) Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to
minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file
an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape
routes, with local emergency management authorities.
(b) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes,
replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially
improved homes shall:
[1] Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection
elevation; and
[2] Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally
during a flood.
(c) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new
manufactured home parks and all single units outside of
existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially
improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential
development standards for the flood-fringe in Subsection C(1).
(12) Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that
are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully
licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and
anchoring requirements in Subsection C(11)(b) and (c). A mobile
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions.
A. Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains
mapped as A, AO or AH Zones.
B. Permitted uses. Those uses permitted in the Floodway (§ 660-131) and
Flood-Fringe (§ 660-132) Overlay Districts are allowed within the
General Floodplain Overlay District, according to the standards of
Subsection C below, provided that all permits or certificates required
under § 660-199 have been issued.
C. Standards for development in the General Floodplain District. Section
660-131 applies to floodway areas and § 660-132 applies to flood-fringe
areas. The rest of this section applies to either district.
(1) In AO/AH Zones, the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the
conditions listed below, whichever is higher:
(a) At or above the flood protection elevation;
(b) Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the
structure; or
§ 660-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-133
1:891
§ 660-134. Flood Storage Overlay (FSO) District.
The Flood Storage District delineates that portion of the floodplain where
storage of floodwaters has been taken into account and is relied upon to
reduce the regional flood discharge. The district protects the flood storage
areas and assures that any development in the storage areas will not
decrease the effective flood storage capacity which would cause higher
flood elevations.
(c) The depth as shown on the FIRM.
(2) In AO/AH zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to
guide floodwaters around structures.
D. Determining floodway and flood-fringe limits. Upon receiving an
application for development within the General Floodplain District, the
Zoning Administrator shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph
or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to
the General Floodplain District limits, stream channel, and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the
property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and
floodproofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM.
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the WDNR to evaluate the effects of the
proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation,
and to determine floodway boundaries.
(a) A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in § 660-199B(2).
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on
the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and
sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information.
(c) Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
(3) Transmit one copy of the information described in Subsection D(1)
and (2) to the Department of Natural Resources Regional office
along with a written request for technical assistance to establish
regional flood elevations and, where applicable, floodway data.
Where the provisions of § 660-198B apply, the applicant shall
provide all required information and computations to delineate
floodway boundaries and the effects of the project on flood
elevations.
§ 660-133 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-134
1:892
§ 660-135. Nonconforming uses in flood areas.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all areas within the
Flood Storage District (FSD), as shown on the Official Floodplain
Zoning Maps.
B. Permitted uses. Any use or development which occurs in a Flood
Storage District must meet the applicable requirements in § 660-132C.
C. Standards for development in Flood Storage Districts.
(1) Development in a Flood Storage District shall not cause an increase
equal or greater than 0.00 of a foot in the height of the regional
flood.
(2) No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage
volume unless an equal volume of storage as defined by the
predevelopment ground surface and the regional flood elevation
shall be provided in the immediate area of the proposed
development to compensate for the volume of storage which is lost
(compensatory storage). Excavation below the groundwater table
is not considered to provide an equal volume of storage.
(3) If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be
developed unless the entire area zoned as Flood Storage District,
on this waterway, is rezoned to the Flood-Fringe District. This must
include a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the
waterway to revert to the higher regional flood discharge
calculated without floodplain storage, as per § 660-199 of this
chapter.
(4) No area may be removed from the Flood Storage District unless it
can be shown that the area has been filled to the flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to other lands lying outside of the
floodplain.
A. General.
(1) Applicability. If these standards conform with § 62.23(7)(h), Wis.
Stats., they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any
nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or
premises which was lawful before the passage of this article or any
amendment thereto. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this article may continue,
subject to the following conditions:
(a) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or
structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this
article. The words "modification" and "addition" include, but
§ 660-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-135
1:893
are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification,
structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such
existing use, structure or accessory structure or use.
Maintenance is not considered a modification; this includes
painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural
components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of
existing private sewage or water supply systems or
connections to public utilities. Any costs associated with the
repair of a damaged structure are not considered maintenance.
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square
feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal
structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof
of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order
to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure
is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer
permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure
or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable
requirements of this article.
(c) The municipality shall keep a record which lists all
nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their
present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications
or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of
the structure's total current value those modifications
represent.
(d) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or
any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of
the structure would equal or exceed 50% of its present
equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure
with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must
be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance
with § 660-132C(1). The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a
nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming
use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50%
provisions of this subsection.
(e) No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would
equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value,
shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently
changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this article.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential
and commercial uses in compliance with § 660-132C(1).
§ 660-135 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-135
1:894
(f) If on a per-event basis the total value of the work being done
under Subsection A(2)(d) and (e) equals or exceeds 50% of the
present equalized assessed value, the work shall not be
permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed
to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance
with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous
dry land access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with § 660-132C(1).
(g) Except as provided in Subsection A(2)(h), if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is
destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced,
reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet
the current ordinance requirements. A structure is considered
substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure
to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50% of the
structure's present equalized assessed value.
(h) For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or
destroyed by a non-flood disaster, the repair or reconstruction
of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order
to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage
event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements
below are met and all required permits have been granted
prior to the start of construction.
[1] Residential structures.
[a] Shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill,
pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter
walls must meet the requirements of § 660-135D.
[b] Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy, and shall be constructed with
methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
[c] Shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or
elevated so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
[d] In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data
available from a federal, state or other source.
[e] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, meet the
standards in § 660-130A(3).
§ 660-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-135
1:895
[f] In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from the structure.
[2] Nonresidential structures.
[a] Shall meet the requirements of § 660-135A(2)(h)[1][a]
through [f].
[b] Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall meet the standards in § 660-135D(1) or (2).
[c] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, meet the
standards in § 660-130A(3).
(3) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration
will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic
structure, the alteration will comply with § 660-131, flood-resistant
materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing
methods that comply with § 660-135D are used.
B. Floodway District.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the
Floodway District, unless such modification or addition:
(a) Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all article
requirements;
(b) Meets the requirements of Subsection A above;
(c) Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional
flood height;
(d) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed,
pursuant to § 660-135D, by means other than the use of fill, to
the flood protection elevation;
(e) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection
elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
[1] The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered
architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and
exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A
minimum of two openings must be provided with a
minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one
square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the
opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent
grade;
§ 660-135 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-135
1:896
[2] The parts of the foundation located below the flood
protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant
materials;
[3] Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation;
and
[4] The use must be limited to parking, building access or
limited storage.
(2) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing
on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been
ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public
health, shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any replacement,
repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal
system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements
of all municipal ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain
potable water shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any
replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in the
Floodway District shall meet the applicable requirements of all
municipal ordinances, § 660-135D(3), and Chs. NR 811 and NR
812, Wis. Adm. Code.
C. Flood-Fringe District.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such
modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by
the municipality, and meets the requirements in § 660-132C, except
where Subsection C(2) below is applicable.
(2) Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection C(1) above
would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure
will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high
flood damage potential, the Zoning Board of Appeals, using the
procedures established in § 660-199A(3), may grant a variance
from those provisions of Subsection C(1) above for modifications or
additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions
which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection
elevation may be permitted if:
(a) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for
residential or commercial structures;
(b) Human lives are not endangered;
(c) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed;
§ 660-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-135
1:897
(d) Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
(e) Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
(f) The structure will not be used for storage of materials as
described in § 660-132C(5).
(3) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to,
replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal
system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local
ordinances, § 660-135D(3), and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(4) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of
a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this article and Chs.
NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
D. Floodproofing.
(1) No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure
designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until
the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect
the structure or development to the flood protection elevation and
submits a FEMA Floodproofing Certificate.
(2) For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no
permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan
either:
(a) Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
(b) Meets or exceeds the following standards:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding;
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
(a) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces and other regional flood factors.
(b) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation.
(c) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement.
§ 660-135 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-135
1:898
§ 660-136. Conservancy Overlay (CO) District.
(d) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
(e) Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters.
A. Permitted uses and structures.
(1) Accessory uses.
(2) Fishing.
(3) General farming, provided no drainage, filling or dredging takes
place and no farm buildings are constructed.
(4) Harvesting of wild crops such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice,
berries, tree fruits, tree seeds, and sustained yield forestry.
(5) Hiking trails and bridle paths.
(6) Nonresident buildings used solely in conjunction with the raising of
waterfowl or fish.
(7) Public and private parks and picnic areas.
(8) Scenic, historic, scientific or wildlife preserves.
(9) Utilities such as but not restricted to telephone, telegraph and
power transmission lines.
B. Conditional uses and structures.
(1) Boathouses.
(2) Dams.
(3) Docks.
(4) Drainage.
(5) Dredging.
(6) Excavations for specified purposes.
(7) Artificial lakes and lagoons.
(8) Borrow pits.
(9) Topsoil or peat removal.
(10) Filling.
(11) Flowages.
(12) Grading.
(13) Nonresidential farm structures.
§ 660-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-136
1:899
(14) Piers.
(15) Ponds.
(16) Relocation of watercourses.
C. Lot size requirements.
(1) Nonresidential farm structures must have two acres with a onehundred-
foot width.
(2) Excavations for specified purposes must have a minimum lot size as
specified by the Plan Commission.
(3) Yard requirements. Excavations for specified purposes must have a
fifty-foot setback in all yards.
D. Building bulk limitations. All buildings shall not exceed 35 feet in height
and shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.30.
§ 660-136 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-136
1:900
ARTICLE VIII
Performance Standards
§ 660-137. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to indicate the requirements for exterior
lighting, erosion control, vibration, noise, glare and heat, fire and explosion,
air pollution and smoke, water quality, odors, radioactivity, electrical
disturbance and interference, chemical, asbestos, and other hazardous
materials storage, solar energy systems, and geothermal for all
development occurring within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
§ 660-138. Compliance in all zoning districts.
Any use established hereafter in any zoning district shall be so operated
as to comply with the hazard prevention performance standards set forth
in this article as well as state and federal regulations unless otherwise
specified.
§ 660-139. through § 660-141. (Reserved)
§ 660-142. Exterior lighting.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the spillover of light
and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in
the vicinity of a light source in order to promote traffic safety and to
prevent the creation of nuisances in all zoning districts.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all private
exterior lighting within the jurisdiction of this chapter, except for
lighting within public rights-of-way and/or lighting located on public
property.
C. Depiction on required design (BSO) plan. Any and all exterior lighting
shall be depicted as to its location, orientation and configuration on a
BSO plan required for the development of the subject property. (Refer
to § 660-205 of this chapter.)
D. Requirements.
(1) Orientation of fixture. All fixtures shall be ninety-degree downcast.
In no instance shall an exterior lighting fixture be oriented so that
the lighting element (or a transparent shield) is visible from a
property located within a residential zoning district. The use of
shielded luminaries and careful fixture placement is encouraged so
as to facilitate compliance with this requirement.
(2) Location. Light fixtures shall not be located within required buffer
yards. In no case shall a lighting fixture be located closer than
three feet to a property line in any district.
§ 660-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-142
1:901
(3) Flashing, flickering and other distracting lighting. Flashing,
flickering and/or other lighting which may distract motorists are
prohibited.
(4) Lamps, bulbs, and intensity of illumination:
(a) Lamps or bulbs. The use of metal halide lamps or bulbs shall be
prohibited except as allowed under Subsection D(4)(e) below.
The use of light-emitting diode (LED) type lighting shall not be
prohibited under this section.
(b) Minimum lighting standards. All areas designated on required
site plans for vehicular parking, loading, or circulation and
used for any such purpose after sunset shall provide artificial
illumination in such areas.
(c) Maximum allowable standards. The maximum allowable
illumination shall be 0.5 footcandle measured with a
photometer held vertically at a height of four feet zero inches
above grade, with its recording cell aimed towards the site
from the property line.
(d) Maximum average illumination. The maximum average on-site
lighting in nonresidential zoning districts shall be 2.4
footcandles (500 watts high-pressure sodium, 250 watts lowpressure
sodium). The maximum average on-site lighting in
residential zoning districts shall be 0.90 footcandles (185 watts
high-pressure sodium, 90 watts low-pressure sodium).
(e) The following exceptions shall be permitted:
[1] Outdoor recreation facilities and assembly areas.
Maximum average on-site lighting of 3.60 footcandles (750
watts metal halide or high-pressure sodium, 375 watts
low-pressure sodium). All events shall be scheduled so as
to complete all activity before or as near to 10:30 p.m. as
practical, but under no circumstances shall any
illumination of the playing field, court or track be
permitted after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude a scheduled
event that was in progress before 11:00 p.m. and
circumstances prevented concluding before 11:00 p.m.
[2] Gas station pump islands. Maximum average on-site
lighting of 25.0 footcandles shall be permitted. All underthe-
canopy fixtures shall be fully recessed. Only high- and
low-pressure sodium vapor lamps or bulbs shall be
permitted.
[3] Auto display lots. The use of metal halide lamps or bulbs
shall be permitted to illuminate vehicles for display. The
use of metal halide lamps or bulbs shall be prohibited
between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The
§ 660-142 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-142
1:902
§ 660-143. Erosion control.
maximum average on-site lighting shall be 25.0
footcandles.
(5) Ground-mounted lighting. All ground-mounted luminaries designed
or intended for purposes of illuminating buildings, signs, flagpoles,
or other on-site amenities shall be completely screened with
vegetative cover or other materials as approved under § 660-113 in
order to fully shield the light source from public view.
(6) Building lighting. All luminaries designed or intended for purposes
of lighting any building on the premises shall limit, to the greatest
extent possible, spill-over of light into the sky. Building-mounted
lighting shall be appropriately shielded to prevent glare.
(7) Fixture heights. The maximum fixture height in the RD, R1-4, R1-6,
R1-8, R2-8, R3-12, B2, B1, and HPO Districts shall be 15 feet as
measured from grade. The maximum fixture height in the PB, PI,
I1, I2, and PIO Districts shall be 20 feet or the ridgeline of the
building. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(8) Fixture base. All lighting fixtures shall be located on a base not to
exceed six inches above grade. Fixtures should be placed within
landscape islands and otherwise protected by curbing or placement
outside of the parking lot.
E. Nonconforming lighting. All lighting fixtures lawfully existing prior to
the effective date of this chapter shall be considered as legal
conforming uses and grandfathered fixtures. However, the replacement
or relocation of a grandfathered fixture shall result in a discontinuation
of such grandfathered status, and such replacement or relocated
lighting shall meet the requirements of this section. Moreover, any
grandfathered fixtures that direct light toward streets or fixtures in
parking lots that cause disability glare to motorists shall be shielded or
redirected so that the fixtures do not cause a potential safety hazard to
motorists.
F. Special events lighting. Any temporary or special events lighting which
is not in compliance with the requirements of this section shall secure a
temporary use permit from the City.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to preserve the natural
resources; to protect the quality of the waters of the state and the City;
and to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the people,
to the extent practicable by minimizing the amount of sediment and
other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from construction sites
to lakes, streams and wetlands.
B. Applicability of section. This section applies to land disturbing and land
developing activities on lands within the boundaries and jurisdiction of
§ 660-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-143
1:903
the City and the public and private lands subject to extraterritorial
review under Chapter 236, Wis. Stat. All state-funded or -conducted
construction is exempt from this section.
[Note: State-funded or -conducted construction must meet the
requirements contained in the "State Plan for the Control of
Construction Erosion and Stormwater Runoff" (State plan), which
contains similar requirements as contained in this model ordinance, as
a minimum.]
C. Design criteria, standards, and specifications for control measures. All
control measures required to comply with this section shall meet the
design criteria, standards and specifications for the control measures
based on accepted design criteria, standards and specifications
identified by the City Building Inspector.
D. Maintenance of control measures. All sedimentation basins and other
control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this section
shall be maintained by the applicant or subsequent landowner during
the period of land disturbance and land development of the site in a
satisfactory manner to ensure adequate performance and to prevent
nuisance conditions. Erosion controls shall be in place prior to landdisturbing
activity and shall be maintained until construction activities
are completed and vegetative cover is established.
E. Control of erosion and pollutants during land disturbance and
development.
(1) Applicability. This section applies to the following sites of land
development or land-disturbing activities:
(a) Those requiring a subdivision plat approval or the construction
of houses or commercial, industrial or institutional buildings
on lots of approved subdivision plats.
(b) Those requiring a certified survey approval or the construction
of houses or commercial, industrial or institutional buildings
on lots of approved certified surveys.
(c) Those involving grading, removal of protective ground cover or
vegetation, excavation, land filling or other land disturbing
activity affecting a surface area of 4,000 square feet or more.
(d) Those involving excavation or filling or a combination of
excavation and filling affecting 400 cubic yards or more of dirt,
sand or other excavation or fill material.
(e) Those involving street, highway, road, or bridge construction,
enlargement, relocation or reconstruction.
(f) Those involving the laying, repairing, replacing or enlarging of
an underground pipe or facility for a distance of 300 feet or
more.
§ 660-143 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-143
1:904
(Note: The above applicability criteria are specifically stated in
1983 Wisconsin Act 416 for inclusion in the model ordinance.
Utility companies responsible for energy repair work should
enter into a "memorandum of agreement" with the
administration authority clearly stating their responsibilities
if their activities may be included under any of the above
applicability criteria.)
(g) Those involving land disturbing activities associated with the
construction of boathouses.
(2) Erosion and other pollutant control requirements. The following
requirements shall be met on all sites described in Subsection E(1):
(a) Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated
by temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand
filters, upslope chambers, hydro-cyclones, swirl concentrators,
or other appropriate controls designed and used to remove
particles of 100 microns or greater for the highest dewatering
pumping rate. If the water is demonstrated to have no particles
of greater than 100 microns during dewatering operations,
then no control is needed before discharge, except as
determined by the City Building Inspector. Water may not be
discharged in a manner that caused erosion of the site or
receiving channels.
[Note: There are many ways to meet this particle size
performance objective, depending on the pumping rate. As an
example, if the pumping rate is very low (1 gal/min), then
an inclined or vertical enlargement pipe (about eight-inch
diameter for one gallon per minutes) several feet long would
be an adequate control device to restrict the discharge of 100
micron, and larger, particles. As the pumping rate increases,
then the "device" must be enlarged. At a moderate (100 gallons
per minute) pumping rate, a vertical section of corrugated
steel pipe, or concrete pipe section, or other small "tank"
(about 4 1/2 feet across for a 100 gallons per minute pumping
rate) several feet tall would be adequate. With these pipe
sections or small tanks, inlet baffles would be needed to
minimize turbulence. With very large pumping rates (10,000
gallons per minute), sediment basins (about 35 feet in diameter
for a pumping rate of 10,000 gallons per minute) at least three
feet in depth with a simple (but adequately sized) pipe outlet
would be needed. More sophisticated control devices (such
as swirl concentrators or hydro-cyclones) could be specifically
fabricated that would generally be smaller than the simple
sedimentation devices described above, but they would not be
required.]
(b) Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building
materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes,
§ 660-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-143
1:905
wastewater, toxic materials, or hazardous materials) shall be
properly disposed and not allowed to be carried by runoff into
a receiving channel or storm sewer system.
(c) Tracking. Each site shall have gravel roads, access drives and
parking areas of sufficient width and length to prevent
sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways.
Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be
removed by street cleaning (not flushing) before the end of
each workday.
(d) Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets shall be protected
with a straw bale, filter fabric, or equivalent barrier meeting
accepted design criteria, standards and specifications.
(e) Site erosion control. The following criteria (Subsection
E(2)(e)[1] through [4]) apply only to land development or landdisturbing
activities that result in runoff leaving the site:
[1] Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through
the site shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if
practical. Otherwise, the channel shall be protected as
described below in Subsection E(2)(e)[3]. Sheet flow
runoff from adjacent areas greater than 10,000 square feet
in area shall also be diverted around disturbed areas
unless shown to have resultant runoff velocities of less
than 0.5 feet per second across the disturbed area for the
set of one year design storms. Diverted runoff shall be
conveyed in a manner that will not erode the conveyance
and receiving channels. [Note: Natural Resources
Conservation Service guidelines for allowable velocities in
different types of channels should be followed.]
[2] All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical
sequence to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any
one time.
[3] Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site shall be
controlled by meeting either Subsection E(2)(e)[3][a] and
[b] or Subsection E(2)(e)[3][a] and [c].
[a] All disturbed ground left inactive for seven or more
days shall be stabilized by seeding or sod (only
available prior to September 15) or by mulching or
covering, or other equivalent control measure.
[b] For sites with more than 10 acres disturbed at one
time, or if a channel originates in the disturbed area,
one or more sedimentation basins shall be
constructed. Each sedimentation basin shall have a
surface area of at least 1% of the area draining to the
basin and at least three feet of depth and constructed
§ 660-143 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-143
1:906
§ 660-144. through § 660-145. (Reserved)
§ 660-146. Vibrations.
in accordance with accepted design specifications.
Sediment shall be removed to maintain a depth of
three feet. The basin shall be designed to trap
sediment greater than 15 microns in size, based on the
set of one-year design storms having durations from
0.5 to 24 hours. The basin discharge rate shall also
be sufficiently low as to not cause erosion along the
discharge channel or the receiving water.
[c] For sites with less than 10 acres disturbed at one time,
filter fences, straw bales, or equivalent control
measures shall be placed along all sideslope and
downslope sides of the site. If a channel or area of
concentrated runoff passes through the site, filter
fences shall be placed along the channel edges to
reduce sediment reaching the channel.
[4] Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than ten
cubic yards of material should not be located with a
downslope drainage length of less than 25 feet to a
roadway or drainage channel. If remaining for more than
seven days, they shall be stabilized by mulching,
vegetative cover, tarps or other means. Erosion from piles
which will be in existence for less than seven days shall be
controlled by placing straw bales or filter fence barriers
around the pile. In-street utility repair or construction soil
or dirt storage piles located closer than 25 feet of roadway
or drainage channel must be covered with tarps or suitable
alternative control if exposed for more than seven days,
and the storm drain inlets must be protected with straw
bale or other appropriate filtering barriers.
A. Measurement. Earthborne vibrations are measured with a seismograph
or accelerometer and are measured in three mutually perpendicular
directions (one vertical and two horizontal). Vibration shall be
measured at the site boundary lines. All uses shall conform to the
standards set forth in this section.
B. Permitted steady state vibration displacement. Except temporary
construction activities and agricultural activities, no activity shall cause
or create a displacement greater than the permitted steady state
vibration displacement for the frequencies set forth in Table 8.1.
§ 660-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-146
1:907
§ 660-147. Noise.
Table 8.1: Maximum Permitted Steady State Vibration
Displacement
Frequency
(cycle per second)
Vibration Displacement
(inches)
10 and below 0.0008
10 to 20 0.0005
20 to 30 0.0003
30 to 40 0.0002
40 and over 0.0001
C. Impact vibrations. For impact vibrations, the maximum permitted
vibration displacement shall be twice that permitted for steady state
vibrations.
D. Temporary construction activities exempt from requirements.
Vibrations resulting from temporary construction activity that occurs
between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall be exempt from the requirements
of this section if steady state vibrations and impact vibrations shall not
exceed twice the permitted displacement for permanent operations.
E. Prohibition on vibrations beyond property boundaries. Except
temporary construction activities, no activity shall be permitted which
creates a vibration beyond the boundaries of the site of the activity
sufficient to cause a displacement of 0.003 inch.
F. Public nuisance prohibited. In no case shall vibrations be allowed to
create a public nuisance or hazard beyond the property boundaries.
A. Measurement of noise. Noise shall be measured using a sound level
meter meeting the standards of the American National Standards
Institute's (ANSI S1.4-1983, as amended) "American Standard
Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters." The instrument
shall be set to the A-weighted filter response scale and the meter to the
slow response. Measurements shall be conducted in accord with ANSI
S1.2-1962 "American Standard Method for the Physical Measurement
of Sound." Measurements of sound may be made at any point along a
district boundary or site boundary line of the noise-generating property.
For measuring impact sounds, however, the impact sound shall be
measured using the fast response of the sound level meter. Traffic,
aircraft, and other background noises must not be considered in
measuring noise levels unless the background noise is a part of the
noise being measured.
B. Exemptions from standards of this section. Noises exempt from the
requirements of this section include the following:
§ 660-146 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-147
1:908
(1) Noises of vehicles to the standard noise reduction of
manufacturer's specifications.
(2) Home appliances.
(3) Chain saws, lawn mowers, and snow blowers in private use (not
commercial repair services).
(4) Occasionally used safety signals, warning and emergency signals,
and emergency pressure-relief valves.
(5) Unamplified human voice.
(6) Bells or chimes.
(7) Temporary construction operations.
C. Maximum permitted sound levels in all zoning districts. At no point
either on the boundary of a zoning district or site boundary line shall
the sound level of a use exceed the decibel level shown in Table 8.2 for
the zoning districts indicated.
D. Increases to maximum permitted sound levels. The sound levels set
forth in Table 8.2 may be exceeded by 10 dBA for a single period, not to
exceed 15 dBA in any one day except in the PB, PI, I1, I2, and PDD
(business and industrial uses only) Districts.
E. Impact noises. For impact noises, the sound levels set forth in Table 8.2
may be increased by 10 dBA, in the PB, PI, I1, I2, and Industrial PUD
Districts.
Table 8.2: Maximum Permitted Sound Levels in dBA by Zoning
District
Zoning District
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
(dBA)
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
(dBA)
All Residential and B2
Districts
67 67
B1 and PB Districts 67 65
PI and I1 District 70 65
I2 District 75 65
HPO and PIO Districts As per underlying zoning district
WPO, SWO, FPO, CO
Districts
55 55
F. Creation of excessive noise in areas adjacent to noise-sensitive areas
prohibited. The creation of, or causing the creation of, any sound
adjacent to any noise-sensitive area, containing a hospital, nursing
home, school, court or other designated area, to exceed the specified
§ 660-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-147
1:909
land use noise standards set forth in this section and to interfere with
the functions of such activity or unreasonably annoy the occupants in
the activity, is prohibited, if conspicuous signs are displayed indicating
the presence of the noise-sensitive area.
G. Occasional outdoor activities exempted. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows,
and sporting and entertainment events (excluding regularly scheduled
school athletic events), provided the events are conducted pursuant to
any permits issued by the City of Lake Mills concerning the event.
H. Interstate highway noise. The purpose of these regulations is to guide
the development of noise-sensitive land uses (such as homes, schools
and recreational areas) abutting to highway corridors and to ensure
that any such development that does occur is planned to mitigate the
adverse effects of noise. The standards contained are based on the
requirements for development of the best possible urban environment
outlined by the American Society of Civil Engineers, American Public
Health Association, National Recreational Association, American
Association of State Highway Officials, Institute of Transportation
Engineers, Federal Emergency Management Administration, American
Society of Planning Officials Reports, Wisconsin Administrative Code,
Trans 405, and the Federal Highway Administration's Procedures for
Abatement of Highway Traffic Noise and Construction Noise, Title 23,
CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter H, Part 772. In general, residential
subdivisions will be encouraged to provide generous distances between
building sites and existing industries and between building sites and
high capacity streets, highways, expressways, and freeways to act as
buffers against noise and noxious fumes. Residential subdivisions will
also be discouraged from locating too close to existing or proposed
airport approach zones.
(1) General provisions.
(a) These provisions shall apply to unplatted lands abutting to any
existing state or federal expressway or freeway for which a
preliminary plat approval was not previously granted. These
provisions shall not apply to structures existing at the time of
adoption of this section.
(b) Prior to approval of any preliminary plat, final plat or
commencement or construction of any structure, every
application for approval shall be submitted in writing to the
Zoning Administrator by the owner of the land on which the
structure is proposed to be constructed and shall contain the
following information:
[1] Identification of the land on which the construction is
proposed;
[2] The section under which approval is requested;
§ 660-147 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-147
1:910
[3] The information and data supporting the claim that the
appropriate requirements shall be met including specific
enumerations that the Federal Highway Administration's
Procedures for Abatement of Highway Traffic Noise and
Construction Noise, Title 23, CFR Chapter I, Subchapter
H, Part 772 provisions, and Ch. Trans 405, Wis. Adm.
Code, shall be met and any other information which the
City may require.
[4] Certification by an engineering or other qualified testing
firm that hourly traffic sound levels, Leq(h) as hereinafter
indicated, are within permissible levels or that appropriate
sound attenuation measures are incorporated into the
design and construction of any structures to satisfy the
highway noise provisions within this section.
(c) In addition to the requirements contained in Subsection
H(1)(b)[3] above, the application shall also contain the
following information as well as any other information bearing
on the approval:
[1] The existing maximum hourly traffic sound level, Leq(h),
for a representative sample of locations, measured in
accordance with guidelines presented in "Sound
Procedures for Measuring Highway Noise: Final Report,"
August 1981, United States Department of Transportation,
Federal Highway Administration, Arlington, VA, or
modeled according to a methodology in the FHWA
Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model (Report No.
FHWA-RD-77-108);
[2] The projected future Leq(h) at the site resulting from
future traffic increases; and
[3] Where applicable, plans for sound attenuation measures
on the site and/or of the structure proposed to be built and
the amount of sound attenuation anticipated as a result of
these measures.
(2) Construction restrictions for habitable and institutional structures.
(a) New residential or institutional structures approved for
construction, where the exterior hourly traffic sound level
Leq(h) within a proposed outdoor living area is projected to be
equal to or in excess of 67 dBA upon completion of the
structure, should evaluate opportunities to mitigate noise
levels.
(b) Prior to issuance of any building permit for any structure
regulated pursuant to this subsection, the City may require
submission of plans and specifications to WisDOT for review.
The City or WisDOT may conduct such inspections and
§ 660-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-147
1:911
§ 660-148. Glare.
measurements as are necessary to ensure the proper
implementation of traffic sound mitigation measures.
(3) Remedies. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section
shall invalidate purported transfers of titles at the option of the
purchaser in accordance with provisions of § 236.31(3), Wis. Stats.
Building permits may also be refused for construction on sites
created in violation of these requirements.
A. Measurement of glare. Glare illumination levels shall be measured with
a photoelectric photometer having a spectral response similar to that of
the human eye, using the standard spectral luminous efficiency curve
adopted by the International Commission on Illumination. Illumination
levels shall be measured in footcandles with a direct-reading, portable
light meter. The meter shall have a color and cosine-corrected sensor
with multiple scales and shall read within an accuracy of plus or minus
5%. It shall have been tested, calibrated, and certified by an
independent commercial photometric laboratory or the manufacturer
within one year of the date of use.
B. Glare standards. All uses shall conform to the following minimum
standards:
(1) Maximum illumination increase. Any operation or activity
producing glare shall be conducted so that direct or indirect
illumination from the source of light shall not cause an illumination
increase greater than 0.2 footcandle as measured at a location
beyond the site boundary line as measured during the day or at
night.
(2) Flickering and intrinsically bright sources of illumination.
Flickering and intrinsically bright sources of illumination, even if
meeting the standard set forth in Subsection B(1) above, shall be
controlled by luminaire shielding or aiming the light source away
from roads and nearby sites. Exposed sources of light shall be
shielded so as not to exceed the outdoor lighting standards set
forth in § 660-142.
(3) Reflective materials that cause glare prohibited. Reflective roofs,
sidings, and building surfaces including reflective glass shall not be
permitted except solar heating devices.
C. Exceptions. Solar energy systems regulated by Wis. Stats. § 66.0235
shall be entitled to the protection of its provisions.
D. Declaration of public nuisance. Any operation producing intense glare
shall be done within a completely enclosed building and effectively
screened as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along property
boundaries.
§ 660-147 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-149
1:912
§ 660-149. Heat.
The following standards shall apply to heat and humidity.
§ 660-150. Fires and explosions.
Fire and explosive hazards shall be controlled as set forth in this section.
All activities involving the manufacturing, utilization, processing or storage
of inflammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate
safety devices against the hazards of fire and explosion and with adequate
firefighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices that are standard in
the industry. All such activities shall be in compliance with Wisconsin State
Statutes, applicable Wisconsin Administrative Codes and Municipal Codes
of the City of Lake Mills. When such activities are not specifically governed
by law, the most current standards of NFPA (National Fire Code Standards)
shall apply.
A. Location. Any activity producing intense heat shall be conducted within
an enclosed building as not to raise the temperature of the air beyond
the site boundary line.
B. Increases in humidity in the form of steam or moist air from cooling
towers or equipment. Increases in humidity in the form of steam or
moist air from cooling towers or equipment shall be controlled so that
they do not create an ice hazard. Cooling towers shall be controlled by
either reheating the plume or using a closed system.
C. Standards. There shall be no transmission of heat or heated air so as to
be discernible (by a healthy observer such as the Zoning Enforcement
Officer or a designee) at the lot line.
D. Declaration of public nuisance. Any operation producing intense heat or
humidity shall be done within a completely enclosed building and
effectively screened as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along
property boundaries.
A. Storage or manufacture of materials or products that decompose by
detonation not permitted. Activities involving the storage or
manufacture of materials or products that decompose by detonation are
not permitted unless licensed by the City of Lake Mills. If such activities
are permitted by City of Lake Mills license, such activities shall take
place exclusively in the PI, I1, I2, or Industrial PUD Districts.
B. Storage, use, or manufacture of materials ranging from free to active
burning may be permitted with conditions. The storage, use, or
manufacture of materials ranging from free to active burning, as
determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, is permitted in the I2
District (storage only in the I1 District, and may be permitted by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer in the PI District or an industrial PDD
District) under the following conditions:
§ 660-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-150
1:913
§ 660-151. through § 660-155. (Reserved)
(1) Location. All storage, use, or manufacture of such materials or
products shall be within completely enclosed buildings or
structures having noncombustible exterior walls.
(2) Setbacks and fire protection. All materials shall be set back a
minimum of 400 feet from any residential or commercial district or
use, except that this standard shall not apply to the storage or
usage of liquefied petroleum or natural gas for normal residential
or business purposes. All activities and storage of flammable and
explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate
safety and firefighting devices in accordance with all fire
prevention codes of the National Fire Protection Association, the
State of Wisconsin, and this chapter.
(3) Noncombustible to moderate burning materials. The storage, use,
or manufacture of materials ranging from noncombustible to
moderate burning, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, is permitted.
(4) Materials or products that produce flammable or explosive vapors.
Materials or products that produce flammable or explosive vapors
or gases under ordinary weather temperatures shall not be
permitted, except the following, which are permitted:
(a) Materials required for emergency or standby equipment.
(b) Materials used in secondary processes that are auxiliary to a
principal operation, such as paint-spraying of finished
products.
(c) Flammable liquids and oils stored, sold, and used with the
operation of an automobile service station and customarily
required or used in such operation.
(5) Manufacture, possession, storage, transportation, and use of
hazardous materials. All manufacture, possession, storage,
transportation, and use of hazardous materials that include
explosives and blasting agents, flammable and combustible liquids,
liquefied petroleum gas, and hazardous chemicals shall be required
to comply with all applicable state and local fire codes or as set
forth in the most current edition of the NFPA Fire Protection
Handbook, as amended, whichever is stricter.
(6) No storage allowed within one-hundred-year recurrence interval
floodplain. Any permitted structural storage facilities for
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids and
gases, or other toxic materials that could be hazardous to public
health or safety, shall be located at elevations a minimum of four
feet above the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood
elevation.
§ 660-150 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-156
1:914
§ 660-156. Air pollution, contaminants, and smoke.
A. Smoke and particulate matter. The provisions of Subsection A(1) and (2)
below shall not apply in the case of an equipment breakdown that
makes compliance not reasonably possible, and shall not apply to
residential interior fireplaces, to home barbecues and fire pits,
campfires on legal campgrounds, and to burning incidental to
agricultural operations for clearing land, but not for waste disposal.
(1) Measurement of smoke emissions. Smoke emissions shall be
measured by using the Ringelmann Chart, as adopted and
published by the United States Department of the Interior, Bureau
of Mines Information Circular 8333, May 1967, on which are
illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in estimating the lightobscuring
capacity of smoke. All uses shall conform with the
following standard. The density of smoke shall be measured at the
point of emission except, when the point of emission cannot be
readily observed, it may be measured at an observable point on the
plume nearest the point of emission.
(2) Established requirements not to be exceeded. No person or activity
shall emit any fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists, or gases in such
quantities to substantially contribute to exceeding the established
requirements of the City of Lake Mills, Jefferson County, State of
Wisconsin, or federal air pollution standards set forth by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency. In case of conflict, the
most restrictive requirements shall govern.
(3) Maximum amount of particulate matter on a single site. Emission of
particulate matter from all sources shall be included in the
maximum amount permitted for a single site as prescribed by the
requirements of the agencies and regulations cited in Subsection
A(2) above.
(4) Wind-borne particulate matter. Emission of particulate matter from
materials or products subject to becoming wind-borne from such
sources as storage areas, yards, roads, and so forth, within lot
boundaries, shall be kept to a minimum by landscaping, paving,
wetting, or other means not violating any other applicable laws or
regulations to render the surface wind-resistant.
(5) Maximum smoke units. No stack shall emit more than 10 smoke
units during any one hour, nor shall smoke of a density greater than
Ringelmann No. 2 be emitted, if during a single one-hour period in
each twenty-four-hour day, each stack may emit up to 20 smoke
units when blowing soot or cleaning fires, and during such cleaning
of fires, smoke of a density of Ringelmann No. 3 may be emitted,
but for not more than four minutes each period except a plume
consisting entirely of condensed steam.
(6) Declaration of public nuisance. In addition to the performance
standards specified herein, the emission of smoke or particulate
§ 660-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-156
1:915
§ 660-157. Water quality protection.
matter in such manner or quantity as to be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
B. Toxic and noxious matter. All uses shall conform with the following
standards:
(1) Ambient air quality standards. The ambient air quality standards of
the State of Wisconsin and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, or any other federal agency having jurisdiction
shall limit the release of airborne toxic and noxious materials. In
case of conflict, the most restrictive requirements shall govern.
(2) Toxic materials not included in ambient air quality standards. When
toxic materials are not included in the ambient air quality
standards of the State of Wisconsin, the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or any other federal agency, the
release of such materials shall not exceed 1/40 of the threshold
limit value across site boundary lines of those toxic materials
currently listed in the "Threshold Limit Values" adopted by the
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists.
Unless otherwise stated, the measurement of all toxic and noxious
matter shall be at ground level or habitable elevation, and shall be
the average of a twenty-four-hour sampling period. The City of
Lake Mills may request that an applicant submit a statement from
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that the proposed
levels of toxic matter to be released will not result in any hazard to
human life or health or to wildlife.
(3) Discharge across property boundaries prohibited. No use on any
property shall discharge across the boundaries of said property
toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental
to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or
cause injury or damage to other property or business.
A. General water quality standards. No activity shall locate, store,
discharge, or permit the discharge of any treated, untreated, or
inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid materials of such nature,
quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or temperature that might run off,
seep, percolate, or wash into surface or subsurface waters to
contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters or cause nuisances such as
objectionable shore deposits, floating or submerged debris, oil or scum,
color, odor, taste, or unsightliness or be harmful to human, animal,
plant, or aquatic life.
B. Minimum state requirements to be met. No activity shall withdraw or
discharge any liquid or solid materials to exceed, or contribute toward
the exceeding of, the minimum standards set forth in Subsection A,
above, and those other standards and the application of those standards
§ 660-156 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-157
1:916
§ 660-158. Odor.
This section is applicable to all zoning districts and uses.
§ 660-159. Radioactivity.
All uses shall conform to the following specified standards concerning
radioactivity:
set forth in Chapter NR 102 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, as
amended.
A. Generation of odor. Any use in any district may generate any odor that
reaches the "odor threshold concentration" or does not exceed the
lowest amount set forth in Table III, "Odor Thresholds," of Chapter 5,
"Physiological Effects," of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual of the
Manufacturing Chemists' Association, according to the latest edition of
such tables for the compounds therein described. For compounds not
described in Table III, odor thresholds may be established by methods
shown in Chapter 5 of the manual. No odor shall be permitted at any lot
line exceeding the amount determined by the application of such
methods as measured at:
(1) Two or more uses occupying a single lot or parcel of land. The
outside boundary of the immediate space occupied by the use
generating the odor.
(2) Single use lot or parcel of land. The lot line of the use generating
the odor if said use is the only use on the lot.
B. Public nuisance or hazard prohibited. The emission of odorous matter
from any property in such concentrations at any point along the
boundaries of said property or in such concentrations as to create a
public nuisance or hazard beyond such boundaries is prohibited.
A. Maximum concentrations of radioactivity permitted. The maximum
permissible concentrations of radioactivity that can be released shall be
subject to the regulations of the State of Wisconsin, the United States
Atomic Energy Commission, and any other federal agency having
jurisdiction. In the case of conflict, the most restrictive requirements
shall govern.
B. Storage of radioactive materials. Radioactive materials shall be stored
in fireproof containers made of steel and concrete, but shall not be
stored in containers made of lead or other low-melting metals or alloys
unless completely encased in steel.
C. Medical sources of radiation residues. Medical sources of radiation
residues, such as X-ray machines, gamma and neutron sources, and
pharmaceutical isotopes used for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes,
shall be permitted when located within a hospital, clinic, medical or
dental office, or medical research facility. Other uses of radioactive
§ 660-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-159
1:917
§ 660-160. Electrical disturbance, interference, and
electromagnetic fields.
§ 660-161. Chemical, asbestos, and other hazardous material
storage.
The following standards shall apply to chemical, asbestos, or other
hazardous materials or wastes use and/or storage:
materials shall be limited to measuring in X-ray and similar apparatus,
and concerning the processing and preservation of food.
A. No use, activity, or process is allowed which produces electric and/or
magnetic fields or radiation with adverse effects. In all zoning districts,
no use, activity, or process shall be conducted which produces electric
and/or magnetic fields or radiation that adversely affects public health,
safety, and welfare, including but not limited to interference with
normal radio, telephone, or television reception from off the premises
where the activity or process is conducted or the use is located.
Applicable rules of the FCC, other federal agencies, and the State of
Wisconsin shall apply.
B. Minimum standards for electromagnetic radiation. Where electrical
systems are planned to be established which are either equal to or
exceed a level of electromagnetic radiation of 60 hertz (Hz), the
following standards shall be applicable:
(1) Environmental and health assessment reports required.
Environmental and health assessment reports of such proposed
systems shall be prepared at the expense of the developer of such
systems. An electromagnetic field mitigation plan shall be a
component of all such reports.
(2) Location of residential land uses and places of assembly. No
residential land uses or places of assembly shall be allowed to be
sited in areas exposed to four or more milligauss of 60 hertz (Hz)
electromagnetic fields.
A. Location. Any activity involving chemical, asbestos, or other hazardous
materials or wastes use or storage shall be conducted within an
enclosed building.
B. Transfer off parcel by natural causes or forces prohibited. No chemical,
asbestos, or other hazardous materials or wastes shall be deposited
upon a parcel in any zoning district in such form or manner that they
may be transferred off the parcel by natural causes or forces.
C. Outdoor storage prohibited. In all zoning districts no chemical,
asbestos, or other hazardous materials or wastes that might cause
fumes, dust, or which are a fire hazard or which may be edible by or
otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors.
§ 660-159 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-161
1:918
§ 660-162. through § 660-165. (Reserved)
§ 660-166. Small wind energy conversion systems.
Small wind energy conversion systems (SWECS) shall be subject to the
following regulations to preserve and protect public health and safety
without significantly increasing the cost or decreasing the efficiency of a
small wind energy system. No person shall construct or operate a SWECS
without having fully complied with the provisions of this section.
D. Public nuisance prohibited. In no zoning district shall the storage of
chemical, asbestos, or other hazardous materials or wastes be allowed
to create a public nuisance or hazard beyond the property boundaries.
E. Compliance with all fire and building codes for hazardous materials use
and storage. In all zoning districts uses involving the storage of
chemicals, asbestos, or other hazardous materials or wastes shall be
designed to comply with all fire and building codes for the hazardous
materials use and storage, and adequate precautions using the best
available technology shall be taken to protect against negative off-site
impacts of a hazardous materials release.
F. Hazardous materials impact analysis required. In all zoning districts
where chemical, asbestos, or other hazardous materials or wastes are
used or stored, a hazardous materials impact analysis shall be required
to determine potential off-site impacts and required mitigation
precautions. Said hazardous materials impact analysis shall be
submitted to the Plan Commission for its review and consideration.
A. Permits required.
(1) A building/zoning permit shall be obtained to allow construction of
a SWECS.
(2) A SWECS permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Enforcement
Officer for the construction of all SWECS.
B. Application requirements. An application for a permit to build a small
wind energy system shall include the following:
(1) Property lines and physical dimensions of the property of the
proposed construction site.
(2) Proposed location of the SWECS.
(3) Location and description of all structures located on the property
where the SWECS site is proposed.
(4) Location of all aboveground utility lines within a radius equal to
two times the height of the proposed SWECS.
(5) Location of all underground utility lines on the property where a
SWECS site is proposed.
§ 660-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-166
1:919
(6) Dimensional representation of the structural components of the
tower construction including the base and footings.
(7) Schematic of electrical systems associated with the SWECS,
including all existing and proposed electrical connections.
(8) Manufacturer's specifications and installation and operation
instructions or specific SWECS design information, including
model and rotor diameter.
(9) Certification by a registered professional engineer that the tower
design is sufficient to withstand wind load requirements for
structure as defined by the Wisconsin Building Code.
C. General performance standards. A SWECS shall be permitted as a
conditional use in all zoning districts subject to the following
requirements:
(1) Number. Only one SWECS shall be permitted per property
regardless of the number of dwelling units or tenants.
(2) Location.
(a) A SWECS shall be prohibited from being located in front of the
building setback line or in front of the principal building on a
property.
(b) SWECS setback shall comply with the yard areas established
for principal structures for each zoning district.
(c) The SWECS shall be located such that its fall zone plus five feet
will be located entirely on the permitted property in the event
of collapse or other structural failure.
(3) Tower construction. All towers for a SWECS shall be a single
monopole type constructed without guy wires or ground anchors.
Guyed towers and lattice towers are expressly prohibited. All
towers shall be structurally designed to withstand 100 mph winds
and handle loads imparted.
(4) Height, blade length, turbine capacity. The total height of a SWECS
shall be measured as the vertical distance from ground level to the
tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its highest point.
The SWECS shall comply with the following table:
§ 660-166 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-166
1:920
Table 8.3: Maximum Height, Blade Length, and Turbine
Capacity
Use
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Blade
Length
(feet)
Maximum
Nameplate
Capacity
Single-family
residential
35 4 1,000 w
Two-family
residential
35 4 1,500 w
Multiple-family
residential
40 6 3,000 w
Commercial 50 8 5 kW
Institutional 75 10 10 kW
Manufacturing 75 10 10 kW
(5) Blades and clearance. Protected blades shall be used if a SWECS is
installed on a rooftop or if located within 12 feet of a structure. A
minimum vertical blade clearance of 15 feet shall be required from
grade or rooftops.
(6) Access. All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall
be labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access. The tower
shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a
ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of
eight feet above the ground.
(7) Electrical wires. SWECS including tower shall comply with all
applicable state construction and electrical codes. All electrical
wires associated with a SWECS, other than wires necessary to
connect the wind generator to the tower wiring, the tower wiring to
the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires shall be
located underground. All wires and connections shall be wholly
located on the subjects property, and in no case shall connections
to multiple detached structures be permitted.
(8) Lighting. A wind tower and generator shall not be artificially
illuminated unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration.
(9) Appearance, color, and finish. The wind generator and tower shall
remain painted or finished the color or finish that was originally
applied by the manufacturer, unless approved in the building
permit. Generally acceptable colors shall be muted or understated
colors that are unobtrusive to surrounding properties, such as
galvanized metal or earth tones.
§ 660-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-166
1:921
(10) Signs. All signs, other than the manufacturer's or installer's
identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification
on a wind generator, tower, building, or other structure associated
with a small wind energy system visible from any public road shall
be prohibited.
(11) Noise and shadow flicker.
(a) Audible sound from a SWECS shall not exceed 25 dBA in
residential districts or 50 dBA in all other districts, as
measured at the exterior of any occupied building on an
adjacent or neighboring property. Methods for measuring and
reporting acoustic emissions from wind turbines and the wind
energy facility shall be equal to or exceed the minimum
standards for precision described in American Wind Energy
Association Standard 2.1 - 1989, titled "Procedures for the
Measurement and Reporting of Acoustic Emissions from Wind
Turbine Generation Systems Volume I: First Tier."
(b) Low-frequency harmonics. The SWECS shall be designed to
avoid emitting low-frequency harmonics that can be disruptive
to neighboring properties.
(c) The property owner and operator shall make reasonable efforts
to minimize shadow flicker to any occupied building on an
adjacent or neighboring property.
(12) Utility notification and interconnection. SWECS that connect to the
electric utility shall comply with the Wisconsin Distributed
Generation Interconnection Standard.
(13) Compliance with FAA regulations. SWECS must comply with
applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for
installations close to airports/airstrips. If lighting is required by the
FAA, a dual-mode fixture/lamp shall be installed.
(14) Required safety features.
(a) All SWECS shall be designed with an automatic overspeed
control to render the system inoperable when winds are
blowing in excess of the speeds for which the machine is
designed.
(b) All SWECS shall have a manually operable method to render
the system inoperable in the event of a structural or
mechanical failure of any part of the system including the
automatic overspeed control.
(c) All SWECS shall be designed with an automatic control to
render the system inoperable in case of loss of utility power to
prevent the SWECS from supplying power to a de-energized
electrical distribution system.
§ 660-166 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-166
1:922
§ 660-167. Solar energy systems (SES).
(15) Any SWECS thereof declared to be unsafe by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or
abandonment is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall
be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the Municipal Code.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to support the use of solar
energy systems and to ensure that such systems are constructed and
installed in a manner that protects public and property owner safety.
B. Permits.
(1) Zoning permit. A zoning permit shall not be required for the
installation or construction of a SES.
(2) Building permit. A building permit issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall be obtained prior to construction of a
SES to ensure compliance with the International Building Code or
with Chapters 20 to 25 of the Unified Dwelling Code.
(3) Plumbing permit. A plumbing permit issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall be obtained prior to construction of a
SES to ensure compliance with Chs. 381 to 387of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(4) Electrical permit. An electrical permit issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall be obtained prior to construction of a
SES to ensure compliance with Ch. SPS 316 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code and the National Electrical Code.
C. Application requirements. A petition to construct or install a solar
energy system shall include the following:
(1) Location of all underground utility lines on the property where a
SES site is proposed.
(2) Dimensional representation of the structural components of the
supports or tower construction, including the base and footings.
(3) Schematic of electrical systems associated with the SES including
all existing and proposed electrical connections.
(4) Manufacturer's specifications and installation and operation
instructions or specific photovoltaic design information, including
model and installation instructions.
(5) Certification by a registered professional engineer or structural
engineer that the SES design is sufficient to withstand wind load
requirements for structure as defined in all applicable Wisconsin
building codes.
§ 660-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-167
1:923
§ 660-168. Geothermal.
D. General performance standards. All SESs shall be subject to the
following requirements to ensure public safety:
(1) Support or tower construction. Guyed or lattice towers or supports
are expressly prohibited. All towers and supports shall be
structurally designed to withstand 100 mph winds and handle loads
imparted.
(2) Access. All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall
be labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(3) Electrical wires. All electrical wires associated with a SES, other
than wires necessary to connect the photovoltaic to the support or
tower wiring, the support or tower wiring to a disconnect junction
box, and the grounding wires shall be located underground. All
wires and connections shall be wholly located on the subjects
property.
(4) Utility notification and interconnection. SESs that connect to the
electric utility shall comply with the Wisconsin Distributed
Generation Interconnection Standard.
(5) Required safety features.
(a) All SESs shall have a manually operable method to render the
system inoperable in the event of a structural or mechanical
failure of any part of the system.
(b) All SESs shall be designed with an automatic control to render
the system inoperable in case of loss of utility power to prevent
the SES from supplying power to a de-energized electrical
distribution system.
(c) Any SES thereof declared to be unsafe by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or
abandonment is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal
in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Municipal
Code.
A. Purpose. The City of Lake Mills recognizes the environmental benefits
associated with the use of geothermal/ground source heat pump
(GSHP) systems for heating and cooling. GSHP systems offer the
benefit of reduced generation of air pollution (including greenhouse
gases) in comparison with conventional heating and cooling systems.
The potential environmental and human health risks associated with an
accidental release of the GSHP fluids that are permitted under this
section are relatively low. The main goal of these guidelines is to have
GSHP wells and systems sited in a manner that will not adversely affect
§ 660-167 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-168
1:924
abutting properties and that are installed in a manner that will not
provide potential contaminant pathways that would allow surface
runoff to enter groundwater aquifers or the transfer of natural or
man-made contamination between two different aquifers or between
aquifers and surface water bodies. An additional goal of these
guidelines is to minimize the potential for subsurface system leaks.
B. Types of systems and typical arrangement.
(1) Closed-loop system: horizontal. Horizontal ground source heat
pump installation is generally most cost-effective for residential
installations, particularly for new construction where sufficient
land is available. It requires trenches at least four feet deep. The
most common layouts either use two pipes, one buried at six feet,
and the other at four feet, or two pipes placed side-by-side at five
feet in the ground in a two-foot wide trench. The method of looping
pipe allows more pipe in a shorter trench, which cuts down on
installation costs and makes horizontal installation possible in
areas it would not be with conventional horizontal applications.
(2) Closed loop system: vertical. Vertical systems are often used for
large commercial buildings and schools because the land area
required for horizontal loops would be prohibitive. Vertical loops
are also used where the soil is too shallow for trenching, and they
minimize the disturbance to existing landscaping. For a vertical
system, holes (approximately four inches in diameter) are drilled
about 20 feet apart and 100 feet to 400 feet deep. Into these holes
go two pipes that are connected at the bottom with a U-bend to
form a loop. The vertical loops are connected with horizontal pipe
(i.e., manifold), placed in trenches, and connected to the heat pump
in the building.
(3) Closed loop system: pond/lake. The coils are placed in an open
water source (pond or lake) that meets minimum volume, depth,
and quality criteria. A supply line pipe is run underground from the
building to the water source and coiled into circles at least eight
feet under the surface to prevent freezing.
(4) Open-loop system. This system uses a well or surface water body,
such as a pond or lake, as the heat exchange fluid that circulates
directly through the ground source heat pump system. Once the
water has circulated through the system, it returns to the ground
through the well, a recharge well, or surface discharge. This option
is only practical where there is an adequate supply of relatively
clean water, and all regulations regarding groundwater discharge
are met.
C. Prohibitions. GSHP wells or systems shall not be located, constructed,
or operated in a manner that will cause further degradation of aquifers,
wetlands, or surface water bodies.
§ 660-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-168
1:925
D. Underground injection control requirements. The federal Underground
Injection Control (UIC) Program regulates every injection of fluid into
the subsurface.
(1) USEPA. All wells and systems shall comply with the regulations
outlined in 40 CFR 144.26.
(2) WDNR. All wells and systems shall comply with the regulations
outlined in Wisconsin Administrative Code Ch. NR 815.
E. Construction.
(1) Plan submittal. The owner/operator/installer of the GSHP system
shall submit to the City a BSO plan and comply with the regulations
outlined in § 660-205. All construction plans must be designed and
stamped by a professional engineer licensed in the State of
Wisconsin or an individual that is certified by the International
Ground Source Heat Pump Association (IGSHPA).
(2) Required permits/approvals.
(a) A City of Lake Mills zoning permit shall be required as outlined
under § 660-187.
(b) A City of Lake Mills building permit shall be required as
outlined under Chapter 279, Building Construction, Article I,
Building Code.
(c) The owner/operator/installer of the GSHP system shall submit
the plan to the Zoning Enforcement Officer for approval for
said system by the WDNR. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) Prior to construction. Prior to the construction of a GSHP system,
the owner/operator/installer must submit to the WDNR UIC
Program a notification of intent to construct. This notification
requirement includes GSHP systems that do not include the use of
wells.
(4) Contractors.
(a) Well drilling. Only Wisconsin Registered Well Drillers shall be
permitted to construct, alter, or decommission wells for
geothermal heating and cooling systems.
(b) Plumbing. All plumbing installation/modification shall be
performed by a licensed Wisconsin plumber.
(c) GSHP equipment. The installation or modification of all GSHP
equipment shall be performed by an individual certified by the
IGSHPA.
(5) Materials.
§ 660-168 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-168
1:926
(a) The use of refrigerants, antifreeze chemicals, and lubricating
oils is prohibited in water that is returned to the subsurface via
open-loop GSHP systems.
(b) The use of plasticizers in grout used in well construction is
prohibited for open-loop GSHP wells.
(c) The following are the only currently WDNR-approved
refrigerants, plasticizers, antifreeze, lubricating oils, and
corrosion inhibitors that are allowed for closed-loop GSHP
wells:
[1] Propylene glycol and ethanol are acceptable antifreeze
additives for closed-loop systems. All other antifreeze
chemicals must be approved by WDNR prior to use.
[2] Food-grade lubricating oils are acceptable for closed-loop
and direct exchange wells. Direct exchange wells may also
use polyester as a lubricant. All other lubricating
chemicals or oils must be approved by WDNR prior to use.
[3] R-22 refrigerant and its EPA-recommended substitutes
R-407C and R-410A are acceptable for use in direct
exchange systems. All other refrigerants must be approved
by WDNR prior to use.
[4] Sodium naphthalene sulfonate conforming to ASTM C 494
Type F is an acceptable plasticizer for use in grouts that
contain cement. Plasticizers shall not be used for the
construction of GSHP wells that will also serve as sources
of potable water.
[5] Corrosion inhibitors must be approved by WDNR prior to
use.
(6) Location on property.
(a) Wells.
[1] Open-loop GSHP wells that also serve as potable water
supply wells shall meet the setback requirements of
WDNR's Private Well Guidelines (as amended) or WDNR's
Guidelines and Policies for Public Water Systems (as
amended), whichever is applicable.
[2] Open-loop GSHP wells that do not also serve as a potable
water supply source shall be sited at least 25 feet from
existing and potential sources of contamination, including
but not limited to septic tanks/fields, lagoons, livestock
pens, and oil or hazardous materials storage tanks.
§ 660-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-168
1:927
§ 660-169. through § 660-170. (Reserved)
§ 660-171. Permanently installed standby generators.
[3] Closed-loop and direct exchange wells shall also be sited
at least 25 feet from these potential sources of
contamination.
[4] Closed-loop and direct exchange wells shall be sited at
least 50 feet from private potable water supply wells.
[5] Closed-loop and direct exchange wells shall not be
permitted within the Zone 1 of public water supply wells.
[6] An open-loop GSHP well that does not also serve as a
public water supply well shall not be permitted within the
Zone 1 of a public water supply well.
[7] Closed-loop and direct exchange wells shall be sited at
least 10 feet from surface water bodies.
(b) No GSHP appurtenances shall be permitted to be located with
the required setbacks for the parcel on which it is sited.
A. Operation. A permanently installed standby generator installation shall
be allowed for the purpose of providing temporary power during
incidental power outages and emergency power outages only due to
storms and other natural and/or man-made disasters.
B. Noise level. The noise from permanently installed standby generators
installed in all zoning districts, when operated during power outages,
shall not exceed 70 dBA at the lot line under normal load.
C. Testing. Permanently installed standby generators in all zoning districts
may be operated for testing purposes one time for a period not to
exceed 30 minutes in any seven-day period. Testing periods of standby
generators in all residential districts shall be restricted to times
between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
D. Location. No permanently installed standby generator shall be installed
in a required front yard and not within 15 feet of any side or rear lot
line. All such units shall be installed at ground level only.
E. Installation. Permanently installed standby generators shall be installed
in accordance with the requirements of § 660-57 of this chapter.
F. Screening. The equipment will be screened to its full height from the
view of the street and abutting properties by a solid fence and/or
evergreen shrubbery in accordance with § 660-113.
G. Performance standards. All standby generator installations shall
comply with the regulations outlined in Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 660-168 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-172
1:928
§ 660-172. Power-generation facilities.
Power-generation facilities shall meet the following requirements:
§ 660-173. Hydronic heaters (outdoor boilers).
A. Direct access to arterial streets required. All power-generation
facilities shall have direct access to an arterial street which is a federal-
, state-, or county-designated highway.
B. Minimum required setbacks. Front, rear, and side yards shall be a
minimum of 50 feet from all lot and right-of-way lines.
C. All applicable local, state, and federal environmental standards to be
met. Proof of the ability to meet all applicable local, state, and federal
environmental standards shall be provided.
A. Prohibited. Hydronic heaters as defined in this chapter shall be
prohibited.
B. Burning. Burning of any and all materials on property in the City of
Lake Mills shall be governed by the regulations outlined in Chapter
362, Fires and Fire Prevention, of the Municipal Code.
§ 660-172 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-173
1:929

ARTICLE IX
Zoning Procedures and Administration
§ 660-174. Purpose.
The purpose of this article of the chapter is to establish the procedural
requirements for zoning text amendments, Zoning Map amendments,
conditional use review and approval, temporary use review and approval,
sign permits, site plan review and approval, certificates of occupancy,
variances, zoning provision interpretations by the Zoning Administrator and
Zoning Enforcement Officer, and appeals of zoning provision interpretations
to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 660-175. Administrative and enforcement officials.
A. Purpose. The administrative and enforcement officials are to ensure the
provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced equitably
under the general police powers of the City of Lake Mills.
B. Personnel.
(1) Zoning Administrator. The City Manager, or his designee, is hereby
designated as the Zoning Administrator for administering the
provisions of this chapter. For such duties, he may be provided with
the assistance of such additional persons as the City Council may
direct.
(2) Zoning Enforcement Officer. The Building Inspector, or his
designee, is hereby designated as the Zoning Enforcement Officer
for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. For such duties, he may
be provided with the assistance of such additional persons as the
City Manager may direct.
C. Duties.
(1) In the administration of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator
shall perform the following duties:
(a) Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments,
conditional uses, variances, appeals, and applications therefor;
(b) Forward to the City Plan Commission all applications for
conditional uses and for amendments to this chapter that are
initially filed with the City;
(c) Carry out such additional responsibilities as are hereinafter set
forth by the provisions of this chapter.
(2) In the enforcement of this chapter, the Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall perform the following duties:
§ 660-174 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-175
1:931
§ 660-176. Zoning Board of Appeals.
(a) Responsible for the official interpretation of the provisions of
this chapter.
(b) Issue the necessary zoning use permits and occupancy permits
required by the provisions of this chapter, provided its
provisions and those of the building code have been complied
with.
(c) Forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals application for
appeals, variances, or other matters on which the Zoning
Board of Appeals is required to pass under this chapter;
(d) In case of any finding of a violation of a provision of this
chapter, notify in writing the actual violator where known,
owner of the property on which the violation has taken place
and the City Manager, indicating the nature of the violation
and the action necessary to correct it;
(e) Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and use of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;
(f) Carry out such additional responsibilities as are hereinafter set
forth by the provisions of this article.
D. Authority. In the enforcement of said ordinance, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall have the power and authority for the
following:
(1) At any reasonable time, to enter upon any public or private
premises and make inspection to determine compliance with this
chapter. However, if he is refused entry after presentation of his
identification, he may procure a special inspection warrant in
accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0119.
(2) Upon reasonable cause or question as to proper compliance, to
revoke any zoning use permit or occupancy permit, and issue
cease-and-desist orders requiring the cessation of any building,
moving, alteration or use which is in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, such revocation to be in effect until reinstated by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Zoning Board of Appeals; or
take any other action as directed by the City Council to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violation of the Lake Mills Municipal
Code provisions.
(3) In the name of the City and with the endorsement of the City
Attorney, commence any legal proceedings necessary to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, including the collection of forfeitures
provided for herein.
§ 660-175 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-176
1:932
A. Establishment. There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals
in the City of Lake Mills in accordance with § 62.23, Wis. Stats., for
hearing appeals and applications and granting variations and
exceptions to the provisions of this chapter in harmony with the
purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance.
B. Membership.
(1) Composition. The Zoning Board of Appeals membership is outlined
in § 27-11 of the Code of the City of Lake Mills.
(2) Terms. The members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve
terms as set forth in § 27-12 of the Code of the City of Lake Mills.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) Chairman. Selection of the Chairman is outlined in § 27-12 of the
Code of the City of Lake Mills.
(4) Recording secretary. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have a
recording secretary who shall make and keep a record of all of its
meetings and official acts.
(5) City staff. The City may designate that a member of the staff to
attend meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals for providing the
City's case.
(6) Continuation of existing Board. The Zoning Board of Appeals in
existence at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which
this chapter is derived shall be recognized as the Zoning Board of
Appeals established under the provisions of this chapter, and the
members previously appointed under the old ordinances shall be
recognized as members thereof, and shall serve for such period of
time as designated at the time of appointment, the time to run from
the date of the original appointment under the old ordinance.
(7) Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the
member whose place has become vacant.
C. Powers of the Board. The powers of the Zoning Board of Appeals are
outlined in § 27-13 of this chapter.
D. Meetings and procedures.
(1) Rules of procedure. The Board shall adopt its own rules and
procedures, not in conflict with this chapter or with the applicable
Wisconsin Statutes, and select or appoint such officers as it deems
necessary. The Board may require submission of such records, plats
and other information necessary to make its determinations. A copy
of the rules of procedure, and all recommendations relating
thereto, shall be filed in the office of the secretary.
§ 660-176 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-176
1:933
(2) Meetings. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held
at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Zoning
Board of Appeals may determine. Publication and mailing of due
notice is to be made at least 10 days prior to the date of hearing.
The notice shall be published in a paper of general circulation in
the City, and such notice to contain a statement of the particular
purpose of such meeting and a brief description of the location of
the property under consideration at such meeting. All meetings of
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. Any person
may appear and testify at a hearing either in person or by duly
authorized agent or attorney.
(3) Minutes. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every
question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall also keep records of its examinations and other official
actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each
case and the reasons for granting or denying each application shall
be specified. Every rule and regulation and every order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall immediately be filed in the office of the secretary and
shall be of public record.
(4) Oaths. The Chair of the Zoning Board of Appeals may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
(5) Finality of decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals. All decisions
and findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals, on appeal or upon
application for a variation after a hearing, shall, in all instances, be
final administrative determinations and shall be subject to review
by courts as by law may be provided.
E. Application for variance and notice of hearing. An application for a
variance shall be filed, along with the required filing fee, with the
Zoning Enforcement Officer by the owner(s) of the subject property or
by the contract purchasers. The application shall contain such
information as the Board may, by rule, require. The application shall be
certified as complete by the Zoning Enforcement Officer before placing
such item on any agenda to be acted upon by the Board. Said
application shall be comprised of all of the following:
(1) A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the
variance is proposed. Said map and any attachments shall be
submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a
photocopier. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic
scale, and a North arrow shall be provided.
(2) A written description of the proposed variance describing the type
of specific requirements of the variance proposed for the subject
property.
§ 660-176 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-176
1:934
(3) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development.
Said site plan shall conform to any and all requirements of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(4) Written justification for the requested variance consisting of the
reasons why the petitioner believes the proposed variance is
appropriate, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the
standard set out in Subsection I below.
F. Review by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The requested variance
shall be reviewed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer as follows:
(1) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine whether the
application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this section.
If the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that the application
is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this section,
he shall return the application to the petitioner. If the Zoning
Enforcement Officer determines that the application is complete,
he shall so notify the petitioner.
(2) Upon notifying the petitioner that the application is complete, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review the application and
evaluate and comment on the written justification for the proposed
variance provided in the application.
(3) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall also evaluate the application
to determine, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the
standards of Subsection I below, whether a variance from the terms
of the Zoning Ordinance will not be contrary to the public interest,
where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of the chapter will result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the chapter shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice
done.
(4) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall forward the report to the
Board. If the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that the
proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall note this determination in the report.
G. Appeals.
(1) General.
(a) Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or
by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected
by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall
be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of
the Board, by filing with the officers from whom the appeal is
taken and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The officers from whom the appeal is taken
§ 660-176 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-176
1:935
shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
(b) An application for a variation shall be filed in writing with the
Zoning Enforcement Officer. The application shall contain such
information as the Zoning Board of Appeals may from time to
time, by rule, require.
(c) An application for a variance shall stay all legal proceedings
furthering enforcement of any provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance from which the petitioner is requesting a variance,
unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies to the Board
after the request for a variance has been filed, that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the Board or by a Court of Record upon
application, on notice to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and
on due cause shown.
(d) Appeals of the subdivision, land division, and platting
provisions. The granting of variances to the land division and
platting related issues of Chapter 650, Subdivision
Regulations, of the Code of the City of Lake Mills shall be the
sole charge of the Plan Commission.
(2) Administrative appeals.
(a) General application requirements. Appeals from the decision of
the Zoning Enforcement Officer concerning the literal
enforcement of this chapter may be made by any person
aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of
the City. Such appeals shall be filed with the City Clerk within
20 days after the date of written notice of the decision or order
of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Applications may be made
by the owner or lessee of the structure, land, or water to be
affected anytime and shall be filed with the City Clerk. Such
appeals and application shall include that information and data
as outlined in the Zoning Board of Appeals Rules of Procedure.
(b) Applications relating to floods, shoreland, and wetland related
mapping disputes. See the provisions of §§ 660-197 and
660-198 of this chapter.
(3) Dimensional variances.
(a) Purpose. The Zoning Board of Appeals, after a public hearing,
may determine and vary the regulations of this chapter in
harmony with their general purpose and intent, only in the
specific instances hereinafter set forth, where the Zoning
Board of Appeals makes findings of fact according to the
§ 660-176 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-176
1:936
standards hereinafter prescribed, and further finds that there
are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of this chapter.
(b) Application and notice of hearing. An application for a variance
shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk. The application
shall contain such information as outlined in the Zoning Board
of Appeals Rules of Procedure. Before decisions on such
petitions, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing thereon pursuant to the requirements set forth in the
Zoning Board of Appeals Rules of Procedure.
(c) Findings of facts. No variance to the provisions of this chapter
(except as otherwise provided) shall be granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals unless it finds that if the variance is granted it
would not be contrary to the public interest; a literal
enforcement of the chapter provisions would result in practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardship due to special conditions;
the spirit of the chapter is preserved; public safety and welfare
are secured and substantial justice done. In reviewing the
application and evidence relating to a variance, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall consider the findings statements set
forth in this section of this chapter.
(4) Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the
Board in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district
boundaries:
(a) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate
or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles
shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other
evidence may be examined.
(b) In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall
be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and
technical evidence to the Board.
(c) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform
the Plan Commission or the person contesting the boundary
location to petition the governing body for a map amendment
according to § 660-199. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
H. Public hearings for Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1) General. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing
upon each variance within a reasonable time of the date of filing.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall publish notice of a public
hearing in conformance to the requirements of § 62.23(7)(d) of the
Wisconsin Statutes. Said notice shall be published in a paper of
general circulation in the City, on such application for variation,
stating the time and place and the purpose of the hearing. Notice of
§ 660-176 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-176
1:937
the public hearing shall be mailed to the petitioner and the owners
of all property within 200 feet of the boundaries of subject property.
Failure to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not
invalidate proceedings under this section. The cost of notifying the
affected property owner and the cost of advertising the notice of
public hearing shall be borne by the petitioner. At the hearing,
the appellant or petitioner may appear in person, by agent, or by
attorney.
(2) Notice to the WDNR. The provisions of § 660-198 shall be followed
when a variance is requested for a property located in the
Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District. The provisions of § 660-198
shall be followed when a variance is requested for property located
in Floodplain Zoning Districts.
(3) Conduct of public hearing. The Vice Chair of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall place all witnesses under oath. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall hear all relevant evidence presented for and against
the application. The Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
rule on exceptions to evidence and permit examination of
witnesses.
I. Findings. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant no variance to the
provisions of this chapter unless it finds that the following facts and
conditions exist when applicable and so indicates in the minutes of its
proceedings:
(1) Hardship or practical difficulty. The hardship or difficulty shall be
peculiar to the subject property and different from that of other
properties and not one which affects all properties similarly. Such
hardship or difficulty shall have arisen because of the unusual
shape of the original acreage parcel; unusual topography or
elevation; or because the property was created before the passage
of the current, applicable zoning regulations, and it is not
economically suitable for a permitted use or will not accommodate
a structure of reasonable design for a permitted use if all area,
yard, green space, and setback requirements are observed.
(2) Preservation of intent. No variance shall be granted that is not
consistent with the purpose and intent of the regulations for the
district in which the development is located. No variance shall
permit a use in any district that is not a stated permitted use,
accessory use, or special use in that particular district.
(3) Exceptional circumstances. There must be exceptional,
extraordinary, or unusual circumstances or conditions applying to
the lot or parcel, structure, use, or intended use that do not apply
generally to other properties or uses in the same district and the
granting of the variance would not be of so general or recurrent
nature as to suggest that the Zoning Ordinance should be changed.
§ 660-176 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-176
1:938
(4) Economic hardship and self-imposed hardship not grounds for
variance. No variance shall be granted solely based on economic
gain or loss. Self-imposed hardships shall not be considered as
grounds for the granting of the variance.
(5) Preservation of property rights. The variance must be necessary for
the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights
possessed by other properties in the same district and same
vicinity.
(6) Preservation of health, safety, welfare, morality of the community.
The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the
congestion in the public streets, or increase the danger of fire or
endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood.
(7) Absence of detriment. No variance shall be granted that will create
substantial detriment to adjacent property and will materially
impair or be contrary to the purpose and spirit of this chapter or
the public interest.
(8) Additional requirements in Shoreland-Wetland Districts. See the
provisions of § 660-198 of this chapter.
(9) Additional requirements in floodplain districts. In addition to the
criteria above, to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations,
the following criteria must be met:
(a) The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation;
(b) Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than 1/2
acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed
below the RFE; and
(c) Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall
not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall
not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be
contrary to the purpose of the ordinance.
(d) A variance shall not:
[1] Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district.
[2] Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic
gain or loss.
[3] Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
§ 660-176 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-176
1:939
[4] Damage the rights or property values of other persons in
the area.
[5] Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or
map(s) required in § 660-199D.
[6] Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its
use, which would preclude its continued designation as a
historic structure.
(e) When a floodplain variance is granted, the Board shall notify
the applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and
property and flood insurance premiums could increase up to
$25 per $100 of coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the
variance record.
J. Decision.
(1) Required vote. If a quorum is present, the concurring vote of a
majority of the members present shall be necessary to grant a
variation. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) Finding of fact. Every finding of fact shall be signed by the Chair or
Vice Chair and attested to by the Board Secretary as evidence of
the action of the Board. The original finding of fact letter shall be
sent to the appellant. Copies of each finding of fact letter shall be
filed with the Board's record of the case, the property file, and the
Administrative Officer by the Recording Secretary.
(3) Conditions. Conditions may be placed upon any zoning permit
ordered or authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(4) Decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, within 60 days after
the public hearing, render its decision in writing.
K. Limited effect of a variance. Where the Board has granted a variance,
such approval shall neither change the use classification of the building
or premises, nor give it any status as a nonconforming use other than
that which it has as a result of the variance. Granting a variance shall
be considered as being unique to the variance granted, and shall not be
construed as precedent for any other proposed variance.
L. Effect of denial and resubmittal. No application for a variance which
has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a
period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on
grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer.
M. Re-hearing. No request to grant a re-hearing shall be entertained
unless substantial new evidence is submitted which could not
reasonably have been presented at the previous hearing. In all cases,
the request for a re-hearing shall be in writing listing the reasons for
§ 660-176 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-176
1:940
§ 660-177. Plan Commission.
the request, and shall be duly verified and accompanied by the
necessary data and diagrams. The party requesting the re-hearing shall
be notified to appear before the Board on a date to be set by the
Board, of which the requestor shall be notified. If a motion to grant
a re-hearing receives the affirmative votes of four or more members
of the Board, the case shall be put on the calendar for a re-hearing.
Re-hearings shall be subject to the same requirements as the original
hearing.
N. Review by court of record. Any person or persons aggrieved by any
decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may present to the court of
record a petition duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal
and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be
presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in
the office of the secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
O. Compensation. The City Council shall determine the annual
compensation for service of the members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
A. Establishment. The Plan Commission is established pursuant to § 62.23
of the Wisconsin Statutes for the guidance, direction and control of the
growth and development or redevelopment of the City and contiguous
territory not more than 1 1/2 miles beyond the corporate limits and not
included in any municipality.
B. Composition. The Plan Commission membership is outlined in § 27-8 of
the Code of the City of Lake Mills.
C. Term of members; vacancies. The terms of the Plan Commission are
outlined in § 27-8 of the Code of the City of Lake Mills.
D. Compensation of members. The City Council shall determine the
compensation for annual service of all members of the Plan
Commission.
E. Organization. The Plan Commission shall organize and adopt rules for
its own government according to the provisions of this chapter.
(1) Meetings. The Plan Commission shall set its own meeting schedule,
generally to be twice per month. Special meetings may be held at
the call of the Chairman.
(2) Standing and special subcommittees. The Chairman may appoint
standing and special subcommittees.
(3) Quorum. Quorum shall be four members, and all actions shall
require approval of a majority of the members present.
(4) Proxy voting. Voting by proxy shall not be permitted.
§ 660-176 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-177
1:941
(5) Minutes. Minutes shall be kept showing all actions taken,
resolutions, findings, determinations, transactions, and
recommendations made. A copy of the minutes shall be filed with
the City Clerk in accordance with policies as may be adopted by the
City Council from time to time.
F. Powers. The Plan Commission shall have such powers as may be
necessary to enable it to perform its functions and duties and promote
municipal planning. Such powers shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
(1) Employment of experts. To employ experts and staff and to pay for
their services, supplies, equipment, and other such expenses as
may be necessary and proper, not to exceed the appropriations and
regulations as may be made by the City Council from time to time.
(2) Reports and recommendations. To make reports and
recommendations relating to the planning and development of the
municipality to public officials, agencies, utilities, and other
organizations and citizens.
(3) Request available information. To request available information
from any public official to be furnished within a reasonable time.
G. Duties. The Plan Commission shall have the following functions and
duties:
(1) Prepare and recommend a comprehensive master plan. To make
and adopt a comprehensive plan for the physical development of
the municipality, in accordance with §§ 62.23 and 66.1001 of the
Wisconsin Statutes and § 27-10 of the Code of the City of Lake
Mills.
(2) Prepare and recommend an Official Map. To make and recommend
an Official Map to the City Council according to Section § 62.23 of
Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) Prepare and recommend a zoning district plan and regulations. To
prepare and recommend a zoning district plan and regulations to
the City Council according to § 62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(4) Prepare and recommend land division regulations. To prepare and
recommend land division regulations to the City Council according
to Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(5) Changes to adopted plans. Make and/or recommend changes to
adopted plans and to recommend to the City Council said changes
or amendments concerning the Official Map and Official Map
Ordinance, Zoning and Land Division Ordinance, and other
ordinances as deemed related.
§ 660-177 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-177
1:942
(6) Matters referred to the Plan Commission. To consider and report or
recommend on all matters referred to them including, but not
limited to, conditional use permits.
(7) Exceptions to the land division and platting provisions of Chapter
650, Subdivision Regulations, of the Code of the City of Lake Mills.
The granting of exceptions to land division and platting related
aspects of Chapter 650, Subdivision Regulations, shall be the sole
charge of the Plan Commission.
(8) Division of land. The Plan Commission shall make
recommendations to the City Council on all division of lands within
the City's extraterritorial platting jurisdiction.
(9) Determination of use. The Plan Commission shall make a
determination for all uses that are not specifically classified as
permitted by right, as accessory to a permitted primary use, or
permitted by conditional use permit.
(10) Conditional use permit recommendations. The Plan Commission
shall hear petitions for conditional use grants and make
recommendations to the City Council.
(11) Conditional use permit terminations. The Plan Commission shall
only provide recommendations for termination of conditional uses
to the City Council.
(12) Hold public hearings and informational meetings. To hold public
hearings and informational meetings on matters referred to the
Plan Commission.
H. Referrals. The City Council or other public body or officer of the City
having final authority thereon shall refer to the Plan Commission, for its
consideration and report before final action is taken, the following
matters:
(1) Public buildings. Location and architectural design of any public
building.
(2) Statues and memorials. Location of any statue or other memorial.
(3) Streets, alleys, or other public way, park, playground, airport, or
other memorial/public grounds. Location, acceptance, extension,
alteration, vacation, abandonment, change of use, sale, acquisition,
or lease of land for any street, alley, or other public way, park,
playground, airport, parking area, or other memorial or public
grounds.
(4) Other. Location, character and extent or acquisition, leasing or sale
of lands for public or semipublic housing, slum clearance, relief of
congestion, or vacation camps for children.
§ 660-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-177
1:943
§ 660-178. (Reserved)
§ 660-179. Joint Extraterritorial Zoning Committee.
(5) Public utilities. Location, extension, abandonment, or authorization
for any public utility whether publicly or privately owned.
(6) Changes and amendments. All proposed or requested changes and
amendments to the City's Comprehensive Plan and adopted
components thereof, Official Map, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision,
land division ordinances, and Comprehensive Planning.
I. Additional powers and duties. The Plan Commission shall have all
additional powers and duties granted or assigned by the City Council or
by City ordinances. All the powers and duties granted or assigned by
the Wisconsin Statutes to Plan Commissions and any amendments
thereto are hereby granted or assigned to the Plan Commission and
such statutes are hereby adopted by reference.
J. Fees. Fees, as established from time to time by resolution of the City
Council, associated with Plan Commission petitions shall be paid by the
petitioner prior to the item being added to the agenda.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the extraterritorial zoning (ETZ) regulations is
to promote public health, safety, and general welfare, and to provide
sound controls over land uses within the areas over which the
governing body of the City of Lake Mills and the Town of Lake Mills
have jurisdiction pursuant to § 62.23(7a), Wis. Stats., and their
boundary agreement.
B. Joint Extraterritorial Zoning Committee.
(1) Creation. Pursuant to § 62.23(7a), Wis. Stats., and Resolution
02-44, A Resolution Declaring Intent to Exercise Extraterritorial
Jurisdiction in the Town of Lake Mills, the City Council of the City of
Lake Mills has established a joint Extraterritorial Zoning
Committee (ETZC).
(2) Membership. In accordance with the authority conferred by
§ 62.23(7a), Wis. Stats., the City Council of the City of Lake Mills
does hereby organize the ETZC with the powers and duties set
forth herein, and does herein set out procedures for the
governance of the ETZC.
(a) The ETZC shall have six members, three of which shall be
Town of Lake Mills appointees and three of which shall be
members of the City of Lake Mills Plan Commission (PC).
(b) The Town members of the ETZC are appointed to terms of
three years by the Lake Mills Town Board and shall be persons
of recognized experience and qualifications. Town Board
members are eligible to serve as members of the ETZC. For
§ 660-177 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-179
1:944
those Town members first appointed, the Town Board may
exercise its discretion with regard to designating staggered
terms such that not all terms of members from the Town of
Lake Mills would expire in the same year.
(3) Terms. The City members shall be appointed by the Council
President for terms of three years, and such appointments are
subject to confirmation by the Council. All City members shall be
non-Council members of the Planning Commission of the City of
Lake Mills, and their terms on the ETZC shall coincide with their
three-year terms on the Planning Commission.
(4) Chairperson. The Chairperson of the ETZC shall be elected
annually by the members of the ETZC. In addition, the ETZC may
elect a Vice Chairperson, and such other officers as the Committee
may, in its judgment, deem necessary to carry out the duties of the
ETZC.
(5) Recording Secretary. The City Clerk shall attend meetings of the
ETZC to keep a record of its proceedings and shall provide all
notices of meetings and hearings as required by law and shall act
as the ETZC's records custodian. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(6) Support. The ETZC shall have the administrative support of the
City Manager, Clerk, Planning Consultant and, when needed, the
Engineering Consultant. The City Attorney and Special Counsel of
the City of Lake Mills will provide services to the extent allowable
under their duties to the City of Lake Mills. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(7) Compensation. No compensation shall be paid to members for
service on the ETZC. Members shall take the official oath required
by § 19.01, Wis. Stats., which is to be filed with the Clerk prior to
entering into the duties of office. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(8) Powers and duties. The ETZC shall have the powers and duties
prescribed in § 62.23(7a) Wis. Stats., and such other powers and
duties as shall be vested in it from time to time by ordinance of the
City Council.
(9) Meetings. The ETZC shall regularly meet on the same date as the
regular, monthly Planning Commission meetings, but it shall only
meet when it has business to conduct. All meetings are called by
the chairperson of the ETZC and when the situation warrants it, the
Chairperson may call special meetings of the ETZC. Meetings may
be held separately from the meetings of the PC, but when so
conducted, all actions of the ETZC shall be reported to the PC on a
monthly basis. Meetings may be held jointly with the PC when
participation with the PC is advisable. Four members of the ETZC
§ 660-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-179
1:945
shall constitute a quorum, whether it is meeting separately or
jointly with the PC, and all actions of the ETZC shall require the
affirmative approval of a majority of all members of the ETZC. Any
vote taken by the ETZC in a joint meeting with the PC shall be
deemed to be the action of the PC, whenever that vote pertains to
the proposed plans or regulations, or amendments thereto, in the
ETZ area.
(10) Rules. The ETZC may create rules for the conduct of its business
and for carrying out its duties, provided the rules are not in conflict
either with this chapter or with § 62.23(7a), Wis. Stats.
(11) Records. All records, including electronic communications and any
correspondence or reports received or created by the ETZC, shall
be preserved by placing the same on file with the Clerk. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
C. Procedures.
(1) The ETZC shall participate with the Plan Commission in developing
tentative recommendations for the district plan and regulations
within the boundaries of the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction
area. Such participation shall include the entire Plan Commission
in the course of preparing the plan and regulations to be made
applicable to the ETZ area.
(2) Only the members of the ETZC may vote on matters relating to the
extraterritorial plan and regulations, or amendments thereto,
regardless of whether the ETZC is meeting jointly with the PC, but
members of the PC may participate in discussions of the ETZC at
joint meetings prior to the taking of any vote.
(3) The City Council may not adopt the proposed plan and regulations
or amendments thereto unless the proposed plan, regulations, or
amendments thereto have received the favorable vote of four
members of the ETZC. Such a vote shall be deemed to be action
taken by the entire PC whenever § 62.23, Wis. Stats., requires a
recommendation from the PC prior to the Council taking action.
(4) The ETZC shall formulate tentative recommendations for the
district plan and regulations, or parts thereof, and shall hold a
public hearing thereon. Notice of a hearing shall be given by
publication in the official newspaper as a Class 2 notice, under Ch.
985, and by mailing the notice to the Clerk of the Town of Lake
Mills. The notice shall contain the layout of tentative districts
whether by maps or words of description, and may contain the
street names and house lot numbers for purposes of identification if
the ETZC or the Council so determines. At a public hearing, an
opportunity to be heard shall be afforded to representatives of the
§ 660-179 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-179
1:946
Lake Mills Town Board or to any person residing in the Town of
Lake Mills, as well as any other interested persons.
(5) After the public hearing on any tentative recommendations for the
district plan or regulations, or parts thereof, the ETZC shall make a
final recommendation to the Council in accordance with Subsection
C(2) and (3) of this section. The PC may consider and report to the
Council with regard to any such recommendation, but it may not
veto or change any proposed district plan or regulations, or parts
thereof, which have been recommended to the Council by the
ETZC.
(6) The Council may adopt by ordinance the proposed district plan and
regulations, or parts thereof, recommended by the ETZC after
giving notice as provided in Subsection C(4) of this section and
holding a separate public hearing, or the Council may change the
proposed districts and regulations after first submitting the
proposed changes to the ETZC for recommendation and report.
The ETZC and the Council may hold a hearing on the proposed
changes after giving notice as provided in Subsection C(4) of this
section. The ETZC recommendation on the proposed changes shall
be submitted to the governing body, and such recommendation
shall be made in accordance with Subsection C(2) and (3) of this
section.
(7) The Council may amend the districts and regulations of the
extraterritorial zoning ordinance after first submitting the
proposed amendment to the ETZC for recommendation and report.
The procedures set out in Subsection C(1) through (6) of this
section shall apply to any amendments to the extraterritorial
zoning ordinance or district plan. In the case of a protest against an
amendment, the applicable provisions under § 62.23(7)(d), Wis.
Stats., shall be applicable.
(8) The Council may specifically provide in the extraterritorial zoning
ordinance for the enforcement and administration of the ETZ
regulations. The town, if it has been issuing building permits, may
continue to do so, but the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
approve such permits as to zoning prior to their issuance.
D. Administration.
(1) The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the City of Lake Mills and such
deputies or assistants that have been, or shall be, duly appointed by
the City Council shall enforce extraterritorial zoning provisions.
Any requested variance to these regulations, or any requested
appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made in the administration of ETZ, may be taken to the City of Lake
Mills Zoning Board of Appeals. The administrative procedures for
variances and appeals set forth in § 660-176 of this article are also
applicable to this chapter and incorporated herein by reference.
§ 660-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-179
1:947
§ 660-180. Historic Preservation Commission.
(2) The ETZC shall have all the powers and duties conferred to them in
§ 62.23(7a), Wis. Stats. Where such conditional uses may be
granted in the ETZ area, the ETZC shall also have the authority to
review a conditional use permit request and make a
recommendation regarding its findings on the request to the City of
Lake Mills City Council.
(3) The procedures to review and forward a recommendation on a
conditional use permit request shall comply with § 660-195D(4) of
the City of Lake Mills Code, with "ETZC" substituting for "Plan
Commission." Section 660-195D(4) is incorporated herein by
reference.
E. Enforcement. The Zoning Enforcement Officer, or his designee, may
enforce any ETZ violation by using the enforcement processes and
procedures in the Lake Mills Municipal Code, which are located in this
chapter, or which are included in the nuisance regulations when the
same are within his jurisdiction. All such enforcement procedures,
processes and powers in this chapter, and in Chapter 479, Nuisances,
are incorporated herein by reference.
A. Establishment. The Lake Mills Plan Commission, as constituted under
Chapter 27, Boards, Committees and Commissions, Article III, Plan
Commission, of the Code of the City of Lake Mills is hereby designated
as the Historic Preservation Commission. This designation shall not be
delegated to any subordinate organization, committee, or
subcommittee unless specifically proposed by the Plan Commission and
approved by a 3/4 vote of the City Council.
B. Powers and duties. The Commission shall have the power, subject to
Subsection C, to recommend the designation of historic structures,
historic sites, and historic districts within the City limits. Such
designations shall be made based on criteria in § 660-63D(1). All
recommendations shall be approved by the City Council. Once
designated, such historic structures, sites and districts shall be subject
to all the provisions of this chapter.
C. Procedures for designation of historic structures, sites, and districts.
(1) Nomination. Structures, sites, and districts shall be nominated for
designation as historic in nature. Nominations shall be in writing to
the Commission. Nominations for historic structures or sites may
only be submitted by the following: the property owner or owners
of record as listed in the office of the City Clerk, or any two
members of the City Council. Nominations for historic districts may
only be submitted by the owners of 51% of the property in the
proposed district or by 51% of the owners of the property in the
proposed district, or by any two members of the City Council.
§ 660-179 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-180
1:948
(2) Nominations received by the Commission shall be considered
during routine business meetings of the Commission. The property
owner(s) shall be permitted to offer any statement(s) to the
Commission concerning the nomination. This statement may be
written or oral. In the case of nominations for historic districts, the
nomination shall not be considered for the purposes of interim
controls until the underlying Historic Preservation Plan has been
completed and submitted to the Commission.
(3) The Commission shall cause to be published a Class I notice of a
hearing and conduct said hearing for all nominations to designate
an historic structure, site, or district. In the case of a nomination of
a historic district, no notice or hearing shall proceed unless a
historic preservation plan has been made available to the
Commission prior to such notice and hearing.
(4) The City Clerk shall notify the property owner(s) of record of any
property nominated by first-class mail at least 10 days prior to such
hearing. In addition, the City Clerk shall notify the owners of
property in whole or in part situated within 200 feet of the
boundaries of the property affected.
(5) The Commission shall then conduct such hearing and, in addition to
the notified persons, may hear expert witnesses, and may conduct
an independent investigation of the proposed designation. The
Commission shall make a preliminary written findings of fact, after
applying criteria in § 660-63D(1), on all nominations within 60 days
of the hearing. Owners of nominated property shall be provided a
copy of the preliminary findings of fact, and any required historic
preservation plan, within 10 days of the issuance of the preliminary
written findings of fact.
(6) The owners of nominated property shall have 30 days in which to
protest in writing to the Commission any of its preliminary findings
of fact. The Commission shall issue final findings of fact on
designating any property as historic no less than 60 days nor more
than 90 days after the date of the preliminary findings of fact.
(7) A 3/4 vote of the Commission shall be required to recommend
designation of historic structures or sites to the City Council. The
City Council shall act on such recommended designations within 60
days of receipt of the Plan Commission recommendation and
finding of fact. Failure by the City Council to act upon the
recommended designation shall result in a denial of said
designation unless the Council, for good reason, extends the time
frame for final action. A 3/4 vote of the Council shall be required to
designate a historic structure or site.
(8) Nominations for historic district designation shall be accompanied
by a historic preservation plan for each district. It is the
responsibility of the individuals submitting the nomination to
§ 660-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-180
1:949
prepare and fund the Historic Preservation Plan. The Historic
Preservation Commission, subject to City Council approval, or the
City Council may elect to fund the preparation of the Historic
Preservation Plan, at its discretion. Once submitted, the
nomination for Historic District designation shall be evaluated by
the Historic Preservation Commission according to Subsection C.
The Commission shall submit final written findings of fact and
their recommendation for designation of Historic Districts to the
City Council. The City Council shall act on the Commission's
recommendation within 60 days of receipt. Failure of the Council
to act shall result in the nomination being denied. A 3/4 vote of the
City Council is required to designate a Historic District.
(9) Rescission of a designation as a historic structure, site, or district
shall be in accordance with the procedures established in
Subsection C.
(10) After the designation or rescission has been made, notification
shall be sent to the property owner or owners. Notification shall
also be given to the City Clerk, Zoning Administrator, and City
Assessor. The Commission shall cause the designation or rescission
to be recorded, at City expense, in the office of the Jefferson County
Register of Deeds.
D. Interim control. No building permit shall be issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer for alteration, construction, demolition, or removal
of a nominated historic structure, historic site, or any property or
structure within a nominated historic district from the date of the
meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission at which a nomination
is first presented in writing, or in the case of a historic district, from the
date of the receipt of the historic preservation plan, until the final
disposition of the nomination by the Historic Preservation Commission
or the City Council, unless such alteration, removal or demolition is
authorized by formal resolution of the City Council as necessary for
public health or safety. In no event shall the delay be for more than 180
days, unless specifically extended by the City Council.
E. Historical markers.
(1) Property owners may request the placement of Wisconsin historical
markers on their designated properties by completing the
Wisconsin Historical Marker Application Form. The cost of these
markers shall be paid by the property owner.
(2) The Commission may request the placement of Wisconsin historical
markers on any property designated as a historic site or structure,
or within the boundaries of a historic district. The cost of these
markers shall be paid by the City. The markers may be located upon
public property subject to approval of the Plan Commission (and
Parks Board, if located on park land) or on private property,
§ 660-180 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-180
1:950
§ 660-181. through § 660-186. (Reserved)
§ 660-187. Zoning permit.
provided the property owner approves and grants an easement for
emplacement and maintenance of the historical marker.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the zoning permit is for the City to
communicate its official statement that the land use and operations
described in the permit application are deemed to comply with the
regulations as set forth under this chapter.
B. Permit required. A zoning permit, to be issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, shall be required for all of the following, except
accessory buildings for agricultural operations:
(1) Occupancy and use of a building or site hereafter changed, erected,
or enlarged.
(2) Change in use or operations of an existing building or site.
(3) Occupancy and use of vacant land.
(4) Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification.
(5) Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.
C. Application. Applications for a zoning permit shall be made to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer on forms furnished by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and shall include the following where pertinent
and necessary for proper review:
(1) Name and address of the petitioner, owner of the site, architect,
professional engineer and contractor.
(2) Property owner signature.
(3) Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded
subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site;
type of structure; existing and proposed operation or use of the
structure or site; number of employees; and the zoning district
within which the subject site lies.
(4) Site plan. Every application for zoning permit submitted to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be accompanied by a site plan,
drawn to scale, showing the lot and the building site and location of
existing buildings on the lot. The site plan shall also show all
accessory buildings, existing and proposed structures, all existing
and proposed off-street parking and loading, streets and public
ways, and accurate dimensions of the lot, yards and buildings,
together with locations, size and use of any land and all buildings
not on the lot and within 50 feet from the boundaries thereof,
unless separated by a street.
§ 660-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-187
1:951
§ 660-188. Certificate of occupancy.
(5) Additional information as may be required by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
D. Compliance with regulations. Except as hereinafter provided, no permit
pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by any officer,
department, or employee of the City unless the application for such
permit has been examined and approved by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer indicating that the proposed use, activities, building or site
complies with all the provisions of this chapter. Occupancy or use of
land, water or buildings and structures shall be prohibited until an
occupancy certificate per § 660-188 has been issued, certifying that all
appropriate provisions of this chapter have been met. Any permit or
certificate of occupancy issued in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter shall be null and void.
E. Granting of permit. A zoning permit shall be granted or denied by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer in writing within 30 days of a complete
application submittal, and the petitioner shall post such permit in a
conspicuous place at the site. A permit that is issued applies only to the
development project as it is specifically described in the application.
The permit shall expire within four months unless the project site
exhibits progress. Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter shall be null and void.
F. Fees.
(1) All petitioners shall pay a zoning permit fee, to be determined by
the City Council, at the time of application.
(2) Zoning permit fees do not include and are in addition to building
permit fees established by the City.
(3) Fees for zoning permit amendments shall be in accordance with
§ 660-211, Fees, of this chapter.
(4) If work is started before a permit is applied for and issued by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, a penalty may be applied. Such
penalty shall not release the petitioner from full compliance with
the provisions of Chapter 660, Zoning, nor from prosecution for
violation of this chapter.
(5) Fees for written determinations by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
may be applied.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations governing
the review and approval of certificates of occupancy. This procedure is
required to ensure completed development complies with the
regulations outlined in § 660-187, Zoning permit, and the approved site
plan (per the requirements of § 660-205, Building site and operation
§ 660-187 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-188
1:952
(BSO) plan review and approval, and the requirements of this chapter
as a whole.
B. Applicability. A certificate of occupancy, to be issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, shall be required for all of the following, except
accessory buildings for agricultural operations:
(1) Occupancy and use of a building or site hereafter changed, erected
or enlarged.
(2) Change in use or operations of an existing building or site.
(3) Occupancy and use of vacant land.
(4) Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification.
(5) Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.
C. Issuance of certificate of occupancy. No such occupancy, use or change
of use shall take place until a certificate of occupancy shall have been
issued based upon the following:
(1) Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building
or for an existing building which has been enlarged shall be made
at the same time as the application for the zoning permit for such
building. No fee shall be charged for an original certificate applied
for coincident with the application for a zoning permit. For all other
certificates, or for copies of any original certificate, a fee may be
required. The certificate shall be acted upon within three days after
a written request for the certificate has been made to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer after the construction or enlargement of such
building or part thereof has been completed in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter. The occupancy certificate shall be
issued or written notice shall be given to the petitioner stating the
reasons why a certificate cannot be issued, no later than 14 days
after the Zoning Enforcement Officer is notified in writing that the
building or premises is ready for occupancy.
(2) No occupancy certificate for a building, or portion thereof,
constructed after the effective date hereof, shall be issued until
construction has been completed and the premises inspected and
certified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to be in conformity
with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning certificate
was based. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a
temporary certificate may be issued to be valid for a period not to
exceed six months from its date during the completion of any
addition or during partial occupancy of the premises.
(3) Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of
vacant land, or for a change in the use of land or of a building, or
for a change in a nonconforming use, as provided in this chapter,
shall be made to the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
§ 660-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-188
1:953
§ 660-189. Sign permits.
(4) If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, the certificate of occupancy therefor shall be issued within
three days after application for the certificate has been made.
(5) Each certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or
proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of
this chapter.
(6) A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the
office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and a copy shall be
forwarded, on request, to any person having proprietary or tenancy
interest in the building or land affected.
D. Certificate of occupancy for legal nonconforming uses. Upon
application, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued for all lawful
nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by adoption of this
chapter, or in existence at the effective date of this chapter. Application
for such certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use shall be filed
with the Zoning Enforcement Officer by the owner or lessee of the
building or land occupied by such nonconforming use within one year of
the effective date of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer to issue a certificate of occupancy for a legal
nonconforming use.
E. Termination of a certificate of occupancy. It shall constitute a violation
of this chapter for any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary
association, either owner or agent, to do any of the things mentioned in
Subsection B above without having first obtained a certificate of
occupancy. Any certificate issued upon a false statement of any fact
which is material to the issuance thereof shall be void. Whenever the
fact of such false statement shall be established to the satisfaction of
the Zoning Enforcement Officer, he shall forthwith revoke the
certificate of occupancy, by notice in writing to be delivered by him to
the holder of the void certificate upon the premises where the violation
has occurred, or if such holder be not found there, by mailing the said
notice of revocation by certified letter to his last known address. Any
person who shall proceed thereafter with such work or use without
having obtained a new certificate of occupancy shall be deemed guilty
of violation of this chapter.
F. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure and
requirement for obtaining a sign permit before the erection of certain
signs.
B. General requirement. Unless specifically exempted by this chapter, no
sign shall be erected, altered, or relocated after the effective date of
this chapter until a sign permit has been secured from the Zoning
§ 660-188 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-189
1:954
Administrator. Section 660-124 establishes what changes to an existing
sign would be deemed to be an alteration.
C. Application requirements. All applications for sign permits shall be
made in writing on a form supplied by the City of Lake Mills Zoning
Administrator. Said application shall be submitted with all required
information provided and shall contain or have attached thereto the
following information:
(1) A site plan for the subject property, with requirements as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, showing the location and
dimensions of all buildings, structures, and signs on the subject
property; said subject property boundaries; and the location of the
proposed sign;
(2) The configuration of the proposed sign, listing the height, width,
total square footage, method of attachment, method of
illumination, and sign materials;
(3) The subject property's zoning designation; and
(4) The total area of all signs on the subject property, both before and
after the installation of the proposed sign, measured in square feet
in accordance with § 660-117C.
D. Procedure. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning
Administrator shall review said application for compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, and shall approve or deny a sign permit.
Such action by the Zoning Administrator shall be based on the
submitted application and this chapter, and such action shall occur
within 10 working days of the Zoning Administrator's acceptance of the
complete application.
E. Termination of a sign permit. Any sign found not to be in compliance
with the terms of this chapter shall be considered in violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to all applicable procedures and penalties.
Nonconforming signs, as regulated in § 660-125, do not require sign
permits, provided they remain in compliance with § 660-124.
F. Exceptions to permit requirement. The following sign uses and
purposes are permitted in all zoning districts without the need for a
sign permit. Such signs shall not count as part of the maximum
permitted sign area as regulated by Table 6.1 in § 660-119G.
(1) Address numerals and identification signs not exceeding one
square foot in area.
(2) Legal notices.
(3) Signs established by, or by order of, any governmental agency.
(4) Memorial signs and tablets displayed in cemeteries.
§ 660-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-189
1:955
§ 660-190. through § 660-191. (Reserved)
§ 660-192. Temporary use review and approval.
(5) On-premises directional signs that bear no advertising.
(6) Temporary signs that conform to the requirements of § 660-120.
(7) Signs less than one square foot in area.
(8) Temporary retailers' signs displayed inside the premises or in
windows for the purpose of informing the public of a "sale" or
temporary offer.
(9) Grand opening and special events signs and banners may be
allowed, subject to Zoning Administrator approval as to size,
location, length of use and appearance.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide regulations that govern the
procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial,
of proposed temporary uses.
(2) Temporary uses are those uses that have the potential to create
undesirable impacts on nearby properties if allowed to develop
simply under the general requirements of this chapter. In addition
to such potential, temporary uses also have the potential to create
undesirable impacts on nearby properties that potentially cannot
be determined except on a case-by-case basis. In order to prevent
this from occurring, all temporary uses are required to meet
certain procedural requirements applicable only to temporary uses,
in addition to the general requirements of this chapter and the
requirements of the zoning district in which the subject property is
located.
(3) Land uses which fail to meet one of the requirements for temporary
uses in § 660-29 may be reviewed as a conditional use.
B. Regulations applicable to all temporary uses. No public hearing is
required to develop a temporary use; however, a demonstration that the
developer proposes to meet all temporary use requirements of this
article must be made at time of site plan application. Furthermore, no
building permit shall be issued for any development that does not
comply with all requirements of § 660-188, Certificate of occupancy.
Any temporary use found not to be in compliance with the terms of this
chapter shall be considered in violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to all applicable procedures and penalties.
C. Application requirements. All applications for proposed temporary uses
shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator prior to
§ 660-189 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-192
1:956
§ 660-193. (Reserved)
§ 660-194. Variances.
§ 660-195. Conditional uses.
certification of the proposed temporary use. Said complete application
shall be comprised of all of the following:
(1) A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the
temporary use is proposed, and all other lands within 200 feet of
the boundaries of the subject property. Said map shall clearly
indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs,
and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. Said map and
all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is
clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a
reasonable scale. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a
graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be provided;
(2) A map, such as the Land Use Plan or Zoning Map, of the
generalized location of the subject property in relation to the City
as a whole; and
(3) A written description of the proposed temporary use describing the
type of activities, buildings, and structures proposed for the subject
property and their general locations.
(4) The Zoning Enforcement Officer may require a building site and
operation (BSO) plan of the subject property. Said BSO plan shall
conform to any and all the requirements of § 660-205, Building site
and operation (BSO) plan review and approval.
D. Approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Approval of a temporary
use shall be by the Zoning Enforcement Officer following review of said
complete application per Subsection C above.
E. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses
which have the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby
properties if allowed to develop simply under the general requirements
of this chapter. In addition to such potential, conditional uses also have
the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby properties which
potentially cannot be determined except with a binding site plan and on
a case-by-case basis. In order to prevent this from occurring, all
conditional uses are required to meet certain procedural requirements
applicable only to conditional uses, in addition to the general
requirements of this chapter and the requirements of the zoning district
§ 660-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-195
1:957
in which the subject property is located. A public hearing process is
required to review a request for a conditional use.
B. Approval required. Uses listed as permitted by conditional use grant
may be permitted in the district in which listed upon petition for such
grant to the Plan Commission and subject to the approval of the City
Council and to such other conditions as hereinafter designated.
C. Basis for approval. The Plan Commission and City Council shall base
their determination on general considerations as to the effect of such
grant on the health, general welfare, safety and economic prosperity of
the City and specifically of the immediate neighborhood in which such
use would be located, including such considerations as the effect on the
established character and quality of the area, its physical
attractiveness, the movement of traffic, the demand for related
services, the possible hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or
nuisance effect as a result of noise, dust, smoke or odor and such other
factors as would be appropriate to carrying out the intent of conditional
use grants. No conditional use permit shall be recommended or granted
pursuant to this chapter unless the petitioner shall establish the
following:
(1) Zoning Code and Comprehensive Plan purposes and intent. The
proposed use and development will be in harmony with the general
and specific purposes for which this chapter was enacted and for
which the regulations of the zoning district in question were
established and with the general purpose and intent of the City of
Lake Mills Comprehensive Plan or elements thereof.
(2) Adverse impact. The proposed use and development will not have a
substantial or undue adverse or detrimental effect upon or
endanger adjacent property, the character of the area, or the public
health, safety, morals, comfort, and general welfare and not
substantially diminish and impair property values within the
community or neighborhood and:
(a) Interference with surrounding development. The proposed use
and development will be constructed, arranged, and operated
so as not to unreasonably interfere with the use and
development of neighboring property according to the
applicable zoning district regulations.
(b) Adequate public facilities. The proposed use and development
will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as streets, public utilities including public water
supply system and sanitary sewer, police and fire protection,
refuse disposal, public parks, libraries, schools, and other
public facilities and utilities or the petitioner will provide
adequately for such facilities.
(3) Traffic congestion. The proposed use and development will not
cause undue traffic congestion nor draw significant amounts of
§ 660-195 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-195
1:958
traffic through residential streets. Adequate measures will be taken
to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic
congestion in the public streets.
(4) Destruction of significant features. The proposed use and
development will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of
any natural, scenic, or historic feature of significant importance.
D. Procedure.
(1) Initiation of request for approval of a conditional use. Proceedings
for approval of a conditional use shall be initiated by:
(a) A petition of the owner(s) of the subject property;
(b) A recommendation of the Plan Commission; or
(c) By action of the City Council.
(2) Petition. A request for conditional use grant shall be submitted in
writing to the City Clerk who shall promptly refer such petition to
the Plan Commission and City Council for determination. Such
petition shall be accompanied by appropriate data and information
necessary for proper evaluation of the request, including
specifically the following:
(a) An accurate map of the property including indication of
general terrain and topographical characteristics, the location
of all significant terra in features such as streams, ponds, tree
growths, etc., and the location of all existing structures.
(b) An accurate and complete written description of the use for
which a conditional use is being requested including pertinent
statistics and operational characteristics.
(c) Plans and other drawings showing proposed development of
the site and buildings including landscape plans, location of
parking and service areas, driveways, exterior lighting, type of
building material, etc.
(3) Review by City staff. The proposed conditional use shall be
reviewed by City staff in the following steps:
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall review the submittal in order to
ensure that all required portions of the submittal are provided.
(b) Upon the receipt and acknowledgement of a complete
submittal, City staff shall undertake a review of the submittal
which shall evaluate and comment on the written justification
for the proposed conditional use provided in the submittal per
Subsection C, Basis for approval, above. Furthermore, said
review shall evaluate the submittal based on the following
questions:
§ 660-195 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-195
1:959
[1] How is the proposed conditional use (the use in general) in
harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and
standards of the City of Lake Mills Comprehensive Plan, or
any other plan or program, adopted by the City?
[2] How is the proposed conditional use (in its specific
location) in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives,
policies and standards of the City of Lake Mills
Comprehensive Plan, or any other plan or program,
adopted by the City?
[3] Does the proposed conditional use, in its proposed location
and as depicted on the site plan, result in a substantial or
undue adverse impact on adjacent property, the character
of the neighborhood, environmental factors, traffic factors,
parking, public improvements, public property or rightsof-
way, or other matters affecting the public health, safety,
or general welfare, either as they now exist or as they may
in the future be developed as a result of the
implementation of the provisions and policies of this
article, the Comprehensive Plan, or other plan, program,
map, or ordinance adopted?
[4] Does the proposed conditional use maintain the desired
consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land use
impacts as related to the environs of the property?
[5] Is the proposed conditional use located in an area that will
be adequately served by, and will not impose an undue
burden on, any of the improvements, facilities, utilities or
services provided by public agencies serving the property?
[6] Do the potential public benefits of the proposed
conditional use outweigh any and all potential adverse
impacts of the proposed conditional use (as identified in
Subsection D(3)(b)[1] through [5], above), after taking into
consideration any proposal by the petitioner and any
requirements recommended by the petitioner to alleviate
such impacts?
(c) A staff report shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission for
review and use in the development of a recommendation to
City Council.
(4) Review by Plan Commission. City Council shall not approve a
conditional use without allowing for a recommendation from the
Plan Commission per the provisions of this subsection.
(a) Within 45 days after the receipt of the complete petition as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission
shall hold a public hearing pursuant to § 660-209, Public
hearings, of this chapter.
§ 660-195 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-195
1:960
(b) Within 60 days after the receipt of the complete petition as
determined by the Zoning Administrator (or within an
extension of said period requested in writing by the petitioner
and granted by the Plan Commission), the Plan Commission
shall provide a written report, minutes, or motion to the City
Council stating its findings regarding Subsection D(3), above,
and its recommendation regarding the petition as a whole. The
report, minutes, or motion shall include a formal finding of
facts developed and approved by the Plan Commission
concerning the requirements of Subsection D(3)(c) above.
(c) If the Plan Commission fails to make a report within 60 days
after the receipt of said complete petition (and in the absence
of a petitioner-approved extension per Subsection D(4)(b)
above), then the City Council may hold a public hearing within
30 days after the expiration of said sixty-day period. Failure to
receive said written report from the Plan Commission shall not
invalidate the proceedings or actions of City Council. If such a
public hearing is necessary, the City Council shall provide
notice per the requirements of § 660-209, Public hearings.
[State Law Reference: § 62.23(7)(d)2.]
(5) Review and action by City Council. City Council shall consider the
recommendation of the Plan Commission regarding the proposed
conditional use. The Council may request further information and/
or additional reports from the Plan Commission, City staff, and/or
the petitioner. The Council may take final action on said conditional
use at time of its initial meeting, or said proceedings may be
continued from time to time for further consideration. City Council
may approve the conditional use as originally proposed, may
approve the proposed conditional use with modifications (per the
recommendations of City staff, the Plan Commission, or City
Council itself), or may deny the proposed conditional use. If the
City Council wishes to make significant changes in the proposed
conditional use, as recommended by the Plan Commission, then the
procedure set forth in § 66.23(7)(d) of the Wisconsin Statutes shall
be followed prior to Council action. Any action to amend the
provisions of this section requires a majority vote of the Council.
Approval of the proposed conditional use shall be considered the
approval of a unique request and shall not be construed as
precedent for any other proposed conditional use.
(6) Mapping and recording. When a conditional use is approved, the
building site and operation plan and occupancy and zoning use
permits shall be applicable solely to the structures, use, and
property so described. The City Clerk shall be responsible for
recording the approved conditional use permit. Indication of such
approval shall also be made on the Zoning Map by appropriate code
number or symbol.
§ 660-195 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-195
1:961
E. Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
change in factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
F. Compliance with standards. The conditional use shall, in all other
respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which
it is located, except as such regulations may, in each instance, be
modified by the City Council pursuant to the recommendations of the
Plan Commission. The proposed use and development shall comply with
all additional standards imposed on it by the particular provision of this
section and the Code authorizing such use.
G. Special standards for specific conditional uses. When the zoning district
regulations authorize a conditional use in a particular zoning district
and that conditional use is indicated as having special standards as set
forth in Article IV of this chapter, a conditional use permit for such use
in such zoning district shall not be recommended or granted unless the
petitioner shall establish compliance with all such specific standards.
H. Considerations. In determining whether the petitioner's evidence
establishes that the foregoing standards have been met, the Plan
Commission and the City Council shall consider the following:
(1) Alternative locations. Whether and to what extent such public goals
can be met by the location of the proposed use and development at
another site or in another area that may be more appropriate than
the proposed site.
(2) Mitigation of adverse impacts. Whether and to what extent all steps
possible have been taken to minimize any adverse effects of the
proposed use and development on the immediate vicinity through
building design, site design, landscaping, and screening.
I. Conditions on conditional use permits. The Plan Commission may
recommend and the City Council may impose such conditions and
limitations concerning use, construction, character, location,
landscaping, maintenance, screening, operation, hours of operation
(except as may be allowed by other federal, state, or county
requirements), need for a developer's agreement, and other matters
relating to the purposes and objectives of this chapter upon the
premises benefited by the issuance of a conditional use permit as may
be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects
upon other property and improvements near the subject property, upon
such public facilities and services, protection of the public interest, and
to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in
this chapter. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the
resolution granting the conditional use permit, and the City Council
may require the unconditional consent of the petitioner to such
conditions. Violation of any such condition of limitation shall be a
§ 660-195 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-195
1:962
violation of this chapter and shall constitute grounds for revocation of
the conditional use permit.
J. Costs. The costs of all professional, expert, technical consultant
services retained by the City and rendered in review of a conditional
use permit, administration of a conditional use permit, checking and/or
inspections relating to a conditional use permit, including, but not
limited to, consulting professional engineers, consulting planners, City
Attorney, or other professional, expert, or technical services, shall be
borne by the petitioner for a conditional use permit and shall be
considered as a part of the application fees for a conditional use permit.
K. Affidavit of compliance with conditions. In all cases in which conditional
uses are granted, the City Council shall require such evidence and
guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith are being, and will be, complied
with. Whenever any conditional use permit granted pursuant to this
chapter is made subject to conditions or limitations to be met by the
petitioner, the petitioner shall, upon meeting such conditions, file an
affidavit with the Zoning Administrator so stating.
L. Effect of issuance of a conditional use permit. The grant of a conditional
use permit shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any
such use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the
preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any other permits
or approvals that may be required by the ordinances and codes of the
City of Lake Mills, including but not limited to building permit, zoning
permit, occupancy permit, land division approval, site plan approval, or
other type of permit or approval.
M. Limitations on conditional use permits.
(1) Time limitations. Subject to an extension of time granted by the
City Council, upon recommendation of the Plan Commission, no
conditional use permit shall be valid for a period longer than 12
months unless a building permit and/or occupancy permit is issued
and construction is actually begun within that period and is
thereafter diligently pursued to completion or unless a zoning
permit is issued and a use commenced within that period.
(2) Use discontinuance. A conditional use permit shall be deemed to
authorize only the particular use for which it was issued. Such
permits shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or
effect if such use shall be discontinued for 12 consecutive months
or more; provided, however, that if such use is discontinued due to
labor strikes, war, natural disasters, or other similar cause(s)
beyond the reasonable control of the holder of the conditional use
permit, such twelve-month period shall be extended for a period of
time equal to the period that the holder of the conditional use
§ 660-195 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-195
1:963
permit is, for such reason, prevented from engaging in the
particular use for which the conditional use permit was issued.
(3) Conditional use permit runs with land and not the petitioner.
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting a conditional
use permit, a conditional use permit shall be deemed to relate to,
and to be for the benefit of, the use and lot in question rather than
the petitioner, owner, or operator of such use or lot.
(4) Additions and enlargements to conditional uses.
(a) Any additions or enlargements of an existing legal conditional
use for which a conditional use permit has been issued may be
amended, varied, or altered only pursuant to the procedures
and subject to the standards and limitations provided in this
chapter for its original approval.
(b) Any additions or enlargements of an existing conditional use
for which a conditional use permit has not been issued shall be
subject to the provisions of Subsection N of this section.
(5) Amendments to conditional use permits. A conditional use permit
may be amended, varied, or altered only pursuant to the
procedures and subject to the standards and limitations provided in
this chapter for its original approval.
N. Existing conditional uses.
(1) Application to existing uses.
(a) A use which existed lawfully on a lot at the time said lot was
placed in a district where such use would be permitted only as
a conditional use grant shall automatically be granted
conditional use status.
(b) The grant of a conditional use in such case shall be based upon
the existing conditions at that time, and any expansion or
change in use shall require changing of the conditional use
grant.
(c) Petition may be made at any time for expansion or other
change of the conditional use grant, and such petition shall not
prejudice the existing grant as herein authorized.
(d) Conditional use status granted under previous zoning
regulations shall be considered in effect under this chapter
subject to the conditions established by the original grant. Any
expansion or other change, however, shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Review of existing conditional use permits. An existing conditional
use permit may be reviewed by the City as follows.
§ 660-195 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-195
1:964
(a) The Plan Commission may review a conditional use permit if
any of the following determinations are made by the Plan
Commission:
[1] The conditional use has not continued in conformity with
the City's conditions of approval of the conditional use
permit or with any subsequent amendments to the
conditional use permit.
[2] Violations of other statutes, ordinances, or laws.
[3] A change in the character of the surrounding area or in the
conditional use itself which has caused the conditional use
to become incompatible with the surrounding uses.
[4] A change in ownership or tenant; a change in the use or
occupancy of property. This can involve the review of
existing site/building conditions with a determination by
the Plan Commission of where nonconforming elements
are to be brought into compliance.
(b) The determination for the review of a conditional use permit
shall be made by the Plan Commission after due notice to the
property owner, occupant, or agent as indicated on the
conditional use permit, as to the reasons for the review.
(c) Upon review of the conditional use permit, the Plan
Commission may recommend to the City Council that no action
be taken, recommend revisions to the conditional use permit or
additional conditions be added to the conditional use permit or
may recommend that the City Council proceed with a public
hearing for possible termination of the conditional use permit.
(d) Termination. Where a permitted conditional use does not
continue in conformity with the conditions of the original
approval, or where a change in the character of the
surrounding area or of the use itself causes it to be no longer
compatible with surrounding areas, or for similar cause based
upon consideration for the public welfare, the conditional use
grant may be terminated by action of the City Council following
referral to the Plan Commission for recommendation and
public hearing thereon. Such use shall thereafter be classified
as a legal nonconforming use, except that where the action is
due to failure to comply with the conditions of the conditional
use grant, the City Council may require complete termination
of such use.
(3) Subsequent change or addition to the approved plans or use shall
first be submitted for approval to the Zoning Administrator. If in the
opinion of the Zoning Administrator such change or addition
constitutes a substantial alteration based on the standards set
forth, a public hearing before the Plan Commission shall be
§ 660-195 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-195
1:965
§ 660-196. Zoning Code amendments.
required and notice thereof be given pursuant to § 660-209, Public
hearings, of this chapter.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed amendments to provisions of this chapter while
promoting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, and general
welfare, conserving the value of property throughout the City, and
lessening or avoiding congestion in the public streets and highways.
The City Council may, from time to time, in the manner hereinafter set
forth, amend the regulations imposed by this chapter, provided that in
all amendatory ordinances adopted under the authority of this section
due allowance shall be made for existing conditions, the conservation of
property values, the direction of building development to the best
advantages of the entire City, and the uses to which property is devoted
at the time of the adoption of such amendatory ordinance.
B. Initiation of request for amendment of Chapter 660, Zoning
Regulations. Proceedings for amendment of this chapter may be
initiated by any one of the following methods:
(1) An application by any member of the general public;
(2) A recommendation of the City staff;
(3) A recommendation of the Plan Commission; or
(4) By action of the City Council.
C. Application requirements. All applications for proposed amendments to
this chapter, regardless of the party of their initiation per Subsection B
above, shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator prior
to the formal initiation of this procedure. The submittal of an
application to the City Clerk to initiate this procedure shall not occur
until the Zoning Administrator has certified acceptance of the complete
application to the City Clerk. No placement of the application on any
agenda for action shall occur without certification. The item may be
placed on any agenda as a discussion-only item, with the permission of
the Zoning Administrator or the Plan Commission Chair, without an
application. Prior to the submittal of the Official Notice regarding the
application to the newspaper by the City Clerk, the petitioner shall
provide the City Clerk with the requisite number of copies of the
complete application as certified by the Zoning Administrator. Said
complete application shall be comprised of all of the following:
(1) A copy of the portion of the current provisions of this chapter which
are proposed to be amended, with said provisions clearly indicated
in a manner which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier;
§ 660-195 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-196
1:966
(2) A copy of the text which is proposed to replace the current text;
and
(3) As an optional requirement, the petitioner may wish to provide
written justification for the proposed text amendment, consisting of
the reasons why the petitioner believes the proposed text
amendment is in harmony with the recommendations of the
Comprehensive Plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with
the standards set out in Subsection D(3).
D. Review by the Zoning Administrator and City departments. The
proposed text amendment shall be reviewed by the Zoning
Administrator, the City Planner, the City Engineer, pertinent City
departments, including Police, Fire, and Public Works, as follows:
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete and fulfills the requirements of this chapter. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not
complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he
shall return the application to the petitioner. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall
so notify petitioner.
(2) Upon notifying the petitioner that his application is complete the
Zoning Administrator shall review the application and evaluate and
comment on the written justification for the proposed text
amendment provided in the application per Subsection C.
(3) The Zoning Administrator may also evaluate the application to
determine whether the proposed text amendment is in harmony
with the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, particularly
as evidenced by compliance with the standards below:
(a) The proposed text amendment furthers the purposes of this
chapter as outlined in Subsection A.
(b) The proposed text amendment furthers the purposes of the
chapter in which the amendment is proposed to be located.
(c) The proposed text amendment furthers the purposes of the
specific section in which the amendment is proposed to be
located.
(d) The following factors have arisen that are not properly
addressed in the current zoning text:
[1] The provisions of this chapter should be brought into
conformity with the Comprehensive Plan. (If a factor
related to the proposed amendment, note pertinent
portions of the Comprehensive Plan.);
[2] A change has occurred in the land market, or other factors
have arisen which require a new form of development, a
§ 660-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-196
1:967
new type of land use, or a new procedure to meet said
change(s);
[3] New methods of development or providing infrastructure
make it necessary to alter this chapter to meet these new
factors; or
[4] Changing governmental finances require amending this
chapter in order to meet the needs of the government in
terms of providing and affording public services.
(e) If the proposed text amendment is concerned with the
provisions of § 660-56, Land use regulations and matrix of land
uses, then the proposed amendment maintains the desired
overall consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land
use impacts within the pertinent zoning districts.
(4) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the report per Subsection
D(2), and if it has been prepared, the report per Subsection D(3) to
the Plan Commission for the Commission's review and use in
making its recommendation to the City Council. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with
the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning
Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
E. Review and recommendation by the Plan Commission. The City Council
shall not make an amendment to this chapter without allowing for a
recommendation from the Plan Commission per the provisions of this
subsection.
(1) The Plan Commission shall schedule a reasonable time and place
for a public hearing to consider the application after the
acceptance and determination of the complete application as
determined by the Zoning Administrator. The petitioner may
appear in person, by agent, and/or by attorney. Notice of the
proposed amendment and the public hearing shall conform to the
requirements of § 660-209 of this chapter. Said notice shall contain
a description of the proposed text change. A record of such
proceedings shall be preserved in such manner as the Plan
Commission shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
(2) After the public hearing (or within an extension of said period
requested in writing by the petitioner and granted by the Plan
Commission), the Plan Commission may make a written report to
the City Council and/or shall state in its motion or the minutes its
findings regarding Subsection E(1) above and its recommendations
regarding the application as a whole. The report, motion, and/or
minutes shall include a formal finding of facts developed and
approved by the Plan Commission concerning the requirements of
Subsection D(3) above.
§ 660-196 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-196
1:968
(3) If the Plan Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after
the filing of said complete application [and in the absence of a
petitioner-approved extension per Subsection E(2) above] then the
City Council may hold a public hearing within 30 days after the
expiration of said sixty-day period. Failure to receive the written
report from the Plan Commission per Subsection E(1) above shall
not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the City Council. If
such a public hearing is necessary, the City Council shall provide
notice per the requirements of Subsection E(1).
(4) If the Plan Commission recommends approval of an application, it
shall state in its motion, minutes, or final written decision, its
conclusion and any finding of facts supporting its conclusion as to
the following: that the potential public benefits of the proposed
amendment outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the
proposed amendment, as identified in Subsection D(3), after taking
into consideration the proposal by the petitioner.
F. Review and action by the City Council.
(1) The City Council shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this
chapter until it shall have received a written report and
recommendation from the Plan Commission of the proposed
amendment, except that if the City Council has not received such
written report within 60 days of the submission of the proposed
amendments, it may nevertheless act upon such proposed
amendments. The Council may request further information and/or
additional reports from the Plan Commission, Zoning
Administrator, and/or the petitioner. The Council may take final
action on the application at the time of its initial meeting, or may
continue the proceedings, at the Council's or the petitioner's
request. The City Council may approve the amendment as
originally proposed, may approve the proposed amendment with
modifications (per the recommendations of the Zoning
Administrator, the Plan Commission, authorized outside experts, or
its own members), or may deny approval of the proposed
amendment. If an application for a proposed amendment is not
acted upon finally by the City Council within 90 days of the date
upon which such application is received by the City Council, it shall
be deemed to have been denied.
(2) In case of protest against such change duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more either of the areas of
land included in such proposed amendment, supplement or change,
or by the owners of 20% or more of the area of the land within 100
feet therefrom or by the owners of 20% or more of the land directly
opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of
such opposite land, such amendment, supplement or change shall
not become effective except by the favorable vote of 3/4 of the
members of the City Council.
§ 660-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-196
1:969
§ 660-197. Zoning Map amendments.
G. Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
H. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed amendments to provisions of the Official Zoning
Map. The City shall publish a map clearly showing the existing zoning
uses, divisions, restrictions, regulations and classifications of the City of
Lake Mills for the preceding calendar year.
B. Initiation of request for amendment to Official Zoning Map.
Proceedings for amendment of the Official Zoning Map may be initiated
by any one of the following methods:
(1) An application of the owner or agent of the subject property;
(2) A recommendation of the City staff;
(3) A recommendation of the Plan Commission; or
(4) By action of the City Council.
C. Application requirements. All applications for proposed amendments to
the Official Zoning Map, regardless of the party of their initiation, shall
be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator, and shall be approved
as complete by the Zoning Administrator prior to the formal initiation of
this procedure. The submittal of an application to the City Clerk to
initiate this procedure shall not occur until the Zoning Administrator
has certified acceptance of the complete application. No placement of
the application on any agenda for action shall occur without
certification. The item may be placed on any agenda as a discussiononly
item, by the Zoning Administrator or Plan Commission Chair,
without an application. Prior to the submittal of the official notice
regarding the application to the newspaper by the City Clerk, the
petitioner shall provide the City Clerk with the requisite number of
copies of the complete application. Said application shall be comprised
of the following:
(1) A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the
zoning is proposed to be amended, and all other lands within 200
feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the
names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as they
appear on the current tax records of the City of Lake Mills. Said
map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject
property and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains
that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be
§ 660-196 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-197
1:970
submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a
photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one
inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a
graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be provided;
(2) A map, such as the Land Use Plan or Zoning Map, of the
generalized location of the subject property in relation to the City
as a whole; and
(3) As an optional requirement, the petitioner shall provide
justification for the proposed map amendment, consisting of the
reasons why the petitioner believes the proposed map amendment
is in harmony with recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan,
particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards set out
in Subsection D(3).
D. Review by the Zoning Administrator. The proposed amendment to the
Official Zoning Map shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as
follows:
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete and fulfills the requirements of this chapter. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not
complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this section, he
shall return the application to the petitioner. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall
so notify the petitioner.
(2) Upon notifying the petitioner that his application is complete, the
Zoning Administrator shall review the application and evaluate and
comment on the written justification for the proposed map
amendment provided in the application per Subsection C(3).
(3) The Zoning Administrator may also evaluate the application to
determine whether the proposed Zoning Map amendment is in
harmony with the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan,
particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards below:
(a) The proposed Official Zoning Map amendment furthers the
purposes of this chapter as outlined in § 660-3 and the
applicable rules and regulations of the WDNR and FEMA.
(b) The following factors have arisen that are not properly
addressed on the current Official Zoning Map:
[1] The destinations of the Official Zoning Map should be
brought into conformity with the Comprehensive Plan;
[2] A mistake was made in mapping on the Official Zoning
Map;
[3] Factors have changed (such as the availability of new data,
the presence of new roads or other infrastructure,
§ 660-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-197
1:971
additional development, annexation, or other zoning
changes) making the subject property more appropriate
for a different zoning district; or
[4] Growth patterns or rates have changed, thereby creating
the need for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map.
(c) The proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map maintains
the desired consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and
land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject
property.
(4) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the report per Subsection
D(2), and if it has been prepared, the report per Subsection D(3), to
the Plan Commission for the Commission's review and use in the
making its recommendation to the City Council. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with
the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning
Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
E. Review and recommendation by the Plan Commission. The City Council
shall not make an amendment to the Official Zoning Map without
allowing for a recommendation from the Plan Commission per the
provisions of this subsection.
(1) The Plan Commission shall schedule a reasonable time and place
for a public hearing to consider the application within 45 days of
the acceptance and determination of the complete application as
determined by the Zoning Administrator. The petitioner may
appear in person, by agent, and/or by attorney. Notice of the
proposed amendment and the public hearing shall conform to the
requirements of § 660-209 of this chapter.
(2) Within 60 days after the public hearing (or within an extension of
said period requested in writing by the petitioner and granted by
the Plan Commission), the Plan Commission shall make a written
report to the City Council stating its findings regarding Subsection
D above and its recommendations regarding the application as a
whole. Said report shall include a formal finding of facts developed
and approved by the Plan Commission concerning the
requirements of Subsection D(3).
(3) If the Plan Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after
the filing of said complete application [and in the absence of a
petitioner-approved extension per Subsection E(2)], then the City
Council may hold a public hearing within 30 days after the
expiration of said sixty-day period. Failure to receive said written
report from the Plan Commission per Subsection E(2) shall not
invalidate the proceedings or actions of the City Council. If such a
public hearing is necessary, the City Council shall provide notice
per the requirements of Subsection E(1).
§ 660-197 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-197
1:972
§ 660-198. Shoreland-wetland zoning amendments.
(4) If the Plan Commission recommends approval of an application, it
shall state in the minutes or in a subsequently issued written
decision, its conclusion and any finding of facts supporting its
conclusion as to the following: that the potential public benefits of
the proposed amendment outweigh any and all potential adverse
impacts of the proposed amendment, as identified in Subsection
D(3), after taking into consideration the proposal by the petitioner.
F. Review and action by the City Council.
(1) The City Council shall consider the Plan Commission's
recommendation regarding the proposed amendment to the Official
Zoning Map. The Council may request further information and/or
additional reports from the Plan Commission, the Zoning
Administrator, and/or the petitioner. The Council may take final
action on the application to the Official Zoning Map at the time of
its initial meeting, or may continue the proceedings, at the
Council's, or the petitioner's request. The City Council may approve
the amendment as originally proposed, may approve the proposed
amendment with modifications (per the recommendations of the
Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission, authorized outside
experts, or its own members) or may deny approval of the proposed
amendment. Any action to amend the Official Zoning Map requires
a 2/3 vote of the Council.
(2) In case of protest against such change duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more either of the areas of
land included in such proposed amendment, supplement or change,
or by the owners of 20% or more of the area of the land within 100
feet therefrom or by the owners of 20% or more of the land directly
opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of
such opposite land, such amendment, supplement or change shall
not become effective except by the favorable vote of 3/4 of the
members of the City Council.
G. Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
H. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure.
A. Purpose. Official ordinance amendments are required for any change to
a shoreland-wetland zoning regulation. Such amendments shall be
made upon petition in accordance with the provisions of § 62.23, Wis.
Stats.
§ 660-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-198
1:973
B. Initiation of request for amendment to Shoreland-Wetland District.
Proceedings for amendment of the Shoreland-Wetland District may be
initiated as outlined in §§ 660-196B and 660-197B.
C. Application requirements. Application for an amendment of the
Shoreland-Wetland District shall comply with the requirements outlined
in §§ 660-196C and 660-197C.
D. Review criteria. In order to ensure that the shoreland protection
objectives found in § 281.31, Wis. Stats., will be accomplished by the
shoreland-wetland zoning regulations, the City shall not rezone a
shoreland-wetland zoning district, or portion thereof, if the proposed
rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon the following:
(1) Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity;
(2) Maintenance of dry season flow or the discharge of groundwater to
a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another
area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland;
(3) Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or
organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable
waters;
(4) Shoreline protection against soil erosion;
(5) Wildlife habitat; or
(6) Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interests,
including scarce wetland types.
E. Review by Zoning Enforcement Officer. The proposed amendment to a
Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District shall be reviewed by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer as outlined in § 660-196D.
F. Review by the Department of Natural Resources.
(1) The City Clerk shall submit a copy of every petition for an
amendment to shoreland-wetland zoning regulations to the
appropriate district office of the Department of Natural Resources
within five days of the filing of such petition with the Clerk.
(2) The appropriate district office of the Department of Natural
Resources shall be provided with written notice of the public
hearing at least 10 days prior to such hearing.
(3) If the Department determines that the proposed rezoning may have
a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in § NR
117.05(4)(d), the Department shall notify the City Plan Commission
of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing
held on the proposed amendment.
G. Review and recommendation by Plan Commission.
§ 660-198 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-198
1:974
(1) All proposed text and map amendments to Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning Ordinance shall be referred to the City Plan Commission for
a public notice and hearing as required by § 62.23, Wis. Stats.
(2) Review and recommendation by the Plan Commission shall be in
accordance with the provisions outlined in § 660-196E.
(3) As soon as possible after holding a public hearing, the City Plan
Commission shall submit its written findings and recommendations
to the City Council. Said findings shall outline the reasons for the
Commission's recommendations.
H. Review and action by the City Council.
(1) After the receipt of the City Plan Commission's findings and
recommendations, the City Council may approve or disapprove of
the proposed amendments.
(2) If the City Council approves of the proposed amendment and the
Department determines, after review as required by § NR
117.06(2)(b), that the City shoreland-wetland zoning regulations if
so amended will no longer comply with requirements of § 61.351 or
62.231, Wis. Stats., the Department shall, after notice and hearing,
adopt a complying ordinance for the City under § 61.351(6) or
62.231(6), Wis. Stats. The appropriate district office of the
Department shall be provided with:
(a) A copy of the City Plan Commission's findings and
recommendations on the proposed amendment within 10 days
after it is issued; and
(b) Written notice of the City Council's decision on the proposed
amendment within 10 days after it is issued.
(3) If the Department has notified the City Plan Commission that a
proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon
any of the criteria listed in Subsection D above, that proposed
amendment, if approved by the City Council, shall not become
effective until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice
of the City Council approval was mailed to the Department, as
required by Subsection H(2) above. If within the thirty-day period,
the Department notifies the City Council that the Department
intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning
ordinance of the City under § 61.351(6) or 62.231(6), Wis. Stats.,
the proposed amendment shall not become effective while the
ordinance adoption procedure is proceeding, but shall have its
effect stayed until § 61.351(6) or 62.231(6), Wis. Stats., procedure
is completed or otherwise terminated.
I. Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of
§ 660-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-198
1:975
§ 660-199. Floodplain Zoning administration and procedures.
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of factors found valid by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
J. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure.
A. Administration. The Zoning Enforcement Officer, Plan Commission, and
Zoning Board of Appeals adopted under § 62.23(7), Wis. Stats, shall
administer the Floodplain Ordinance.
(1) Zoning Enforcement Officer. The Zoning Enforcement Officer is
authorized to administer this Zoning Ordinance and shall have the
following duties and powers:
(a) Advise petitioners of the ordinance provisions, assist in
preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the
regional flood elevation (RFE) for the proposed development is
shown on all permit applications.
(b) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, and issue certificates of
compliance where appropriate.
(c) Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to
determine if substantial damage to the structures has
occurred.
(d) Keep records of all official actions such as:
[1] All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved.
[2] Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations.
[3] Floodproofing certificates.
[4] Water surface profiles, Floodplain Zoning Maps and
ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including
changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
[5] All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures.
[6] List of nonconforming structures and uses.
(e) Submit copies of the following items to the WDNR Regional
office:
[1] Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and
map or text amendments.
§ 660-198 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-199
1:976
[2] Copies of case-by-case analyses and other required
information, including an annual summary of floodplain
zoning actions taken.
[3] Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and
all related correspondence concerning the assessments.
(f) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this
Zoning Ordinance to the Plan Commission and attorney for
prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the DNR
Regional Office. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(g) Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial
reports to the FEMA Regional Office.
(2) Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall review and advise the
City Council on all proposed amendments to this Zoning Ordinance,
maps and text. The Plan Commission shall not grant variances to
the terms of the chapter in place of action by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, amend the text or Zoning Maps in place of official action
by the Council.
(3) Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby
authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this
Zoning Ordinance. The Board shall exercise the powers conferred
by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business.
(a) Powers and duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall:
[1] Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there
is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement or administration of this Zoning Ordinance.
[2] Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning
the district boundaries shown on the official floodplain
Zoning Map.
[3] Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from
the ordinance standards.
(b) Appeals. Appeals to the Board shall be in accordance with the
provisions outlined in § 660-176 of this chapter.
[1] For appeals of all denied permits, the Board shall:
[a] Follow the procedures of § 660-176D.
[b] Consider Plan Commission recommendations.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
[c] Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
§ 660-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-199
1:977
[2] For appeals concerning increases in regional flood
elevation (RFE), the Board shall:
[a] Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the
data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases
equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed
after amending the flood profile and map and all
appropriate legal arrangements are made with all
adversely affected property owners.
[b] Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data
properly demonstrates that the project does not cause
an increase equal to or greater than 0.01 foot,
provided no other reasons for denial exist.
(c) Required information. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
review all data related to the appeal. This may include:
[1] Permit application data listed in Subsection B below.
[2] Floodway/flood-fringe determination data in § 660-133D.
[3] Data listed in § 660-131C(1)(b) where the petitioner has
not submitted this information to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer.
[4] Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to
the Board with the appeal.
(d) Notice.
[1] Notice shall be provided in accordance with § 660-176E of
this chapter.
[2] Notice shall be provided to the WDNR Regional office at
least 10 days in advance of the hearing.
(e) Hearing.
[1] Hearings shall be in accordance with the provisions
outlined in § 660-176 of this chapter.
[2] Any party may appear in person or by agent.
[3] The Board shall:
[a] Resolve boundary disputes according to
§ 660-176G(4).
[b] Decide variance applications according to § 660-176.
[c] Decide appeals of permit denials according to
§ 660-199B.
§ 660-199 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-199
1:978
(f) Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
[1] Be made within a reasonable time.
[2] Be sent to the Department Regional Office within 10 days
of the decision.
[3] Be a written determination signed by the Chairman or
secretary of the Board.
[4] State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's
decision.
[5] Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole
or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or
grant or deny the variance application.
[6] Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a
variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the
Board proceedings.
B. Required permit. A permit shall be obtained before any new
development or any structural repair or change in the use of a building
or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated.
Application to the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall include:
(1) Zoning permit information as outlined in § 660-187 of this chapter.
The following additional information shall be illustrated on the site
plan as required under § 660-206D of this chapter:
(a) Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot.
(b) Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways.
(c) Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and street center lines.
(d) Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems.
(e) Location and elevation of existing or future access roads.
(f) Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from
the official Floodplain Zoning Maps.
(g) The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any
fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study, either
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD).
§ 660-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-199
1:979
(h) Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation (RFE)
in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to
determine whether or not the requirements of § 660-131 or
660-132 are met; and
(i) Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or
discharge according to § 660-130B(1). This may include any of
the information noted in § 660-131C(1).
(2) Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All
hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in
Wisconsin. The study contractor shall be responsible for the
technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and
approved by the WDNR.
(a) Zone A floodplains:
[1] Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the
standards in § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code,
Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Discharge.
[2] Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Elevation, and the following:
[a] Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic
model shall be based on detailed study information for
downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to
determine adequate starting WSEL for the study.
[b] Channel sections must be surveyed.
[c] Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall
be used for the development of cross-section overbank
and floodplain mapping.
[d] A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross
sections is allowed in developed areas with additional
intermediate cross sections required at transitions in
channel bottom slope including a survey of the
channel at each location.
[e] The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used.
[f] A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of
road is required at each structure.
[g] Additional cross sections are required at the
downstream and upstream limits of the proposed
§ 660-199 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-199
1:980
development and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length of the reach if greater
than 500 feet.
[h] Standard accepted engineering practices shall be
used when assigning parameters for the base model
such as flow, Manning's N values, expansion and
contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The
base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data
such as high-water marks to determine the
reasonableness of the model results. If no historical
data is available, adequate justification shall be
provided for any parameters outside standard
accepted engineering practices.
[i] The model must extend past the upstream limit of the
difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles
in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The
height difference between the proposed flood profile
and the existing study profiles shall be no more than
0.00 feet.
[3] Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be
provided, showing all cross section locations, floodway/
floodplain limits based on best available topographic data,
geographic limits of the proposed development and
whether the proposed development is located in the
floodway.
[a] If the proposed development is located outside of the
floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on
the regional flood elevation.
[b] If any part of the proposed development is in the
floodway, it must be added to the base model to show
the difference between existing and proposed
conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients
remain the same as in the existing model, unless
adequate justification based on standard accepted
engineering practices is provided.
(b) Zone AE floodplains.
[1] Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the
existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be
based on § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydrologic
Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
[2] Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis. Admin.
Code, Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Elevation and the following:
§ 660-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-199
1:981
[a] Duplicate effective model. The effective model shall be
reproduced to ensure correct transference of the
model data and to allow integration of the revised data
to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and
downstream of the revised reach. If data from the
effective model is available, models shall be generated
that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations
shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS report to
within 0.1 foot.
[b] Corrected effective model. The Corrected Effective
Model shall not include any man-made physical
changes since the effective model date, but shall
import the model into the most current version of
HEC-RAS for Department review.
[c] Existing (pre-project conditions) model. The existing
model shall be required to support conclusions about
the actual impacts of the project associated with the
revised (post-project) model or to establish more upto-
date models on which to base the revised (postproject)
model.
[d] Revised (post-project conditions) model. The revised
(post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the
existing model and any proposed changes to the
topography caused by the proposed development. This
model shall reflect proposed conditions.
[e] All changes to the duplicate effective model and
subsequent models must be supported by certified
topographic information, bridge plans, construction
plans and survey notes.
[f] Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to
the stream reach for which the revision is being
requested. Cross-sections upstream and downstream
of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the
effective model and result in water surface elevations
and top widths computed by the revised models
matching those in the effective models upstream and
downstream of the revised reach as required. The
effective model shall not be truncated.
[3] Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be
submitted to the Department for review which meet the
following conditions:
[a] Consistency between the revised hydraulic models,
the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the
revised flood profiles, topographic work map,
§ 660-199 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-199
1:982
annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary Floodway
Maps (FBFMs), construction plans, bridge plans.
[b] Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour
interval, and a planimetric map showing the
applicable items. If a digital version of the map is
available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM
may be more easily revised.
[c] Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised 1% and
0.2% annual chance floodplains and floodway
boundaries.
[d] If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital
mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used, then all
supporting documentation or metadata must be
included with the data submission along with the
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and
State Plane Coordinate System in accordance with
FEMA mapping specifications.
[e] The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the
effective floodplain boundaries.
[f] All cross-sections from the effective model shall be
labeled in accordance with the effective map and a
cross-section lookup table shall be included to relate
to the model input-numbering scheme.
[g] Both the current and proposed floodways shall be
shown on the map.
[h] The stream center line, or profile baseline used to
measure stream distances in the model shall be visible
on the map.
(c) Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this
Zoning Ordinance shall expire no more than 180 days after
issuance. The permit may be extended for a maximum of 180
days for good and sufficient cause.
(3) Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and
no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to,
modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a
certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, except where no permit is required, subject to the following
provisions:
(a) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
§ 660-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-199
1:983
(b) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit.
(c) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of
compliance shall be issued within 10 days after written
notification that the permitted work is completed.
(d) The petitioner shall submit a certification signed by a
registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor
that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in
compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures
also require certification by a registered professional engineer
or architect that floodproofing measures meet the
requirements of § 660-135D.
(4) Other permits. The petitioner must secure all necessary permits
from federal, state, and local agencies, including those required by
the United States Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. § 1344.
C. Public information.
(1) Marks shall be placed on structures to show the depth of
inundation during the regional flood.
(2) All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
(3) All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district
any real property is located.
D. Amendments.
(1) Applicability. Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if
amendments are made to this Zoning Ordinance, the official
Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles,
in accordance with § 660-199D(2).
(a) In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or
increases shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and
amendments are made to this Zoning Ordinance, the official
Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and water surface
profiles, in accordance with § 660-199D(2). Any such
alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the
DNR.
(b) In A Zones, increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only
be permitted if the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of
Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this
Zoning Ordinance, the Official Floodplain Maps, floodway
§ 660-199 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-199
1:984
lines, and water surface profiles, in accordance with
Subsection D(2).
(2) General. The City may change or supplement the floodplain zoning
district boundaries and this Zoning Ordinance in the manner
provided by law. Actions which require an amendment include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(a) Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing
any increase in the regional flood height;
(b) Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse
alterations on the FIRM;
(c) Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps
listed in § 660-130A(4);
(d) Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to
a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is
contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain;
(e) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles
and floodplain maps;
(f) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by
§ NR 116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or
for changes by the municipality; and
(g) All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter
floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the
flood-fringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM
requires prior approval by FEMA.
(3) Procedures. Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of
any party according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23.
Ordinance and map amendments shall be made in accordance this
Subsection and with §§ 660-196 and 660-197 of this chapter. Such
petitions shall include all necessary data required by §§ 660-133D
and 660-199B. The permit shall not be issued until a Letter of Map
Revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed changes.
(a) The proposed amendment shall be referred to the Plan
Commission for a public hearing and recommendation to the
governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing
shall be submitted to the WDNR Regional Office for review
prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply
with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
(b) No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and
approved by the Department.
§ 660-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-199
1:985
§ 660-200. Performance standards administration and enforcement.
(c) All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs
flow causing any increase in the regional flood height shall
obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal
arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and
notify local units of government before the amendment can be
approved by the governing body.
E. Floodplain enforcement and penalties. Any violation of the provisions of
this Zoning Ordinance by any person shall be unlawful and shall be
referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all
such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the
municipality a penalty of not less than $30 and not more than $50,
together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued
violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this
Zoning Ordinance is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined
and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the
municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to § 87.30, Wis.
Stats.
A. Intent. It is the intent of Article VIII that determinations necessary for
administration and enforcement of performance standards set forth
herein can be made with satisfactory accuracy by a reasonable person
using normal senses.
(1) The Zoning Enforcement Officer or a designee shall make such
determinations before a notice of violation is issued.
(2) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall give written notice, by
certified mail or other means ensuring a signed receipt for such
notice, to the person or persons responsible for the alleged
violations and to the property owners, if different from the persons
responsible. The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged
violation and the reasons why the Zoning Enforcement Officer
believes there is a violation in fact, and shall require an answer or
correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer within 30 days.
(3) The notice shall state, and it is hereby declared, that failure to reply
or to correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the
administrative official within the time limit set constitutes a
violation of the terms of this chapter.
B. Enforcement. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall enforce violations
of the performance standards under Article VIII of this chapter, after
following Subsection A(1), (2) and (3).
C. Violations and legal actions. If after investigation the Zoning
Enforcement Officer finds that any provision of Article VIII is being
violated, he shall give notice of such violation by hand delivery or by
§ 660-199 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-200
1:986
§ 660-201. Erosion control administration.
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of such premises,
demanding that such violation be abated within 30 days of the date of
hand delivery or of the date of mailing of such notice. If the violation
is not abated within the thirty-day period, the Zoning Administrator
may institute actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, to
enjoin, restrain, or abate any violations of this section. Nothing in
this subsection shall prohibit the City from instituting public nuisance
procedures in accordance with this chapter, nor shall any other remedy
available to the Zoning Enforcement Officer be limited under this
subsection.
A. Permit application, control plan, and permit issuance. No landowner or
land user may commence a land disturbance or land development
activity subject to § 660-143 and this section without receiving prior
approval of a control plan for the site and a permit from the Zoning
Enforcement Officer. At least one landowner or land user controlling or
using the site and desiring to undertake a land-disturbing or landdeveloping
activity subject to § 660-143 and this section shall submit an
application for a permit and a control plan and pay an application fee to
the Zoning Enforcement Officer. By submitting an application, the
petitioner is authorizing the Zoning Enforcement Officer to enter the
site to obtain information required for the review of the control plan.
B. Content of the control plan for land-disturbing activities covering more
than one acre.
(1) Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions at a reasonable
scale showing the site and immediately adjacent areas.
(a) Site boundaries and adjacent lands which accurately identify
site location;
(b) Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other
watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site;
(c) One-hundred-year floodplain, flood-fringes and floodways;
(d) Location of the predominant soil types;
(e) Vegetative cover;
(f) Location and dimensions of stormwater drainage systems and
natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the
site;
(g) Locations and dimensions of utilities, structures, roads,
highways, and paving; and
(h) Site topography at a contour interval not to exceed five feet.
§ 660-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-201
1:987
(2) Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the
same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes.
(3) Site construction plan. A site construction plan including:
(a) Locations and dimensions of all proposed land-disturbing
activities;
(b) Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt
stockpiles;
(c) Locations and dimensions of all construction site management
control measures necessary to meet the requirements of
§ 660-143 and this section.
(d) Schedule of anticipated starting and completion date of each
land-disturbing or land-developing activity, including the
installation of construction site control measures needed to
meet the requirements of § 660-143 and this section; and
(e) Provisions for maintenance of the construction site control
measures during construction.
C. Content of control plan statement for land-disturbing activities covering
less than one acre, but meeting the applicability requirements stated in
§ 660-143E. An erosion control plan statement (with simple map) shall
be submitted to briefly describe the site and erosion controls (including
the site development schedule) that will be used to meet the
requirements of § 660-143 and this section.
D. Review of control plan. Within 45 days of receipt of the application,
control plan, (or control plan statement) and fee, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall review the application and control plan to
determine if the requirements of § 660-143 and this section are met.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall approve the plan, inform the
petitioner and issue a permit. If the conditions are not met, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall inform the petitioner in writing and may
either require needed information or disapprove the plan. Within 30
days of receipt of needed information, the Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall again determine if the plan meets the requirements of § 660-143
and this section. If the plan is disapproved, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall inform the petitioner in writing of the reasons for the
disapproval.
E. Permits.
(1) Duration. Permits shall be valid for a period of 180 days, or the
length of the building permit or other construction authorizations,
whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer may extend the period one or more times for
up to an additional 180 days. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may
require additional control measures as a condition of the extension
§ 660-201 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-201
1:988
if they are necessary to meet the requirements of § 660-143 and
this section.
(2) Surety bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit,
the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require the petitioner to
deposit a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a
good faith execution of the approved control plan and any permit
conditions.
(3) Permit conditions. All permits shall require the permittee to:
(a) Notify the Zoning Enforcement Officer within 48 hours of
commencing any land-disturbing activity;
(b) Notify the Zoning Enforcement Officer of completion of any
control measures within 14 days after their installation;
(c) Obtain permission in writing from the Zoning Enforcement
Officer prior to modifying the control plan;
(d) Install all control measures as identified in the approved
control plan;
(e) Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage
systems, control measures and other facilities identified in the
control plan;
(f) Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces
and drainageways resulting from land-developing or -
disturbing activities;
(g) Inspect the construction control measures after each rain of
0.5 inch or more and at least once each week and make needed
repairs;
(h) Allow the Zoning Enforcement Officer to enter the site for the
purpose of inspecting compliance with the control plan or for
performing any work necessary to bring the site into
compliance with the control plan; and
(i) Keep a copy of the control plan on the site.
F. Inspection. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall inspect construction
sites at least once a month during the period starting March 1 and
ending October 31 and at least two times during the period starting
November 1 and ending February 28 to ensure compliance with the
control plan. If land-disturbing or land development activities are being
carried out without a permit, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
enter the land pursuant to the provisions of § 66.0119(1), (2), and (3),
Wis. Stats.
G. Enforcement.
(1) The Zoning Enforcement Officer may post a stop-work order if:
§ 660-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-201
1:989
(a) Any land-disturbing or land-developing activity regulated
under § 660-143 and this section is being undertaken without a
permit;
(b) The control plan is not being implemented in a good-faith
manner; or
(c) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
(2) If the permittee does not cease the activity or comply with the
control plan or permit conditions within 10 days, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer may revoke the permit.
(3) If the landowner or land user where no permit has been issued does
not cease the activity within 10 days, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer may request the City Attorney to obtain a cease-and-desist
order.
(4) The Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Zoning Board of Appeals
may retract the stop-work order or the revocation.
(5) Ten days after posting a stop-work order, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer may issue a notice of intent to the permittee or landowner
or land user of the Zoning Enforcement Officer's intent to perform
work necessary to comply with § 660-143 and this section. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer may go to the land and commence the
work after 14 days from issuing the notice of intent. The costs of
the work performed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, plus
interest at the rate authorized by the City Council, shall be billed to
the permittee or the landowner. In the event a permittee or
landowner fails to pay the amount due, the Clerk shall enter the
amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special charge
assessment against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0703(13). [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(6) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a forfeiture as set by City Council and the costs of
prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(7) Compliance with the provisions of § 660-143 and this section may
also be enforced by injunction.
H. Appeals.
(1) Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any
order, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer in administering § 660-143 and this section.
§ 660-201 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-201
1:990
§ 660-202. through § 660-204. (Reserved)
§ 660-205. Building site and operation (BSO) plan review and
approval.
(2) Who may appeal. Any petitioner, permittee, landowner, or land user
may appeal any order, decision or determination made by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer in administering § 660-143 and this
section. [Amended 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 570]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to specify the requirements and
procedures for the review and approval of site plan applications. The
provisions of this section are designed to ensure that all proposed land
use and development activity complies with the requirements of this
chapter. Specifically, this section requires that the initiation of all
development activity (including building permits, zoning certificates,
occupancy permits for a change of use of an existing lot or structure
where there is contemplated a site plan revision, clear cutting, grading
or filling) require the approval of building, site, and operational plans
by the City before the building, occupancy, and building permits can be
issued — except, however, that development activity associated with an
approved final plat of subdivision for single-family and/or duplex/twin
home dwelling units, and development activity associated with the full
and complete implementation of a project approved within the PIP
phase of the planned development (PDD) is exempt from this
requirement.
B. Applicability of this section.
(1) The procedures to be followed in this section shall be applicable to
design, building and operational plans for all construction or
external remodeling or enlargement of any primary or accessory
structure, if such construction or external remodeling requires a
building permit, and if such development activity is located within
the B1, B2, PB, R3-12, I1, I2, or PI Zoning Districts, unless said
district specifically provides for an exemption from either site plan
approval or administrative design review.
(2) If the regulations contained elsewhere within this chapter require a
site plan approval or design review procedure of any kind prior to
initiating any construction or remodeling or enlargement activity of
any structure whatsoever, this sectionshall supersede such
procedural requirements contained within those other provisions,
and this sectionshall be the exclusive procedural requirement for
applying for and receiving any site plan or design review approval.
(3) If the regulations contained elsewhere within this chapter require a
site plan approval or design review procedure of any kind, the
substantive standards for landscaping, open space, parking,
screening, lighting, building materials or any other similar
requirement that is of a substantive, rather than purely procedural
§ 660-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-205
1:991
nature, then those substantive requirements shall continue to be
applicable, but the process for review shall be exclusively those
procedural requirements contained in this section.
C. Review process/procedure.
(1) Initiation of request for BSO plan approval. Procedures for
approval of a BSO plan shall be initiated by the owner(s) of the
subject property, or their legally authorized representative(s).
(2) Preapplication meeting. The petitioner is encouraged, but not
required, to first meet with the City Manager, planning consultant,
engineering consultant, and other applicable City staff to discuss
preliminary concepts and plans for the development. Guidance will
be provided to the petitioner on technical requirements and
procedures, and a timetable for project review may be discussed.
(3) Application requirements. Petitioner shall submit a complete BSO
plan application as outlined in Subsection F below for BSO
submittal requirements for City staff review, accompanied by all
fees and deposits which from time to time may be adopted by the
City Council and in effect at the time of submittal.
(4) City staff review. The City Manager, or designee, shall review the
application and submitted plans to determine whether the
development complies with the provisions of this chapter. As part of
its review, the City Manager may consult with other City staff,
consultants, the Plan Commission and officials of the City, county,
state, fire and emergency medical services departments, or other
agencies. The City staff review may be combined with related Plan
Commission reviews for rezoning, conditional use permit, land
division, or other land use approvals. The City Manager or his
designee shall reserve the right to defer decision regarding a BSO
plan to the Plan Commission for review and approval.
(5) Time frame. The administrative review shall not be conducted until
the planning consultant has received a complete application. After
the application is certified as complete, the review of the submitted
application shall be completed within 20 working days of
application certification.
D. Appeal.
(1) To Plan Commission. If the petitioner is dissatisfied with the
decision of the City Manager, the petitioner may apply within 30
days after the decision is issued to the Plan Commission for a
review of that decision. The Plan Commission of the City of Lake
Mills shall hear such appeals and issue a written decision with
respect to the appeal within 30 days after receipt of the appeal.
(2) To the City Council. If the petitioner is dissatisfied with the decision
of the Plan Commission, the petitioner may apply within 30 days
§ 660-205 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-205
1:992
after the decision is issued to the City Council for a review of that
decision. The City Council of the City of Lake Mills shall hear such
appeals and issue a written decision with respect to the appeal
within 30 days after receipt of the appeal.
E. Project commencement. No building permit shall be issued and no
development project under the jurisdiction of this section shall
commence construction until the Zoning Enforcement Officer has
received, in writing, approval of the application and submitted plans (or
Plan Commission or City Council approval if the decision was appealed)
from the City Manager, and all conditions of approval that reasonably
could have been satisfied have in fact been satisfied. The property
owner shall be responsible for installing and maintaining all site
improvements in conformance with the approved plans and all
conditions.
F. BSO submittal requirements. All building, site, and operation plan
applications for review shall contain or include the plans listed in this
section, and such other information as deemed necessary for
consideration or as waived by the Plan Commission or the City Council.
All plans shall be drawn to a recognized scale, and include a North
arrow, date of preparation, and contact information.
(1) Written description. A narrative which outlines the following:
(a) Full name and contact information of the petitioner and/or
agent, and property owner, if different;
(b) Full name and contact information of petitioner's engineers,
surveyors, architects, and other design professionals used in
BSO plan preparation;
(c) Existing zoning district(s) and proposed zoning district(s), if
different;
(d) Current land uses present on the subject property;
(e) Proposed land uses for the subject property;
(f) Land use designation(s) as depicted in the adopted
Comprehensive Plan;
(g) Description of environmental features existing on the property;
(h) Projected number of residents, employees, and/or daily
customers;
(i) Proposed amount of dwelling units, floor area, open space
area, and landscape surface area, expressed in square feet and
acreage to the nearest 1/100 of an acre;
§ 660-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-205
1:993
(j) Resulting site density, floor area ratio, and greenspace as
calculated using the criteria established in § 660-57 of this
chapter;
(k) Operational considerations relating to hours of operation,
projected normal and peak water usage, sanitary sewer or
septic loadings;
(l) Traffic generation;
(m) Operational considerations relating to potential nuisance
creation pertaining to the appropriate design of street access,
traffic visibility, parking, loading, exterior storage, exterior
lighting, vibration, noise, air pollution, odor, electromagnetic
radiation, glare and heat, fire and explosion, toxic or noxious
materials, waste materials, drainage, and hazardous materials;
(n) Material safety data sheets (MSDS) for all materials
anticipated to be used or stored on site;
(o) Exterior building and fencing materials;
(p) Possible future expansion and related implications for
Subsection F(1)(a) through (o) above; and
(q) Any other information pertinent to adequate understanding by
the Plan Commission or City staff of the intended use and its
relation to nearby properties.
(2) Site plan. Illustrating, where applicable:
(a) Lot area and current zoning of the site;
(b) All existing and proposed lot lines, labeling dimensions,
required minimum setbacks for buildings and other structures;
(c) Wetlands, shoreland zoning areas, and floodplains;
(d) Slopes of greater than 12%;
(e) Existing and proposed buildings, indicating gross floor area
and capacity;
(f) Other structures, such as accessory structures, fences, etc.;
(g) Parking lots, vehicle and pedestrian circulation and driveway
areas, loading areas, and proposed ingress and egress to the
site;
(h) Calculations for determining the number of off-street parking
spaces as required by the § 660-41 of this chapter.
(i) Outdoor storage areas, dumpsters, and proposed screening;
§ 660-205 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-205
1:994
§ 660-206. Planned Development District (PDD) procedures.
(j) Adjacent streets and land uses, including all buildings within
50 feet of the site's boundaries.
(3) Tree survey plan. As outlined in § 660-113.
(4) Landscape plan. As outlined in § 660-113.
(5) Grading and stormwater plans. As required to meet all applicable
City, county, and state requirements, and including existing and
proposed surface elevations of the parcel.
(6) Erosion control. As outlined in § 660-143.
(7) Building elevations. All development shall comply with the
applicable regulations outlined in Article V, Design Guidelines and
Regulations, of this chapter.
(8) Sign plan. All proposed exterior signage shall comply with Article
VI, Signage, of this chapter.
(9) Exterior lighting plan. Petitioners shall submit a unified lighting
plan in accordance with § 660-142 of this chapter.
G. Time restrictions for BSO plan approvals. Approvals granted for BSO
plans, in which the petitioner has not commenced construction activity
or preparation of the land, or has not submitted a certified survey map
or preliminary plat within the past 24 months of the date of approval,
said approval will expire and reapplication will be required. A
reapplication shall be limited solely to reasonable compliance with
current design, locational, and operational requirements. A
reapplication shall not involve the basic permissibility of the use where
such use is permitted by right at the time of reapplication. The Plan
Commission may grant one six-month extension if requested 30 days
prior to the pending expiration date provided that the petitioner
demonstrates a valid cause. This section shall be in force and effect for
all applications filed after the date of adoption and publication.
H. Fee. A fee, as established by the City Council from time to time, shall be
required for this procedure.
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) Purpose. Planned developments are designed to forward both the
aesthetic and economic development objectives of the City by
adhering to standards consistent with sound land use and urban
design and by controlling the site design and the appearance,
density or intensity of development in terms of more flexible
requirements for land uses, density, intensity, bulk, landscaping,
and parking requirements. In exchange for such flexibility, the
planned development shall provide a much higher level of site
design, architectural control and other aspects of aesthetic and
§ 660-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-206
1:995
functional excellence than is normally required for other
developments.
(2) Intent. Planned Development Overlay District regulations are
intended to permit greater flexibility and, consequently, more
creative and imaginative design for the development of a site than
is possible under conventional zoning regulations. It is further
intended to promote more economical and efficient use of land
while providing a harmonious variety of housing choices, a higher
level of amenities, adequate buffering between adjacent uses, and
preservation of the natural qualities of open spaces. The planned
development procedure requires a high degree of cooperation
between the developer and the City. The procedure described
herein is designed to give the developer general plan approval
before completing all detailed design work while providing the City
with assurances that the project will retain the character
envisioned at the time of approval.
(3) PDDs are required to meet certain procedural requirements
applicable only to PDDs, in addition to the general requirements of
this chapter. A public hearing process is required to review a
request for a PDD. This process shall essentially combine the
process for a Zoning Map amendment with that required for a
special use, with several additional requirements.
B. Initiation of request for amendment of Chapter 660, Zoning.
Proceedings for amendment of this chapter may be initiated by any one
of the following methods:
(1) An application by any member of the general public;
(2) A recommendation of the City staff;
(3) A recommendation of the Plan Commission; or
(4) By action of the City Council.
C. Application requirements. All applications for proposed planned
development districts, regardless of the party of their initiation per
Subsection B above, shall be approved as complete by the City
Manager. The City Manager shall forward copies of said complete
application to the office of the City Clerk. Said application shall apply to
each of the process steps in Subsection D below.
D. Procedure.
(1) Preapplication conference. The petitioner shall contact the Zoning
Administrator to place an informal discussion item for a planned
development on the Plan Commission agenda. No details beyond
the name of the petitioner and the identification of the discussion
item as a PD is required to be given in the agenda. At the Plan
Commission meeting, the petitioner shall engage in an informal
§ 660-206 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-206
1:996
discussion with the Plan Commission regarding the potential
planned development. Appropriate topics for discussion may
include the location of the PD, general project themes and images,
the general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses being
considered, approximate residential densities and nonresidential
intensities, the general treatment of natural features, the general
relationship to nearby properties and public streets, and
relationship to the Comprehensive Plan. Points of discussion and
conclusions reached in this stage of the process shall be in no way
binding upon the petitioner or the City, but should be considered as
the informal, nonbinding basis for proceeding to the next step.
(2) Concept plan. The petitioner shall provide the Zoning
Administrator with a draft planned development concept plan for a
determination of completeness prior to placing the proposed
planned development on the Plan Commission agenda for concept
plan review. This submittal shall contain all of the following items,
prior to its acceptance by the Zoning Administrator and placement
of the item on a Plan Commission agenda for concept plan review:
(a) Legal description of the subject property.
(b) A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11
inches by 17 inches, as depicted on a copy of the City of Lake
Mills Land Use Plan;
(c) A general written description of the proposed Planned
Development District, including:
[1] General project themes and images;
[2] The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses;
[3] Approximate residential densities and nonresidential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor
area ratio and impervious surface area ratio;
[4] The general treatment of natural features;
[5] The general relationship to nearby properties and public
streets;
[6] The general relationship of the project to the
Comprehensive Plan;
[7] An initial draft list of zoning standards which will not be
met by the proposed PDD and the location(s) in which they
apply and, a complete list of zoning standards which will
be more than met by the proposed PDD and the location(s)
in which they apply. The purpose of this listing shall be to
provide the City staff with information necessary to
determine the relative merits of the project in regard to
private benefit versus public benefit and in regard to the
§ 660-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-206
1:997
mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design
flexibility.
(d) A written description of potentially requested exemptions from
the requirements of the underlying zoning district, in the
following order:
[1] Land use exemptions;
[2] Density and intensity exemptions;
[3] Bulk exemptions;
[4] Landscaping exceptions;
[5] Parking and loading requirement exceptions.
(e) A conceptual plan drawing (at 11 inches by 17 inches) of
general land use layout and general location of major public
streets and/or private drives. Petitioner may submit copies of a
larger version of the plan in addition to the eleven-inch-byseventeen-
inch reduction.
(f) At the Plan Commission meeting, the petitioner shall engage in
an informal discussion regarding the PDD concept plan
submittal. Appropriate topics for discussion may include any of
the information provided in the PDD concept plan submittal or
other items as determined by the Plan Commission.
(g) Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of
the process shall in no way be binding upon petitioner or the
City, but should be considered as informal, nonbinding basis
for proceeding to the next step. The preferred procedure is for
one or more iterations of City staff review of the concept plan
to occur prior to introduction of the formal rezoning petition
which accompanies general development plan (GDP)
application.
(3) General development plan (GDP). The petitioner shall provide the
Zoning Administrator with a draft GDP plan submittal for a
determination of completeness prior to placing the proposal on the
Plan Commission agenda for review.
(a) The submittal shall contain all of the following items, with the
number of copies to be determined by the Zoning
Administrator, prior to its acceptance by the Zoning
Administrator and placement of the item on a Plan Commission
agenda for review:
[1] Legal description of the subject property.
§ 660-206 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-206
1:998
[2] A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11
inches by 17 inches, as depicted on a copy of the City of
Lake Mills Land Use Plan.
[3] A map of the subject property showing all lands for which
the Planned Development District is proposed, and all
other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject
property, together with the names and addresses of the
owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the
current records of the Register of Deeds of Jefferson
County (as provided by the City of Lake Mills). Said map
shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject
property and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which
maintains that control. Said map and all its parts and
attachments shall be at a reasonable scale. All lot
dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a
North arrow shall be provided.
[4] A general written description of proposed Planned
Development District, including:
[a] General project themes and images;
[b] The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land
uses;
[c] Approximate residential densities and nonresidential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre,
floor area ratio and impervious surface area ratio;
[d] The general treatment of natural features;
[e] The general relationship to nearby properties and
public streets;
[f] The general relationship of the project to the
Comprehensive Plan.
[5] Statement of rationale outlining the need for Planned
Development District zoning. This shall identify barriers
that the petitioner perceives in the form of requirements of
standard zoning districts and opportunities for community
betterment the petitioner suggests are available through
the proposed PDD zoning.
[6] A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met
by the proposed PDD and the location(s) in which they
apply and a complete list of zoning standards which will be
more than met by the proposed PDD and the location(s) in
which they apply shall be identified to provide the Plan
Commission with information necessary to determine the
relative merits of the project in regard to private benefit
§ 660-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-206
1:999
versus public benefit, and in regard to the mitigation of
potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility.
[7] A written description of potentially requested exemptions
from the requirements of the underlying zoning district, in
the following order:
[a] Land use exemptions;
[b] Density and intensity exemptions;
[c] Bulk exemptions;
[d] Landscaping exceptions;
[e] Parking and loading requirements exceptions.
[8] A general development plan drawing at a reasonable scale
(eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch reduction shall also be
provided by petitioner) of the proposed project showing at
least the following information in sufficient detail to make
an evaluation against criteria for approval:
[a] A conceptual plan drawing (at 11 inches by 17 inches)
of the general land use layout and the general location
of major public streets and/or private drives. The
petitioner may submit copies of a larger version of the
plan in addition to the eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch
reduction;
[b] Location of recreational and open space areas and
facilities and specifically describing those that are to
be reserved or dedicated for public acquisition and
use;
[c] Statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the
development, the approximate areas of large
development lots and pads, density/intensity of
various parts of the development, floor area ratio,
impervious surface area ratio and landscape surface
area ratio of various land uses, expected staging, and
any other plans required by the Plan Commission or
City Council; and
[d] Notations relating the written information provided in
Subsection D(3)(a)[4] above to specific areas on the
GDP drawing.
[9] A general conceptual landscaping plan for subject
property, noting approximate locations of foundation,
street, yard and paving, landscaping, and the compliance
of development with all landscaping requirements of
§ 660-113, Landscape and buffers, (except as noted in the
§ 660-206 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-206
1:1000
listing of exceptions) and the use of extra landscaping and
buffer strips.
[10] A general signage plan for the project, including all project
identification signs and concepts for public fixtures and
signs (such as streetlight fixtures and/or poles or street
sign faces and/or poles) which are proposed to vary from
City standards or common practices.
[11]Written justification for the proposed Planned
Development District. (The petitioner is advised to use the
requirements of the special use procedure to develop said
written justification.)
(b) The process for review and approval of the GDP shall be
identical to that for a zoning amendment as outlined in
§ 660-197, Zoning Map amendments. The approval of a GDP by
the City Council shall establish a PDD/GDP Overlay District
that is depicted as such on the Official Zoning Map. The
previous zoning, however, shall control development within the
area of the GDP until all or portions of the GDP are approved as
a precise implementation plan (PIP) as outlined in Subsection
D(4) below.
(c) Where a land division or lot consolidation is proposed, a
preliminary plat final plat or CSM of the entire development
area included in the GDP shall meet all requirements of
Chapter 650, Subdivision Regulations, of the Code of the City
of Lake Mills.
(d) For multi-lot Planned Development District Districts, a detailed
neighborhood development plan showing the arrangement,
design, and uses of different lots, buildings, driveways, parking
areas, parks and open spaces, and paths.
(e) All portions of an approved GDP not fully developed within five
years of final City Council approval shall expire, unless
extended by resolution of the City Council following a public
hearing.
(4) Precise implementation plan (PIP). After the effective date of the
rezoning to PDD/GDP, the petitioner may file an application for a
proposed precise implementation plan with the City Manager.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(a) The PIP submittal shall contain all of the following items, prior
to its acceptance by the Zoning Administrator and placement
of the item on a Plan Commission agenda for review. The
number of copies to be submittal shall be determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
§ 660-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-206
1:1001
[1] A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11
inches by 17 inches, as depicted on a copy of the City of
Lake Mills Land Use Plan Map.
[2] Compliance with the submittal requirements as outlined in
§ 660-205, Building site and operation (BSO) plan review
and approval, reference, and the design regulations
outlined in Article V of this chapter.
[3] Statement of rationale outlining the need for planned
development district zoning. This shall identify barriers
that the petitioner perceives in the form of requirements of
standard zoning districts and opportunities for community
betterment the petitioner suggests are available through
the proposed PDD zoning.
[4] A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met
by the proposed PIP and the location(s) in which they
apply and a complete list of zoning standards which will be
more than met by the proposed PIP and the location(s) in
which they apply shall be identified to provide the City
Manager with information necessary to determine the
relative merits of the project in regard to private benefit
versus public benefit, and in regard to the mitigation of
potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
[5] Location of recreational/open space areas and facilities,
specifically describing those that are to be reserved or
dedicated for public acquisition and use.
[6] A written description which demonstrates the full
consistency of the proposed PIP with the approved GDP.
Any and all variations between the requirements of the
applicable PDD/GDP zoning district and the proposed PIP
development shall be identified.
[7] The Plan Commission or City Council may specify other
plans, documents or schedules that must be submitted
prior to consideration or approval of the PIP, as such may
be relevant to review.
(b) The area included in a precise implementation plan may be
only a portion of the area included in a previously approved
general development plan. The proposed PIP shall comply with
the requirements outlined in § 660-205, Building site and
operation (BSO) plan review and approval, and the design
regulations outlined in Article V of this chapter.
(c) Where a land division or lot consolidation is proposed, a
preliminary plat or final plat of the entire development area
§ 660-206 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-206
1:1002
included in the PIP shall meet all requirements of Chapter 650,
Subdivision Regulations, of the Code of the City of Lake Mills.
The approval of a PIP shall establish a PDD/PIP District that is
depicted as such on the Official Zoning Map.
(d) For multi-lot Planned Development District Districts, a detailed
neighborhood development plan showing the arrangement,
design, and uses of different lots, buildings, driveways, parking
areas, parks and open spaces; and paths.
(e) All portions of an approved PDD/PIP not fully developed within
two years of final City Council approval shall expire, unless
extended by resolution of the City Council following a public
hearing.
(f) The City may require the petitioner to provide surety and/or
contractual agreement, with the approval of the City Attorney,
to ensure the development of public and private improvements.
(5) Consolidated PDD approval process. The petitioner may file an
application for simultaneous approval of the GDP and PIP with the
Plan Commission and City Council. The consolidated process shall
include all the steps outlined in Subsection D(3)(a) through (d)
above, and decisions shall be made in accordance with Subsection
D(5)(a) below for basis for approval.
(a) Basis for approval. The Plan Commission in making its
recommendations and the City Council in making its
determination shall give consideration and satisfy themselves
as to the following:
[1] That the proposed development is consistent with the
spirit and intent of these regulations and produces
significant benefits in terms of improved environmental
design sufficient to justify the application of the "Planned
Development District" concept.
[2] That the site development plan reflects proper
consideration of the natural features of the site, with
particular concern for preservation of open space and
careful grading to ensure proper drainage and
conservation of natural features.
[3] That the general character of the development produces
an attractive environment appropriate to the intensity of
uses proposed and which is compatible with existing
developments in the surrounding area, and with general
community development plans and policies.
[4] That the development can be provided with appropriate
municipal services or their equivalent in private services.
§ 660-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-206
1:1003
[5] That proposed design standards provide adequately for
practical operation and maintenance of circulation,
parking, emergency services, delivery services, and
snowplowing.
[6] That the proponents of the proposed development have
demonstrated that they intend to start construction within
a reasonable period following the approval of the project
and requested overlay of the PDD District, that the project
appears economically sound, that a surety/proof of
financing is provided to the City, and that the development
will be carried out according to a reasonable construction
schedule satisfactory to the City.
[7] That the proposed development is consistent in all
respects to the spirit and intent of this chapter, is in
conformity with the general plans for community
development, would not be contrary to the general welfare
and economic prosperity of the City or of the immediate
neighborhood, that the specific development plans have
been prepared with competent professional advice and
guidance, and that the benefits and improved design of the
resultant development justifies the variation from the
normal requirements of this chapter through the
application of the PDD District.
(b) In the case of proposed residential developments:
[1] That such development will create an attractive residential
environment of sustained desirability and economic
stability, compatible with the character established for the
area by the community's Comprehensive Plan, and where
the economic impact of the development in terms of
income levels, property values, and service demands is at
least as beneficial to the community as that which could be
anticipated under the base zoning.
[2] The population composition of the development will not
alter adversely the impact upon school or other municipal
service requirements as anticipated under the existing
basic zoning and Comprehensive Plan.
[3] That the total average residential density of the project
will be compatible with the Comprehensive Plan.
[4] That the aggregate open space of the development will be
no less, than would have resulted from the application of
open space requirements of the previous district.
[5] That adequate guarantee is provided for permanent
retention as "open space area" of the residual open land
area resulting from the application of these regulations,
§ 660-206 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-206
1:1004
either by private reservation for the use of the residents
within the development or by dedication to the public.
[6] Ownership, maintenance, and tax liability of private open
space reservation shall be established in a manner
acceptable to the municipality and made a part of the
conditions of the plan approval.
(c) In the case of proposed PDD Planned Development District
Overlays for commercial developments:
[1] That the economic practicality of the proposed
development can be justified on the basis of purchasing
potential, competitive relationship and demonstrated
tenant interest.
[2] That the proposed development will be adequately served
by off-street parking and truck service facilities.
[3] That the locations for entrances and exits have been
designed to prevent unnecessary interference with the
safe and efficient movement of traffic on surrounding
streets, and that the development will not create an effect
upon the general traffic pattern of the area incompatible
with that anticipated under the Comprehensive Plan.
[4] That the architectural design, landscaping, control of
lighting, and general site development will result in an
attractive and harmonious service area compatible with
and not creating an effect upon the property values of the
surrounding neighborhood incompatible with that
anticipated under the Comprehensive Plan.
(d) In the case of mixed-use developments:
[1] That the proposed mixture of uses produces a unified
composite which is compatible to itself and which as a
total developmental entity is compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood and consistent with the general
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
[2] That the various types of uses conform to the general
requirements as herein set forth applicable to projects of
such use and character.
E. Determination of the City Council.
(1) The City Council, after due consideration and recommendation by
the Plan Commission, may deny the petition, approve the petition
as submitted or approve the petition subject to additional
conditions. A PDD may only be approved by an ordinance adopted
by the City Council. Any ordinance approving a Planned
Development District shall specify the special conditions and
§ 660-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-206
1:1005
restrictions imposed on the PDD and shall include the development
plan and plat of subdivision, provided that a plat or re-division or
consolidation may be approved by the City Council as part of the
PDD and must be recorded before permits may be issued. Said
ordinance shall further contain a legal description of the property
subject to such PDD and said ordinance shall be recorded in the
office of the Register of Deeds of Jefferson County before any
permits may be obtained.
(2) The approval of a petition and resulting amendment of the Zoning
Map to include the PDD District shall be based on and include
conditions to comply with the building, site and operational (BSO)
plans for the development. The development as approved by the
City Council shall be mapped and recorded as specified by
§ 660-206. Such plans, however, need not necessarily be
completely detailed at the time of zoning provided they are of
sufficient detail to satisfy the Plan Commission and City Council as
to the general character, scope, and appearance of the proposed
development as outlined in the GDP.
(3) No permits, as outlined in § 660-187, Zoning permit, shall be
approved or issued for any use or construction activity in a Planned
Development District without final approval of a PIP by ordinance
of the City Council.
F. Conditions and restrictions.
(1) The Plan Commission may recommend, and the City Council may
adopt by resolution, conditions, and restrictions for planned
developments that specify permitted uses, set bulk regulations and
density standards for lot coverage and dwelling unit size and
distribution, and yard setbacks. The Plan Commission, and the
Public Works Board, when applicable, may recommend, and the
City Council may adopt by ordinance, such permissible
modifications to Chapter 660, Zoning, that are applicable to the
PDD/GDP and the PDD/PIP.
(2) The developer shall enter into a developer's agreement with the
City to comply with all applicable laws and regulations, including
any conditions and restrictions adopted to regulate a specific
planned development, and to assure the construction of all facilities
and infrastructure associated with the project.
(3) No building permit shall be issued until all applicable fees and
assessments have been paid and either all public construction has
been completed and approved, or a developer's agreement has
been approved and executed and a bond has been posted. For
staged development, such developer's agreements may provide for
the construction of improvements and the use of common areas
outside of the subject stage.
§ 660-206 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-206
1:1006
§ 660-207. (Reserved)
§ 660-208. Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND).
(4) If the owner of the planned development fails to adequately
perform maintenance functions, such as snow and ice removal,
weed cutting, or trash disposal, the City shall have the right to
perform such functions or to contract for their accomplishment at
the property owner's expense.
G. Changes or revisions.
(1) All proposed changes, revisions and additions to any aspect of an
approved planned development project shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator for his review. The Zoning Administrator
shall determine whether the change, revision or addition is minor
or if it materially affects the intended design of the project and the
impact of the project on neighboring uses.
(2) If the requested change is determined by the Zoning Administrator
to be substantial, because of its effect on the intended design of the
project or on neighboring uses, a public hearing, subject to the
notice requirements of a conditional use request, shall be held by
the Plan Commission to review and pass its findings to the City
Council for final approval.
(3) If the change is determined to be minor, the Zoning Administrator
shall review the request and may approve the change without a
public hearing.
(4) If the City Council approves any substantial or material change, an
ordinance shall be passed and any necessary amendments to any
developer's agreement(s) shall be executed prior to the developer
proceeding with implementation of any approved change or
modification.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow the optional
development and redevelopment of land in the City of Lake Mills
consistent with the design principles of traditional neighborhoods. A
traditional neighborhood:
(1) Is compact;
(2) Is designed for the human scale;
(3) Provides a mix of uses, including residential, commercial, civic, and
open space uses, in close proximity to one another within the
neighborhood;
(4) Provides a mix of housing styles, types, and sizes to accommodate
households of all ages, sizes, and incomes;
§ 660-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-208
1:1007
§ 660-209. Public hearings.
(5) Incorporates a system of relatively narrow, interconnected streets
with sidewalks, bikeways, and transit that offer multiple routes for
motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists and provides for the
connections of those streets to existing and future developments;
(6) Retains existing buildings with historical features or architectural
features that enhance the visual character of the community;
(7) Incorporates significant environmental features into the design;
and
(8) Is consistent with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan.
B. Applicability. The TND is an alternative set of standards for
development within the City for new developments of at least five acres
in total area, under the auspices of the Planned Development District
(PDD) outlined in § 660-206.
C. Design regulations. All TNDs shall comply with the design regulations
outlined in § 660-108 of this chapter.
D. Application procedure and approval process. Prior to the issuance of
any permits for development within a TND, the following steps shall be
completed according to the procedures outlined in this section:
(1) The applicant shall have had an initial conference;
(2) A General Implementation Plan and a Zoning Map amendment to a
Traditional Neighborhood Development District shall be approved
by the City Council pursuant to the standards and procedures
outlined in § 660-206, Planned Development District (PDD)
procedures;
(3) A precise implementation plan shall be approved by the City
Council.
E. Fees. The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees from time to
time for the administration of this section.
A. Notice. The City Plan Commission shall give notice, through the City
Clerk, of the proposed changes and hearings thereon, by publication in
the official City newspaper of a Class 2 notice under Chapter 985, Wis.
Stats., and shall give written notice to the Clerk of any municipality
within 1,000 feet of the land included within the proposed change. The
City Plan Commission shall give an opportunity to any person interested
to be heard. Such notice may contain the street names and house or lot
numbers for purposes of identification if the Commission so determines.
In addition, at least 10 days before an amendment hearing for a
rezoning, the City Clerk shall mail an identical notice to the petitioner
and to all property owners within 200 feet of the boundaries of the
subject property. Failure to mail said notice, provided it is
§ 660-208 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-209
1:1008
§ 660-210. Violations and penalties.
unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this section. The
hearing may be adjourned from time to time. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Decisions. Within 30 days after the final adjournment of the hearing,
the Commission shall make a final report and submit a recommendation
to the City Council. The City Council may act upon the recommendation
with or without change, or may refer it back to the Commission for
further consideration.
A. Violation of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to construct or use any
land, engage in any development activity (including disruption of
protected vegetation), or construct or use any structure, land or water
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or otherwise neglect,
refuse or fail to comply with this chapter. Anyone who shall violate this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set
forth in Subsection B, below, and in addition, shall pay all costs and
expenses, including actual reasonable attorney and other fees involved
in the case. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a
separate offense. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Penalties. Any person, firm, company, or corporation who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to
a forfeiture as determined from time to time by the City Council in
§ 1-19 of the Code of the City of Lake Mills, together with the costs of
the action, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall
be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not
exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate violation and be punishable as such.
(1) Hazardous condition caused by violation of this chapter. If the
Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that a violation of this
chapter exists, and further determines that the nature of such
violation poses a great and immediate danger to the public health,
safety, peace, morals or decency, the Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall cause the violation to be abated. Costs associated with said
abatement shall be charged to the owner of the property on which
said violation has occurred per Subsection B(3), below. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to abate a violation of
this chapter using the procedures for summary abatement set forth
in Chapter 479, Nuisances.
(2) Nonhazardous condition caused by violation of this chapter. If the
Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that a violation of this
chapter exists, and further determines that the nature of such
violation is not such as to pose great and immediate danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Zoning
§ 660-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-210
1:1009
§ 660-211. Fees.
Enforcement Officer shall serve written notice by certified mail on
the current owner of the property (as indicated by current City
of Lake Mills tax records) on which said violation is occurring to
remove said violation within 10 working days. If such violation is
not removed within such 10 working days, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall cause the violation to be abated per Subsection B(1),
above. Costs associated with said abatement shall be charged to
the owner of the property on which said violation has occurred per
Subsection B(3), below.
(3) Cost of abatement. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this
subsection for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the cost
of abating a violation of this chapter per Subsection B(1) or (2),
above, shall be collected as a debt from the owner of the property
on which said violation has occurred. An account of the expenses
incurred by the City to abate the violation shall be kept and such
expenses shall be charged to and paid by the property owner.
Notice of the bill for abatement of the violation shall be mailed to
the last known address of said property owner by certified mail,
and shall be payable within 30 calendar days from the receipt
thereof. Within 60 days after such costs and expenses are incurred
and remain unpaid, the City Clerk shall enter such charges onto the
tax roll as a special tax as provided by Wisconsin Statute.
C. Inspection fees. To compensate for inspection and administrative costs
under this section, a fee may be charged to the owner or occupant of
property for any inspection or reinspection by a City of Lake Mills
Building Inspector, or their designee, to determine compliance with an
order to correct conditions in violation of this chapter.
A. Review fees. The City Council may by ordinance or resolution establish
reasonable fees for the filing of a petition for amendment to the zoning
provisions or Official Map, or for filing an appeal to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Fees or charges may also be established by the Council for
filing requests for conditional uses, for BSO plan review, for
designations of historic sites or districts, or for the services of
professionals working for the City in the context of reviewing or
commenting on any of these petitions or requests.
B. Consultant fees. The City may retain the services of professional
consultants (including planners, engineers, architects, attorneys,
environmental specialists, recreation specialists, and other experts) to
assist in the City's review of a proposal coming before the City staff,
Plan Commission, City Council, and/or other City committees or boards.
The submittal of a development proposal application or petition shall be
construed as an agreement to pay for such professional review services
applicable to the proposal. The City may apply the charges for these
services to the petitioner. The City may delay acceptance of the
application or petition as complete, or may delay final approval of the
§ 660-210 LAKE MILLS CODE § 660-211
1:1010
proposal, until the petitioner pays such fees. Review fees which are
applied to a petitioner, but which are not paid, may be assigned by the
City as a special charge against to the subject property. The petitioner
shall be required to provide the City with an executed copy of a
professional services reimbursement form as a prerequisite to the
processing of the development application.
C. Agreements for payment of fees or charges. The City Manager is
authorized to require a petitioner or requester to enter into a written
agreement for the payment of the charges permitted, and such written
agreement may require a letter of credit or other financial guaranty if,
in the judgment of the City Manager, such agreement and guaranty are
warranted.
§ 660-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-211
1:1011
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 2009 Code to 2018 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 2009 Code Location in 2018 Code
Title 1, Administrative
Ch. 1, Official Municipal Code NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. I
Ch. 2, Saving Clause NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. I
Ch. 3, Definitions Ch. 1, Art. II
Ch. 4, General Penalty Ch. 1, Art. III
Ch. 5, General Administration
A. City Manager System of Government
Secs. 1-5A-1 to 1-5A-3 and 1-5A-6 Ch. 10
Sec. 1-5A-4 Ch. 153, Art. II
Sec. 1-5A-5 Ch. 153, Art. I
Sec. 1-5A-7 Ch. 153, Art. III
B. The City Council Ch. 38
C. City Manager Ch. 44
Ch. 6, Clerk and Treasurer Ch. 153, Art. IV
Ch. 7, Elections; Ward Boundaries
Secs. 1-7-1, 1-7-3 and 1-7-4 Ch. 59, Art. I
Sec. 1-7-2 Ch. 59, Art. II
Ch. 8, Municipal Court Ch. 145
Ch. 9, Financial Procedure
Secs. 1-9-1 to 1-9-6 Ch. 89, Art. I
Sec. 1-9-7A to H Ch. 190
Sec. 1-9-7I(1) Ch. 80, Art. II
Sec. 1-9-7I(2) and (3) Ch. 80, Art. III
Secs. 1-9-8 Ch. 89, Art. III
Sec. 1-9-9 Ch. 80, Art. I
§ 660-211 LAKE MILLS CODE § DT-1
1:1012
Chapter/Title From 2009 Code Location in 2018 Code
Sec. 1-9-10 Ch. 96, Art. II
Ch. 10, Liens for Current City Services
Secs. 1-10-1, 1-10-3 through 1-10-7 Ch. 89, Art. II
Sec. 1-10-2 Ch. 89, Art. III
Ch. 11, Administrative Review Procedures Ch. 16
Ch. 12, Administrative Penalties
Sec. 1-12-1 Ch. 80, Art. IV
Ch. 13, Ethics Code Ch. 71
Title 2, Boards and Commissions
Ch. 1, Board of Review Ch. 27, Art. I
Ch. 2, Library Board Ch. 27, Art. II
Ch. 3, Plan Commission Ch. 27, Art. III
Ch. 4, Zoning Board of Appeals Ch. 27, Art. IV
Ch. 5, Park Board Ch. 27, Art. V
Ch. 6, Emergency Management Services Ch. 64
Ch. 7, Board of Police & Fire Commissioners Ch. 27, Art. VI
Ch. 8, Board of Public Works Ch. 27, Art. VII
Ch. 9, Economic Development Commission Ch. 27, Art. VIII
Ch. 10, Joint CATV Regulatory Board Ch. 27, Art. IX
Ch. 11, Joint Rock Lake Committee Ch. 27, Art. X
Ch. 12, Fire Department Advisory
Committee
REP
Title 3, Business and License Regulations
Ch. 1, Liquor Regulations Ch. 249, Art. I
Ch. 2, Direct Sellers & Solicitors Ch. 445, Art. I
Ch. 3, Mobile Homes, Mobile Home Parks Ch. 470
Ch. 4, Public Market Ch. 512
Ch. 5, Adult-Oriented Establishments Ch. 240
Ch. 6, Circuses, Shows
Sec. 3-6-1 Ch. 346
Ch. 7, Junk Dealers; Salvage Ch. 424
Ch. 8, Taxicabs Ch. 587
Ch. 9, Sidewalk Cafe Regulations Ch. 548
Ch. 10, Weights & Measures Ch. 445, Art. III
Ch. 11, Vendors License Ch. 445, Art. II
Title 4, Health and Sanitation
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1013
Chapter/Title From 2009 Code Location in 2018 Code
Ch. 1, Nuisances Ch. 479
Ch. 2, Cross Connections, Water Supply Ch. 623, Art. I
Ch. 3, Garbage, Refuse & Recycling Ch. 556
Ch. 4, Weeds and Grasses Ch. 271
Ch. 5, Dutch Elm Disease REP
Ch. 6, Water and Sewer Regulations Ch. 623, Art. II
Ch. 7, Sewer Use Regulations, Charges Ch. 623, Art. III
Ch. 8, Leakage Credit-Water Charges &
Sanitary Sewer User Fees
Ch. 623, Art. IV
Ch. 9, Yard Waste and Material Point Ch. 636
Ch. 10, Storm Water Regulations Ch. 565
Title 5, Police Regulations
Ch. 1, General Offenses
Secs. 5-1-1, 5-1-3, 5-1-7, 5-1-11 to 5-1-14 Ch. 505
Sec. 5-1-2 Ch. 354
Sec. 5-1-4 Ch. 573, Art. I
Sec. 5-1-5 Ch. 573, Art. II
Sec. 5-1-6 Ch. 249, Art. II
Sec. 5-1-8 Ch. 463, Art. I
Sec. 5-1-9 Ch. 496, Art. III
Sec. 5-1-10 Ch. 463, Art. II
Ch. 2, Regulation of Animals
Secs. 5-2-1 to 5-2-7 and 5-2-9 Ch. 255
Sec. 5-2-8 Ch. 496, Art. IV
Ch. 3, Regulation of Alarm Systems Ch. 246
Ch. 4, Outdoor Burning, Open Burning and
Burning of Refuse
Ch. 362, Art. III
Title 6, Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Ch. 1, Traffic Code; General Provisions Ch. 615, Art. I
Ch. 2, Traffic Control, Streets and
Intersections
Ch. 615, Art. II
Ch. 3, Parking Regulations Ch. 615, Art. III
Ch. 4, Bicycles Ch. 264
Ch. 5, (Vacant) Omitted
Ch. 6, All-Terrain Vehicles Ch. 609
Ch. 7, In-Line Skates Ch. 417
§ DT-1 LAKE MILLS CODE § DT-1
1:1014
Chapter/Title From 2009 Code Location in 2018 Code
Ch. 8, Parades and Processions Ch. 491
Title 7, Public Ways and Property
Ch. 1, Streets and Sidewalks
Secs. 7-1-1 and 7-1-2 Ch. 573, Art. III
Sec. 7-1-3 Ch. 573, Art. IV
Secs. 7-1-4 and 7-1-5 Ch. 573, Art. V
Sec. 7-1-6 Ch. 573, Art. VI
Sec. 7-1-7 Ch. 573, Art. VII
Ch. 2, Excavations Ch. 573, Art. VIII
Ch. 3, Trees and Plants Ch. 594
Ch. 4, Improvements and Special
Assessments
Secs. 7-4-1 to 7-4-4 Ch. 161, Art. I
Secs. 7-4-5 and 7-4-6 Ch. 161, Art. II
Ch. 5, Heavy Traffic Routes Ch. 615, Art. IV
Ch. 6, Cemetery Ch. 318
Ch. 7, Parks Ch. 496, Art. I
Ch. 8, Water Recreation Regulations Ch. 496, Art. II
Ch. 9, Utility Management
Sec. 7-9-1 Ch. 211, Art. I
Sec. 7-9-2 Ch. 211, Art. II
Ch. 10, Cable Communication System Ch. 311
Ch. 11, Impact Fees Ch. 411
Ch. 12, Pedestrian Malls Ch. 573, Art. IX
Title 8, Building Regulations
Ch. 1, Building Numbering System Ch. 286
Ch. 2, Building Code Superseded; see Ch. 279,
Art. I
Ch. 3, Plumbing Code Ch. 279, Art. II
Ch. 4, Electrical Code Ch. 279, Art. III
Ch. 5, Energy Conservation Code Ch. 289, Art. IV
Ch. 6, Housing Standards, Regulations
A. Housing Code Ch. 402, Art. I
B. Housing Code Administration Ch. 402, Art. II
C. Housing Code Standards Ch. 402, Art. III
D. Lodging Houses and Rooms Ch. 402, Art. IV
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1015
Chapter/Title From 2009 Code Location in 2018 Code
E. Unsafe Buildings Ch. 292
Ch. 7, Swimming Pools Ch. 581
Title 9, Fire Protection and Prevention
Ch. 1, Fire Department
Secs. 9-1-1 to 9-1-7 Ch. 96, Art. I
Secs. 9-1-8 to 9-1-12 Ch. 362, Art. I
Ch. 2, Fire Codes, Regulations
Secs. 9-2-1 to 9-2-3, 9-2-5 to 9-2-13 Ch. 362, Art. II
Sec. 9-2-4 Ch. 368
Ch. 3, Hazardous Substances Ch. 393
Ch. 4, Fees, Charges, Assessments and
Penalties
Ch. 362, Art. IV
Title 10, Zoning Ch. 660
Title 11, Subdivision Regulations Ch. 650
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1144 1-20-2015 Peace and good order amendment Ch. 505
1145 5-5-2015 Alcohol beverages: licenses and
permits amendment
Ch. 249, Art. I
1146 5-19-2015 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 615, Art. III
1147 5-19-2015 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 615, Art. III
1148 6-2-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1149 6-16-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DT-1 LAKE MILLS CODE § DL-1
1:1016
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1150 6-16-2015 Boards, committees and
commissions: Board of Public
Works amendment
Ch. 27, Art. VII
1151 9-1-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1152 9-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 615, Art. III
1153 8-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 615, Art. III
1154 11-3-2015 Tax levy and budget for 2016 NCM
1155 11-3-2015 Appropriations and capital budget
for 2016
NCM
1156 11-17-2015 Alcohol beverages: licenses and
permits amendment
Ch. 249, Art. I
1157 12-1-2015 Annexation NCM
1158 12-1-2015 Annexation NCM
1159 12-1-2015 Annexation NCM
1160 12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic: traffic control
amendment
Ch. 615, Art. II
Admin.
Rule
02-01
Stormwater runoff regulation NI
1161 3-15-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1162 3-15-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1163 5-3-2016 Impact fees amendment Ch. 411
1164 9-20-2016 Licenses and permits: vendor’s
license amendment
Ch. 445, Art. II
1165 6-21-2016 Land Use Map amendment NCM
1166 7-19-2016 Annexation NCM
1168 8-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic: traffic control
amendment
Ch. 615, Art. II
1169 8-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 615, Art. III
1170A 9-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 615, Art. I
1171A 11-1-2016 Tax levy and budget for 2017 NCM
1172B 11-1-2016 Appropriations and capital budget
for 2017
NCM
1173 11-15-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1017
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1174 1-3-2017 Vehicles and traffic: traffic control
amendment
Ch. 615, Art. II
1175 2-21-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 660
1176 4-18-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 660
1177 5-2-2017 Annexation NCM
1179 8-15-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1180A 11-7-2017 Tax levy and budget for 2018 NCM
1181 11-7-2017 Appropriations and capital budget
for 2018
NCM
1182 10-17-2017 Alcohol beverages: licenses and
permits amendment
Ch. 249, Art. I
1183 11-7-2017 Annexation NCM
1184 12-5-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1185 4-3-2018 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1186 4-3-2018 Water and Sewer: Cross-
Connections Amendment
Ch. 623, Art. I
1187 6-5-2018 Land Use Map amendment NCM
1188 6-5-2018 Land Use Map amendment NCM
1189 6-5-2018 Land Use Map amendment NCM
1190 5-15-2018 Land Use Map amendment NCM
1191 5-15-2018 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1192A 5-15-2018 2018 capital budget amendment NCM
1193A 10-16-2018 Annexation NCM
1194B 11-6-2018 Tax Levy NCM
1195B 11-6-2018 Budget NCM
1196A 11-20-2018 Annexation NCM
1197A 11-6-2018 Zoning Regulations Amendment Ch. 660
1198 11-20-2018 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
1199A 2-5-2019 Solid Waste Amendment Ch. 556
1200 1-15-2019 Records Amendment Ch. 190
1201 3-5-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1202 3-5-2019 Vehicles and Traffic: Traffic
Control Amendment
Ch. 615, Art. II
1203A 5-7-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1204 6-4-2019 Annexation NCM
§ DL-1 LAKE MILLS CODE § DL-1
1:1018
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1205 6-4-2019 Building Construction: Plumbing
Code Amendment
Ch. 279, Art. II
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1206A 10-15-2019 Vehicles and Traffic:
Parking Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 615, Art.
III
3
1207 11-5-2019 Annexation NCM 3
1208A 11-5-2019 Tax Levy NCM 3
1209B 11-5-2019 Budget NCM 3
1210 2-4-2020 Building
Construction
Amendment
Ch. 279 4
1211 3-17-2020 Officers and
Employees
Amendment
Ch. 153 4
1212 3-17-2020 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 4
1213 5-5-2020 Alcohol Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 249 4
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1019