Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. Designation and citation of Code. [Code 1992, § 25.07]
This Code may be known and cited as the Municipal Code of the City of Lake
Geneva, Wisconsin.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and construction of terms. [Code 1992,
§ 25.01(1)—(4)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACTS OF AGENTS — When a provision requires an act to be done which
may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such
requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.
AND/OR — The word "and" may be read as "or" and the word "or" may be
read "and" where the sense requires it.
CITY — The City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin.
CODE — Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is used without further
qualification, it shall mean the Municipal Code of the City of Lake Geneva,
Wisconsin, as designated in section 1-1.
COUNCIL, CITY COUNCIL — The City council of the City of Lake Geneva,
Wisconsin.
COUNTY — Walworth County, Wisconsin.
GENDER — Every word in this Code and in any ordinance imparting the
masculine gender may extend and be applied to females as well as males.
JOINT AUTHORITY — Words purporting to give authority to three or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
MAY — The word "may" shall be construed as being permissive and
discretionary.
MONTH — A calendar month.
NUMBER — A word importing the singular may extend and be applied to
the plural as well as to the singular number and vice versa.
OATH — Includes affirmation in all cases where by law an affirmation may
be substituted for an oath. If any oath or affirmation is required to be taken,
such oath or affirmation shall be taken before and administered by some
1:1
officer authorized by the laws of this state to administer oaths, at the place
where the same is required to be taken or administered, unless otherwise
expressly directed, and, when necessary, duly certified by such officer. If
an oath is administered, it shall end with the words "so help me God."
In actions and proceedings in the courts, a person may take an oath or
affirmation in communication with the administering officer by telephone or
audiovisual means.
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY — Whenever any officer or
employee is referred to by title, such as "County Clerk" or "sheriff," such
reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Walworth
County."
OWNER — The word "owner," applied to a building or land shall include
any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
PERSON — The word "person" extends and applies to natural persons,
firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic and to
all entities capable of being sued, unless plainly inapplicable.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — The words "personal property" includes every
species of property except real property.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY — The words "real property" shall include lands,
tenements and hereditaments.
SHALL — The word "shall" shall be construed as being mandatory.
SIGNATURE — If the signature of any person is required by law it shall
always be the handwriting of such person or, if the person is unable to write,
the person's mark or the person's name written by some other person at the
person's request and in the person's presence.
STATE — The State of Wisconsin.
TENSE — Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
WISCONSIN STATUTES or W.S.A. — All references to Wisconsin Statutes
or Wis. Stats. shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes for the years 2007—2008
and shall include future amendments.[Amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No.
09-13]
YEAR — A calendar year.
Sec. 1-3. Computation of time.
(a) The time within which an act is to be done or proceeding had or taken
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last; and
when any such time is expressed in hours the whole of Sunday and of
any legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
Sec. 1-2 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 1-3
1:2
Sec. 1-4. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1-5. References to chapters or sections.
(b) If the last day within which an act is to be done or proceeding had or
taken falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, the act may be done or the
proceeding had or taken on the next secular day.
(c) When the last day within which a proceeding is to be had or taken or an
act done, which consists of any payment to or the service upon or the
filing with any officer, agent, agency, department or division of the state
or of the County, or a City, Village, Town, school district or other
subdivision of the state, of any money, return, statement, report, notice
or other document, falls on a Saturday and the duly established official
office hours of such officer, agent, agency, department or division to
which such payment is to be made or upon which such service is to be
made or with which such return, statement, report, notice or other
document is required to be filed, do not include any office hours thereof
on such Saturday, such proceeding may be had or taken or such act may
be done on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
(d) Regardless of whether the time limit in any ordinance for the taking of
any proceeding or the doing of an act is measured from an event or
from the date or day on which such event occurs, the day on which such
event took place shall be excluded in the computation of such time.
(e) The expression "legal holiday" as used in this section means any
statewide legal holiday provided in W.S.A., § 895.20. When an act is
permitted to be done by the use of the postal service, and the last day
within the time prescribed by law for performing such act falls on a
legal public holiday under federal law, or other holiday designated by
the president such that the postal service does not receive registered
mail or make regular deliveries on that day, the day shall be considered
a legal holiday for purposes of this section.
(a) Generally. All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and
sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.
(b) Inclusion of penalty. Reference to any section of this Code shall be
understood to refer to and include the penalty section relating thereto,
unless otherwise expressly provided.
Sec. 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 1-6
1:3
Sec. 1-6. References and editor's notes.
The references and editor's notes appearing after sections throughout the
Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to
assist the user of the Code.
Sec. 1-7. History notes.
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code1 are
not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the
source of matter contained in the section.
Sec. 1-8. Provisions considered as continuation of existing
ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those
of the 1992 Code of the City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, and of ordinances
existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a
continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-9. Repeal of general ordinances. [Code 1992, § 25.05]
All general and permanent ordinances heretofore adopted by the City
council and not included in this Code are hereby repealed, except all
ordinances or parts of ordinances relating to the following subjects and not
conflicting with any of the provisions of this Code:
(1) Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the
effective date of this Code;
(2) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the
City or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any
evidence of the City's indebtedness;
(3) Any right or franchise granted by the City including, but not limited to,
CATV, chapter 22 of the 1992 Code;
(4) Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening,
paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City;
(5) Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the City;
(6) Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the
City;
(7) Any ordinance regarding zoning, wetland-shoreland and the zoning
map or rezoning property;
1. Editor’s Note: The histories for each section have been moved to the beginning of the
section, enclosed in brackets, immediately following the section catchline. Histories for
amendments are indicated where appropriate in the text.
Sec. 1-6 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 1-9
1:4
Sec. 1-10. Effect of repeals. [Code 1992, § 25.06]
The repeal or amendment of any section or provision of this Code or of any
other ordinance or resolution of the council shall not:
(8) Any ordinance regarding expense accounts including, but not limited
to, Ord. No. 94-4;
(9) Any ordinance calling elections or prescribing the manner of
conducting the election in accordance with state law;
(10) Any ordinance prescribing any fee or payment of money to the City;
(11) Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code;
(12) The vacation, extension and discontinuance of public streets and alleys;
(13) Any ordinance fixing salaries of public officials and employees;
(14) Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any
ordinance extending the boundaries of the City;
(15) Any ordinance regarding the naming and changing of names of public
grounds and parks;
(16) Any ordinance regarding compliance with IRS reporting requirements
including, but not limited to, Ord. No. 94-4, § I;
(17) Section 9.40 of the 1992 Code;
(18) Any ordinance regarding the purchase of land;
(19) Any ordinance regarding the letting of contracts without bids;
(20) Any appropriation ordinance;
(21) Any ordinance which is temporary although general in effect; and
(22) Any ordinance which is special although permanent in effect.
All such ordinances shall remain in full force and effect and are on file
in the City Clerk's office.
(1) By implication be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or
existing at the time such repeal or amendment takes effect.
(2) Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired,
accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed or amended,
unless the privilege of repealing such obligation or privilege has been
reserved by the City.
(3) Affect any offense committed, or penalty or forfeiture incurred,
previous to the time when any ordinance is repealed or amended;
except when any forfeiture or penalty has been mitigated by the
provisions of any ordinance, such provisions shall apply to and control
Sec. 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 1-10
1:5
Sec. 1-11. Code does not affect prior offenses, acts, penalties or
rights.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any
offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or
any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of
this Code.
Sec. 1-12. Penalty for violation of code. [Code 1992, § 25.04(1); Ord.
No. 04-02; § I, 1-26-2004]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular
provision, section or chapter, any person violating any provision of this
Code, or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, or
any provision of any code adopted in this Code by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10 and not more
than $1,000 and the costs of prosecution, and/or suspension of the violator's
driver's license. In default of immediate payment of such forfeiture and
costs, such person may be committed to the County jail until such forfeiture
and costs are paid. Every commitment shall limit the duration of such
imprisonment to a definite term not exceeding 90 days.
Sec. 1-13. Citation. [Code 1992, § 25.04(4); Ord. No. 04-34, § I,
8-23-2004; Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-06, § 1,
6-11-2007]
Violations of ordinances of the City shall be enforced by the issuance of a
municipal citation.
any judgment to be pronounced after such ordinance takes effect for
any offense committed before that time.
(4) Affect any prosecution for any offense, or the levy of any penalty or
forfeiture pending at the time when any ordinance aforesaid is repealed
or amended. The right of action shall continue, and the offender shall be
subject to the penalty as provided in such ordinance, and such
prosecution shall proceed, in all respects, as if such ordinance had not
been repealed, except all such proceedings had after the time this Code
takes effect shall be conducted according to the provisions of this Code.
(1) Information required. The municipal citation shall contain the following
information:
a. The name and address of the alleged violator.
b. Factual allegations describing the alleged violations.
c. The time and place of the offense.
d. The section of the Code violated.
Sec. 1-10 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 1-13
1:6
e. A designation of the offense in such manner as can readily be
understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so.
f. The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court.
g. A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator that:
1. A cash deposit based on the schedule established by the City
council as a part of this section may be made which shall be
delivered or mailed to the police department at the City hall
prior to the time of the scheduled court appearance.
2. If a deposit is made, no appearance in court is necessary unless
he is subsequently summoned.
3. If a cash deposit is made and the alleged violator does not
appear in court, he will be deemed to have entered a plea of no
contest, or, if the court does not accept the plea of no contest, a
summons will be issued commanding him to appear in court to
answer the complaint.
4. If no cash deposit is made and the alleged violator does not
appear in court at the time specified in the citation, the court
may issue a summons or warrant for the defendant's arrest or
consider the nonappearance to be a plea of no contest and
enter judgment accordingly if service was effected pursuant to
W.S.A., § 66.119(3)(e) or commence an action for collection of
the forfeiture, penalty assessment and jail assessment and any
applicable domestic abuse assessment.
h. A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit,
the statement which accompanies the citation shall be signed to
indicate that the statement required under subsection (1)g of this
section has been read. Such statement shall be sent or brought
with the cash deposit.
i. Such other information as the City deems necessary.
(2) Schedule of deposits. The schedule of cash deposits for use with
citations issued under this section shall be as adopted by the City
council from time to time, and such schedule shall be on file in the office
of the chief of police and in the office of the Clerk.
(3) Form of deposits. Deposits shall be in cash, money order or certified
check to the Lake Geneva Police Department, an officer of which shall
provide a receipt therefor.
(4) Issuance of citation. Any law enforcement officer may issue citations
authorized under this section. The following City officials and their
designated agents, after clearance with the City Attorney, may issue
citations with respect to those specified sections which are directly
related to their official responsibilities: the Building Inspector, Assistant
Building Inspector, Fire Chief, Fire Inspector, City Clerk and Treasurer.
Sec. 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 1-13
1:7
Sec. 1-14. Continuing violation. [Code 1992, § 25.04(2)]
Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation and every day upon which
a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.
Sec. 1-15. Amendments to code.
With respect to boating and launching violations, boat launch
attendants may issue citations. [Amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No.
12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(5) Procedure. W.S.A., § 66.119(3), relating to the violator's options and
procedure on default, is adopted and incorporated in this section by
reference.
(6) Nonexclusivity. This section does not preclude the council from
adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any
law or ordinance relating to the same or other matter. The issuance of a
citation under this section shall not preclude the City or any authorized
officer from proceeding under any other ordinance or law or by any
other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance, regulation or
order.
(a) Any additions or amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as
to indicate the intention of the City council to make such additions or
amendments a part of this Code, are incorporated in this Code, so that a
reference to this Code shall be understood as including such additions
or amendments. All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of
this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be
numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and
printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any
chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed
portions may be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed,
or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of
ordinances by the City council.
(b) Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number
of this Code being amended in the following language: "That section
_____ of the Municipal Code of the City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, is
hereby amended to read as follows:. . . ." The new provisions shall then
be set out in full as desired.
(c) If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the
following language shall be used: "That the Municipal Code of the City
of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, is hereby amended by adding a section to
be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:. . . ." The new
section shall then be set out in full as desired.
Sec. 1-13 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 1-15
1:8
Sec. 1-16. Conflict and severability. [Code 1992, § 25.02]
Sec. 1-17. Failure of officers to perform duties.
The failure of any officer or employee of the City to perform any official
duty imposed by this Code shall not subject such officer or employee to the
penalty imposed for violation of this Code, unless a penalty is specifically
provided for such act or omission.
Sec. 1-18. Collection of delinquent municipal debt. [Added
9-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-26]
Chapter 2
(d) All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter
number, as the case may be.
(a) Conflict of provisions. If the provisions of the different chapters of this
Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each
chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the
subject matter of such chapter.
(b) Severability of code provisions. If any section, subsection, sentence,
clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof. The
council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code and each
section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion may be declared invalid or
unconstitutional.
(a) All original fines, fees, penalties and unpaid bills to the City shall have
late fees (as established by the City Council by resolution from time to
time) added by the City when in delinquency and being collected for
payment. The original debt and late fees shall be known as the "total
delinquent debt."
(b) Finance charges (interest), at a rate as allowed by state statute or as set
by the City Council by resolution from time to time, will be added to the
total delinquent debt as allowed by law.
(c) The total delinquent debt minus interest charges referred to an outside
collection agency shall be increased by an amount of the collection fee
imposed by said collection agency (as established by contract with the
City from time to time) for the additional effort to collect the referred
debt. Finance charges assessed as set forth above are in addition to the
collection fee imposed by a collection agency on a referred debt.
Sec. 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 1-18
1:9
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Court — See Ch. 22.
Elections — See Ch. 26.
Historic Preservation Commission— See Ch.
34, Art. II.
Park Board of Commissioners— See Ch. 54,
Art. III.
Sec. 1-18 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 1-18
1:10
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. Review of administrative determinations. [Code 1992,
§ 24.01]
Any person aggrieved by an administrative determination of the City
Council or a board, commission, committee, agency, official or employee
of the City or an agent acting on its behalf may have such determination
reviewed as provided in W.S.A., ch. 68. The remedies under this chapter
shall not be exclusive, but an election to proceed under this chapter shall
be an election of remedies.
Sec. 2-2. Elected officials. [Code 1992, § 1.01]
Elected officials of the City shall be a Mayor, two Alderpersons from each
aldermanic district, a City Attorney, a City Treasurer and a Municipal Judge.
Sec. 2-3. Appointed officials. [Code 1992, § 1.02; Ord. No. 99-13, § I,
8-9-1999; amended 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 10-05; 11-28-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-33; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-08]
Appointed officials of the City shall be selected in the manner and for the
terms prescribed as follows:
Official How Appointed Term
(1) City Clerk Appointment by the City
Council
Indefinite
(2) Fire Chief Police and Fire Commission Indefinite
(3) Police Chief Police and Fire Commission Indefinite
(4) Director of Public
Works
Appointment by the City
Council
Indefinite
(5) Assessor Appointment by the City
Council
Indefinite
(6) Comptroller Appointment by the City
Council
Indefinite
(7) Administrator Appointment by the City
Council
Indefinite
(8) Treasurer Appointment by the City
Council
Indefinite
Sec. 2-4. Oaths and bonds. [Code 1992, § 1.03]
Elected and appointed officials shall take and file the official oath within
10 days after notice of their election or appointment, as provided in W.S.A.,
Sec. 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-4
1:11
§ 62.09, and shall execute and file the official bond as required by state
statutes and this Code.
Sec. 2-5. Removals. [Code 1992, § 1.04]
Sec. 2-6. Vacancies. [Code 1992, § 1.05]
Sec. 2-7. Salaries. [Code 1992, § 1.06]
The salaries of all elected and appointed officials, including members of
boards and commissions, shall be as determined by the City Council from
time to time, provided the salary of the Mayor and members of the Council
shall not be increased during their terms of office.
Sec. 2-8. through Sec. 2-35. (Reserved)
(a) Elected officials. Elected officials may be removed as provided in
W.S.A., § 17.12(1)(a) or W.S.A., § 17.16.
(b) Appointed officials. Appointed officials may be removed as provided in
W.S.A., § 17.12(1)(c) and (d) and W.S.A., § 17.16.
(a) Causes. Vacancies in elective and appointive positions are caused as
provided in W.S.A., §§ 17.03 and 17.035.
(b) Filling. Vacancies in elective and appointive offices shall be filled as
provided in W.S.A., § 17.23.
Sec. 2-4 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-8
1:12
ARTICLE II
CITY COUNCIL
Sec. 2-36. Composition; terms. [Code 1992, § 2.01]
The City Council shall consist of the Mayor and eight Alderpersons, two
Alderpersons from each aldermanic district, who shall be elected for twoyear
terms.
Sec. 2-37. Powers. [Code 1992, § 1.10]
The City Council shall have all powers of the City not specifically given
to some other body or officer. Except as otherwise provided by law, the
City Council shall have the management and control of the City property,
finances, highways, streets, utilities and the public service; may act for
the government and good order of the City; for its commercial benefit;
for the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public; and may
carry its powers into effect by license, regulations, suppression, borrowing,
taxation, special assessment, appropriation, imposition of forfeitures and
other necessary and lawful means. The City Council may appoint such
officials from time to time as may be deemed necessary for the benefit of the
community. In addition, the City Council shall have the powers enumerated
in W.S.A., § 62.11(5). The powers hereby conferred shall be in addition to all
other grants and shall be limited only by express language.
Sec. 2-38. Meetings. [Code 1992, § 2.02; Ord. No. 98-13, § I,
12-14-1998]
(a) Open Meeting Law requirements. Notice of every meeting of the City
Council, and every board, commission and committee of the Council,
shall be given to the public, to those news media who have filed a
written request for such notice, and to the official newspaper, or to a
news medium likely to give notice in the area, at least 24 hours prior to
commencement of the meeting. If such notice is impossible or
impractical, shorter notice may be given for good cause shown, but in
no case may notice be given less than two hours in advance of the
meeting. Every public notice of a meeting shall contain the time, date,
place and subject matter of the meeting.
(b) Regular and special meetings. Regular meetings of the City Council
shall be held on the second and fourth Monday of each calendar month,
at 6:00 p.m. Any regular meeting falling on a legal holiday shall be held
on the next following secular day, at the same hour and place. All
meetings of the Council, including special and adjourned meetings,
shall be held in the City Hall. Special meetings may be called as
provided by the state statutes. [Amended 1-23-2017 by Ord. No.
17-01]
Sec. 2-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-38
1:13
Sec. 2-39. Presiding officer. [Code 1992, § 2.03]
Sec. 2-40. Absence of Mayor. [Ord. No. 94-9, § I(b), 5-9-1994]
During the Mayor's absence or inability to serve, the Council President shall
be acting Mayor and shall be vested with the powers and duties of the
Mayor, except the Council President may not approve a Council act that the
Mayor has vetoed. When presiding, the Council President retains his right
to vote as Alderperson.
Sec. 2-41. Roll call; quorum. [Code 1992, § 2.04]
Sec. 2-42. Order of business. [Code 1992, § 2.05; Ord. No. 95-8, § II,
5-22-1995; Ord. No. 99-13, § I, 8-9-1999; Ord. No. 03-15, §§ I, II,
(c) Adjournments. The Council may, by a majority vote of those present, but
not less than three affirmative votes, adjourn from time to time to a
specific date and hour.
(d) Meetings to be public. All meetings of the City Council and subunits of
the Council shall be open to the public as provided in W.S.A., §§ 19.81
through 19.89. Public notice of all such meetings shall be given as
provided in W.S.A., § 19.84.
(a) Designated. The Mayor shall preside. In the absence of the Mayor, the
President of the Council shall preside. In the absence of both the Mayor
and the President, the Vice Chairman shall call the meeting to order
and preside.
(b) Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, decide
all questions of order and conduct the proceedings of the meeting in
accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of
Order, Newly Revised, unless otherwise provided by statute or by these
rules.
(c) Decisions, appeals from. Any member may appeal from a decision of the
presiding officer. An appeal shall be sustained by a two-thirds vote of
the Council.
(a) Roll call; procedure when quorum not in attendance. As soon as the
Council is called to order, the Clerk shall proceed to call the names of
the members, noting who are present and who are absent, and record
the same in the proceedings of the Council. If there is not a quorum
present, the fact shall be entered on the journal and the Council may
adjourn; or the Mayor, or in his absence, the Clerk may issue a process
to any peace officer commanding him to summon the absentees
immediately.
(b) Quorum. Two-thirds of the Alderpersons shall constitute a quorum. The
Mayor shall not be counted in computing a quorum.
Sec. 2-38 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-42
1:14
11-24-2003; Ord. No. 04-12, §§ I, II, 5-10-2004; Ord. No. 07-20, § 1,
1-14-2008; amended 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-12]
(a) The business of the City Council shall be conducted in the following
order:
(1) Call to order;
(2) Pledge of Allegiance;
(3) Roll call;
(4) Awards, presentations and proclamations;
(5) Reconsider business from previous meeting;
(6) Comments from the public as allowed by W.S.A. § 19.84(2), except
for public hearing items limited to five minutes;
(7) Acknowledgement of correspondence;
(8) Consent agenda;
(9) Adoption of ordinances and resolutions;
(10) Licenses;
(11) Planning Commission recommendations (no matter shall be
brought forward from the Plan Commission without an intervening
one-week time period);
(12) Presentation of accounts;
(13) Appointments;
(14) Adjournment.
(b) The Mayor shall ensure that:
(1) All items for the agenda are included under the proper agenda
heading.
(2) The business of the City Council shall comply with this section.
(c) The City Clerk shall ensure that all items referred to the Council by two
Alderman, Mayor, Administrator, committees, boards, or commissions
are included in the agenda. Referrals from members of the Common
Council must be received by the Clerk two Fridays prior to the
scheduled meeting. A consent agenda may be included within the
regular agenda for items to be voted upon en bloc without discussion.
Any item listed on the consent agenda may be removed at the request of
any member of the Council. The request requires no second, is not
discussed, and is not voted upon. After a request is made, the item shall
be placed on the regular agenda under the proper category for
discussion and/or action. [Amended 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-05]
Sec. 2-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-43
1:15
Sec. 2-43. Assistant City Clerk. [Code 1992, § 2.06; amended
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
An Assistant City Clerk may be designated by the City Clerk or the City
Administrator. The Assistant City Clerk shall have those duties as
designated in § 62.09(11)(i), Wis. Stats., in addition to such other duties
prescribed by the City Council. The Assistant City Clerk shall receive such
compensation as the City Council shall provide.
Sec. 2-44. Conduct of deliberations. [Code 1992, § 2.07]
The deliberations of the City Council shall be conducted in the following
manner:
(1) When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the
presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak first.
(2) Except as provided by Section 2-42(a)(9), no person other than a
member shall address the Council, except by vote of a majority of the
members present.
(3) No motion shall be discussed or acted upon until it has been seconded
unless the rules permit one Alderperson to initiate action. No motion
shall be withdrawn without the consent of the person making the
motion and the person seconding it.
(4) When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in order except
the following motions, which shall have precedence in the order listed:
a. To adjourn;
b. To lay on the table;
c. To move the previous question;
d. To postpone to a certain day;
e. To refer to a committee;
f. To amend; or
g. To postpone indefinitely.
(5) Any member desiring to terminate debate may move the previous
question, in which event the presiding officer shall announce the
question as: "Shall the main question now be put?" If a majority of the
members present vote in the affirmative, the main question shall be
taken without further debate, its effect being to put an end to all debate
and bring the Council to a direct vote, first upon any pending
amendments and then upon the main question.
(6) Any Alderperson may demand an aye and nay vote on any matter, and
such vote shall be entered in the proceedings. A majority vote of all
members of the Council in favor of any proposed ordinance, resolution
Sec. 2-43 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-44
1:16
Sec. 2-45. Reconsideration of question. [Code 1992, § 2.08]
Sec. 2-46. Call of the Council. [Code 1992, § 2.09]
A call of the Council may be requested at any time by two or more members,
and absent members shall be sent for. A call shall not be made after
voting has commenced. When a call of the Council has been requested and
ordered, the door shall be closed until the report of the police officer has
been received and acted upon, or until further proceedings under the call
are dispensed with by a majority of the entire Council.
Sec. 2-47. Disturbances and disorderly conduct. [Code 1992, § 2.10]
Whenever any disturbance or disorderly conduct occurs in any meeting of
the Council, the presiding officer may cause the room to be cleared of all
persons guilty of such disorderly conduct except the Alderpersons. If any
Alderperson is guilty of disorderly conduct, the presiding officer may order
the police to take him into custody for the time being or until the meeting
adjourns. Such member may appeal from such order to the Council as in
other cases.
or appointment shall be necessary for passage or approval unless a
larger number is required by statute. Except as otherwise provided by
these rules, a majority vote of those present shall prevail in other cases.
The Mayor shall not vote except in case of a tie.
(7) A motion to adjourn shall always be in order. A motion to adjourn or to
lay on the table and a call for the previous question shall be decided
without debate.
(a) Any member voting with the prevailing side may move for a
reconsideration of the vote on any question at that meeting or at the
next succeeding regular meeting. A motion to reconsider being put and
lost shall not be renewed. An Alderperson may not change his vote on
any question after the result has been announced.
(b) If the motion for reconsideration is made at the same meeting that the
vote on an agenda item was taken, then the actual reconsideration of
the issue can be made and voted upon at that same meeting.
(c) If the motion for reconsideration is made and passed at the next
regularly scheduled meeting after the vote was taken on an agenda
item, then the issue must be placed on the agenda at a subsequent
scheduled and noticed City Council meeting.
(d) After a motion for reconsideration has been made and passed, the
Council may refer the matter to a committee for further consideration
prior to the matter being placed on the agenda for action by the City
Council.
Sec. 2-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-48
1:17
Sec. 2-48. Appropriations and accounts. [Code 1992, § 2.11]
All demands or accounts shall be acted upon at the time of presentation
unless one or more members demands a reference.
Sec. 2-49. Standing committees. [Code 1992, § 2.12; Ord. No. 08-02,
3-10-2008]
The standing committees of the council shall be:
Finance, Licensing and Regulation Committee;
Piers, Harbors, and Lakefront Committee;
Personnel Committee;
Public Works Committees.
The standing committees shall consist of five persons all of whom shall
be Aldermen and shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to approval of
Council.
The Mayor shall designate one of each committee's members as the
committee chairman.
The term for member shall be one year. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointment by the Mayor subject to approval of Council for the unexpired
term.
A member or members of each standing committee may be removed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council.
Committee members shall serve without compensation other than the
regularly established salary as Aldermen.
Each standing committee shall adopt its own rules and procedures that are
consistent with the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order and shall
keep a written record and file a copy with the City Clerk of all its minutes,
resolutions, and proceedings.
The City Clerk shall prepare the agenda and provide timely public notice,
including date, place and agenda of all standing committee meetings in
accordance with state statutes.
All standing committees shall meet at City Hall unless a meeting elsewhere
is authorized by the Mayor or City Clerk.
A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business
The powers, duties, and responsibilities of each standing committee are:
(1) Finance, Licensing and Regulation Committee. The Committee shall
have the duties and powers set forth below: [Amended 5-29-2012 by
Sec. 2-48 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-49
1:18
Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08; 12-27-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-23; 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
a. Meeting. The Committee shall meet at 6:00 p.m. on the first and
third Tuesday of each month and additionally as called by the
Chairman or by a majority of the Committee.
b. Financial recommendations. The Committee shall meet to discuss
and make recommendations on the following or similar matters:
1. City or utility financing for capital improvements, capital
projects, and capital equipment financing or leasing;
2. Refinancing;
3. Bond proceeds investing;
4. Financial forecasting;
5. Financing for housing development, economic development, or
for tax incremental financing;
6. Bond counsel for financing, refinancing, financial evaluation,
or bond rating;
7. Cooperate with the City Administrator, Comptroller, Treasurer,
and others in preparation and review of the annual City
budget; and
8. Consider and recommend all purchases of labor, services,
supplies, and materials exceeding $5,000 and all contracts
made, except contracts pursuant to W.S.A. § 62.15(2). No
contract or purchase shall be recommended except where
sufficient funds have been appropriated in the current budget
to an official, department, board or commission or to a
particular fund. All purchases shall be made on the basis of a
written purchase order by the proper official department head,
board or commission.
c. Financial duties. Receive and authorize payment of the monthly
obligations and payments of the City, provided such payments are
authorized under the approved annual budget or authorized
amendments to the annual budget of the City.
d. Regulatory and licensing duties. The Committee shall be
responsible for recommendations of the following to City Council:
1. License applications, as required by statutes or ordinances;
2. Planning and policy setting for the abatement of nuisances;
3. Planning and policy setting on matters pertaining to licenses
and permits; and
Sec. 2-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-49
1:19
4. Planning and policy setting on matters pertaining to orderly
conduct.
e. Advise the City Council and City Administrator on matters relating
to technology, information and communications with the City, or as
referred by City staff or Council.
f. Evaluate and make recommendations to the City Council related to
overall communications to the residents of the City of Lake Geneva
with the vision of establishing a system of communications that
keeps its residents reasonably well informed about the plans and
actions of the City.
g. Advise the City Council on issues related to cable television
pursuant to applicable state and federal laws.
h. Monitor the local cable television franchise and review service
concerns pursuant to the franchise agreement.
i. Study the use of public access and government channels.
j. Review and make recommendations concerning the City's website.
k. Propose facilities and equipment needs necessary for video,
electronic, and digital information distribution to staff and to the
public.
(2) Piers, Harbors, and Lakefront Committee. The Committee shall
consider the following and shall have the duty to recommend action
there as to the City Council:
a. All commercial and private pier and buoy leases, including
wording, length of lease, cost, and any other provisions.
b. All rules and procedures pertaining to City leases, all activities
within or surrounding the Riviera piers, buoys, dinghy pads,
launching, trailer parking as part of boat launch fee and access
road (if any) to piers.
c. Launch fees and annual beach passes.
d. New construction and maintenance of beach piers, buoys, dinghy
pads, and boat launches.
e. The Harbormaster or other person in charge of any lakefront
activity shall report to and cooperate with the Committee.
(3) Personnel Committee.
a. The Committee shall be responsible for negotiating all employment
contracts or agreements between the City of Lake Geneva and its
employees, excepting only those employees who are specifically
governed by another City committee or commission.
Sec. 2-49 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-49
1:20
b. The Committee shall make a recommendation to the City Council to
accept or reject employee contract or agreement offers. The City
Council shall have the sole power to accept or reject employee
contracts or agreements by a majority vote.
c. The Committee shall be responsible for periodic evaluations,
semiannual and/or annual, of all City department heads except
those governed by another City commission, committee, or official.
d. The Committee shall be responsible for all disciplinary matters
involving grievances, prohibitive practice complaints, work rule
violations, contract violations, and other matters including
discharge or separation for employment.
e. The Committee shall be responsible for creating and
recommending to the City Council job descriptions for all City
employees (except police and fire), and such job descriptions shall
be utilized when advertising for and evaluating potential new and
current employees.
f. The Committee will interview all prospective exempt employees
and all appointed officials of the City that are appointed by the City
Council as set forth in Section 2-3 of the Municipal Code of the City
of Lake Geneva. City department heads are those individuals
responsible for the oversight of particular functions and employees
of the City. City department heads shall be given the authority to
hire and terminate employees within their department, provided
that any hiring is done without violating budgetary constraints
placed on their departments and any terminating is done within the
guidelines established by the City of Lake Geneva Employee
Handbook. [Added 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 10-05; amended
11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-32; 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 14-05]
(4) Public Works Committee. The Public Works Committee shall be
responsible for activities taking place on public property, rights-of-way,
and easements, and including the following: [Amended 12-27-2016
by Ord. No. 16-21]
a. Planning for maintenance, repairs and remodeling of all Cityowned
facilities except those facilities under the control of the
Utility Commission and the Piers and Harbors Committee.
b. Recommend repairs of City-owned facilities to be included in the
following year's budget.
c. Determine by inspection or otherwise, not less than annually, the
need for repairs of each facility. Major repairs are to be included in
the proposed five-year capital improvement plan and approved by
the Common Council.
Sec. 2-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-49
1:21
Sec. 2-50. Ordinances. [Code 1992, § 2.13; Ord. No. 07-20, § 1,
1-14-2008]
d. Consult and cooperate with the Piers, Harbors, and Lakefront
Committee, Park Commission, Cemetery Commission, Library
Board and any other overlapping City committees.
e. Superintend all public works and keep the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, storm sewers, public open spaces, and public related
places in repair.
f. Unusual use of streets. No building shall be moved through the
streets without a written permit therefor granted by the Board of
Public Works, except in cities where the Council shall, by
ordinance, authorize some other officer or officers to issue a permit
therefor; said Board shall determine the time and manner of using
the streets for laying or changing underground utilities in City
rights-of-way or easements, including electric, telephone, or gas
pipes, cable television, or placing and maintaining electric and
telephone poles therein, provided that its decision in this regard
may be reviewed by the Council.
g. Restoring streets. In case any corporation or individual shall
neglect to repair or restore to its former condition any street, alley
or sidewalk excavated, altered or taken up, within the time and in
the manner directed by the Board, said Board shall cause the same
to be done at the expense of said corporation or individual. The
expense thereof, when chargeable to a lot owner, shall be certified
to the City Clerk by the Board, and if not paid shall be carried into
the tax roll as a special tax against the lot.
h. Manage all acquisition and maintenance of land for public parking
subject to approval of the City Council.
i. Set up and maintain a system of operation for the municipal
parking system subject to approval of the City Council.
j. With the approval of the Council, purchase, acquire, or lease land
in order to operate a municipal parking system.
k. With the approval of the City Council the Committee shall
construct, extend, add to, improve, conduct, and operate the
municipal parking system for the parking of vehicles.
l. The Committee may exercise the preceding duties in a manner it
sees fit, subject to approval of the City Council. The municipal
parking system shall include parking lots and other parking
facilities upon the public streets or grounds of the City.
(a) City Attorney to review. All proposed ordinances shall be submitted to
the City Attorney for review before action by the Council.
Sec. 2-49 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-50
1:22
Sec. 2-51. Amendment of Rules. [Code 1992, § 2.14]
The rules of this article shall not be rescinded or amended unless the
proposed amendment or motion to rescind has laid over from a regular
meeting, and then it shall require a vote of three-fourths of all the members
of the Council.
Sec. 2-52. Suspension of Rules. [Code 1992, § 2.15]
The rules of this article or any part of such rules may be temporarily
suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded
vote of three-fourths of the members present.
Sec. 2-53. Tabled and deferred motions. [Code 1992, § 2.16]
Sec. 2-54. through Sec. 2-80. (Reserved)
(b) Reading. Unless otherwise requested by majority vote of the members
present, all ordinances shall be read by title at two consecutive Council
meetings before adoption by the Council, except the Council may
suspend this rule under Section 2-52 and bring the matter up for action
after the first reading. [Amended 9-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-28]
(c) Publication. All general ordinances of the City and all regulations
imposing a penalty shall be published in the official paper of the City
once and shall be immediately recorded, with the affidavit of
publication, by the City Clerk in a book kept for that purpose. A printed
copy of such ordinance or resolution in any book, pamphlet or
newspaper and published or purporting to be published therein by
direction of the City Council shall be prima facie proof of due passage,
publication and recording of such ordinance or resolution.
(d) Effective date. Unless otherwise provided, all ordinances shall take
effect and be in force from and after passage and publication; and
published copies of such ordinances shall have appended the date of
first publication.
(a) Tabled or deferred items may be placed on the agenda for the next
Council meeting by notifying the City Clerk by noon of the previous
Thursday. The Mayor, committee chairman of the responsible
committee or any two Alderpersons may make the request. The item
will then be placed on the agenda for the consideration of removing it
from the table.
(b) The City Clerk will maintain a list of all tabled or deferred items. A copy
of the list will be provided the Mayor and Alderpersons with the agenda
for each meeting.
Sec. 2-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-54
1:23

ARTICLE III
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-81. through Sec. 2-95. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-81
1:25

DIVISION 2
CLERK
Sec. 2-96. Powers and duties. [Code 1992, § 1.12(2); Ord. No. 95-8,
§ IV, 5-22-1995]
The City Clerk shall:
Sec. 2-97. Filing of documents incorporated by reference. [Code
1992, § 25.03]
Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written
or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated
in this Code as if fully set forth in this Code, and the Clerk shall file, deposit
and keep in his office a copy of the code, standard, rule, regulation or other
(1) Serve as Clerk of the Council and be responsible for the publication,
filing, indexing and safekeeping of all proceedings of the Council.
(2) Be responsible for all election duties as required by the laws of the state
and shall keep and maintain all election records and be responsible for
all property in connection with the holding of elections.
(3) Publish all legal notices unless otherwise provided, and file and
preserve all contracts, deeds, abstracts, bonds, oaths of office and other
documents not required to be filed elsewhere.
(4) Issue all licenses required by ordinance or state statute, except as
otherwise provided, and keep a record of such licenses.
(5) Be custodian of the City Seal and perform the duties of Comptroller.
(6) Prepare the tax roll as required by state statutes.
(7) Following the close of each month, prepare a statement showing the
condition of the treasury at the close of the preceding month which
contains a statement of all receipts and disbursements and distribute
copies of the same to the Mayor and each Alderperson.
(8) Maintain a set of books and accounts in accordance with the system
prescribed by the Department of State Audit, keep an accurate account
of all orders drawn upon the treasury and receipts reported by the
Treasurer and charge or credit the same, as the case may be, to the
proper accounts. [Amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08;
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(9) At least once each month prepare a statement of accounts to be paid
and submit the statement to the Council for approval.
(10) The City Clerk shall ensure that all items referred to the Council by
municipal officers, committees, commissions or boards are included in
the agenda. Such referrals must be received by the Clerk two Fridays
prior to the scheduled meeting.
Sec. 2-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-97
1:27
written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept
shall be public records open for examination with proper care by any person
during the Clerk's office hours, subject to such orders or regulations which
the Clerk may prescribe for their preservation.
Sec. 2-98. through Sec. 2-114. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-97 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-98
1:28
DIVISION 3
TREASURER
Sec. 2-115. Treasurer. [Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
The Treasurer shall have those duties set forth in § 62.09(9), Wis. Stats.,
together with such other duties as provided by the City Council.
Sec. 2-116. Treasurer's duplicate bond. [Code 1992, § 3.08;
amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No.
14-08]
Sec. 2-117. Temporary investment of funds. [Code 1992, § 3.09;
amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No.
14-08]
The Treasurer may invest any City funds not immediately needed, pursuant
to W.S.A., § 66.04(2).
Sec. 2-118. Depository. [Code 1992, § 3.10; amended 5-29-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
The Treasurer shall maintain in such depository as designated by resolution
of the Council, an open checking account sufficient to meet current City
expenses.
Sec. 2-119. through Sec. 2-135. (Reserved)
(a) Eliminated. The City elects not to give the bond on the Treasurer
provided for by W.S.A. § 70.67(1).
(b) City liability for default of Treasurer. Pursuant to W.S.A. § 70.67(2), the
City shall pay, if the Treasurer fails to do so, all state and county taxes
required by law to be paid by such Treasurer to the County Treasurer.
Sec. 2-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-119
1:29

DIVISION 4
ATTORNEY
Sec. 2-136. Office created. [Code 1992, § 1.14(1)]
Pursuant to W.S.A., § 62.09(12), there is established the office of City
Attorney.
Sec. 2-137. Election; term. [Code 1992, § 1.14(2)]
The City Attorney shall be elected in the spring election in even-numbered
years for a term of two years.
Sec. 2-138. Duties and responsibilities. [Code 1992, § 1.14(3)]
Sec. 2-139. Compensation and fees. [Code 1992, § 1.14(4); Ord. No.
07-19, § 1, 1-14-2008]
(a) The City Attorney shall conduct and be responsible for all legal business
and affairs in which the City has an interest and shall serve as legal
advisor to the Council and all departments and offices of the City. He
shall be in charge of prosecuting all cases arising out of the violation of
City ordinances. He shall give written legal opinions when asked to do
so by the City Council, City, Mayor or other department heads as
required and pursuant to policy established. He shall represent the City
in matters in which the City has a necessary legal interest before any
court or tribunal and, in addition to attending to the day-to-day legal
business of the City, shall perform such other duties as may be required
by the Mayor or Council, all in keeping with the rules of professional
conduct for attorneys as adopted by the State Supreme Court. (See SCR
Chapter 20.)
(b) The City Attorney, although responsible for the day-to-day legal matters
of the City, may be advised from time to time by the Mayor, City Council,
department heads or officers with respect to specific matters and
details of City business, which matters by their nature are solely within
the knowledge of specific individuals, departments or bodies of
government. The City Attorney shall respond to these advisories as part
of his day-to-day activities.
(a) The City Attorney shall be given a salary the amount of which is to be
determined annually commencing January 1 of each year. The salary
shall be paid through regular payroll procedures and is intended to
compensate the City Attorney at the agreed upon hourly rate for the
following activities: attendance at all regular City Council meetings;
attendance at all Plan Commission meetings; the rendering of legal
advice at such meetings when requested by the Mayor or City Council
in keeping with City policy regarding same; drafting of ordinances,
leases, deeds and easements for roads and utilities; and attendance at
standing committees and Committee of the Whole if requested.
Sec. 2-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-139
1:31
Sec. 2-140. Extraordinary matters. [Code 1992, § 1.14(5)]
If an item of the City business arises that is of the type and extent exceeding
the normal and typical day-to-day business of the City and in which the
involvement of the City is optional and not mandatory including, but not
limited to, labor negotiations; industrial revenue; mortgage or general
obligation bonding; TIF developments; major economic developments
involving extensive legal services, including contractual negotiations, the
Mayor and City Council shall be advised in advance of the need for legal
services in those areas or determine on their own the need for such services
and shall authorize the City Attorney to act in these matters if deemed
appropriate. In the event of the involvement of the City and the necessity
of legal services in these extraordinary matters, the City Council and City
Attorney shall establish a separate fee agreement governing these services.
If the City Attorney is required to act on behalf of the City in extraordinary
matters prior to securing Council approval, the City Attorney shall secure
approval of the Mayor or, in the absence of the Mayor, the Council
President, and shall be compensated at the established annual hourly rate
until the Council and City Attorney have established a different hourly rate
for this extraordinary type of work. The City Attorney shall report to the City
Council at its direction on the status of any legal matter pending. However,
such reports shall be in closed session if determined to be appropriate and
allowable under W.S.A., ch. 19.
Sec. 2-141. Benefits. [Code 1992, § 1.14; Ord. No. 07-19, § 1,
1-14-2008]
Sec. 2-142. through Sec. 2-160. (Reserved)
(b) All other work, activity or involvement by the City Attorney in the legal
affairs of the City shall be billed and paid on an hourly (or fraction of an
hour) basis on a monthly schedule. The hourly rate for such services
shall be determined annually by resolution of the City Council
commencing January 1 of each year and paid through the normal
payroll procedures.
(a) The elected City Attorney shall be entitled to receive any and all
benefits to which he may be entitled pursuant to the state statutes or
federal law as a result of his election to the office and position of City
Attorney and employment by the City in such office and position.
(b) The elected City Attorney shall be given an annual W-2 wage and tax
statement covering his entire gross income from the City.
Sec. 2-139 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-142
1:32
DIVISION 5
ASSESSOR
Sec. 2-161. Duties and powers. [Code 1992, § 1.21]
The duties and powers of the Assessor shall include those enumerated
in W.S.A., ch. 70 and such other duties as shall be prescribed by law,
supervisory personnel of the Department of Revenue and the Council,
including attendance at all meetings of the Board of Review.
Sec. 2-162. Confidentiality of income and expense information.
[Ord. No. 00-4, § I, 2-28-2000]
Whenever the Assessor, in the performance of the Assessor's duties,
requests or obtains income and expense information pursuant to W.S.A.,
§ 70.47(7)(af), or any successor statute thereto, then, such income and
expense information that is provided to the Assessor shall be held by the
Assessor on a confidential basis, except, however, that said information may
be revealed to and used by persons: in the discharging of duties imposed by
law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office (including, but not limited
to, use by the Assessor in performance of official duties of the Assessor's
office and use by the Board of Review in performance of its official duties);
or pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense information provided
to the Assessor under W.S.A. § 70.47(7)(af), unless a court determines that
it is inaccurate, is, per W.S.A. § 70.47(7)(af), not subject to the right of
inspection and copying under W.S.A. § 19.35(1).
Sec. 2-163. through Sec. 2-180. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-163
1:33

DIVISION 6
ADMINISTRATOR
Sec. 2-181. Creation of office. [Ord. No. 03-01, §§ I, II, 1-27-2003]
In order to provide the City with a more efficient, effective and responsible
government under a system of a part-time Mayor and part-time Common
Council, referred to in this division as "Council," at a time when the City
government is becoming increasingly complex, there is created the office of
City Administrator, referred to in this division as "Administrator."
Sec. 2-182. Appointment, term of office and removal. [Ord. No.
03-01, §§ I, II, 1-27-2003; amended 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 10-05]
The Administrator shall be appointed as provided under Section 2-3 and on
the basis of merit with due regard to training, experience, administrative
ability and general fitness for the office, by a majority vote of the Council.
The Administrator shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject to removal
at any time by a two-thirds vote of the members of the Council. This section,
however, shall not preclude the Council from establishing other employment
terms and conditions not inconsistent with the provisions of this division or
any other ordinance.
Sec. 2-183. Residency requirements. [Ord. No. 03-01, §§ I, II,
1-27-2003]
The Administrator shall become a resident of the City within six months
following the date of appointment, unless this section is specifically waived
or varied by Council ordinance or by contract authorized by the Council,
and entered into with the Administrator covering the terms and conditions
of residency.
Sec. 2-184. Functions and duties. [Ord. No. 03-01, §§ I, II,
1-27-2003]
The Administrator, subject to the limitations defined in resolutions and
ordinances of the City and state statutes, shall be the chief administrative
officer of the City, responsible only to the Mayor and the Council for the
proper administrations of the business affairs of the City, pursuant to state
statutes, local resolutions or ordinances and directives of the Council, with
the following power and duties:
(1) General duties. General duties are as follows:
a. Carry out directives of the Mayor and Council which require
administrative implementation, reporting promptly to the Mayor
and Council any difficulties encountered.
b. Administer day-to-day operations of City government including
monitoring City ordinances, resolutions, Council meeting minutes,
and state statutes.
Sec. 2-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-184
1:35
c. Evaluate and codify all existing City policies and procedures.
d. Assist the Mayor and Council in establishing City-wide goals and
objectives; ensure that these goals and objectives are implemented
on a consistent basis.
e. Review the existing organization chart, which defines authority and
responsibility for all nonstatutory positions of the City and submit
any suggested changes to the Personnel Committee for
recommendation to Council for adoption as the official organization
and administrative procedure plan for the City.
f. Establish when necessary administrative procedures to increase
the effectiveness and efficiency of City government according to
current practices in local government, not inconsistent with
Subsection (1)c of this section or directives of the Mayor and
Council.
g. Attend Finance/License and Judicial Committee meetings. Keep
informed by minutes and/or committee members, of the activities,
etc. of all other committees, boards and commissions of the City.
h. Keep informed concerning current federal, state, and county
legislation and administrative rules affecting the City and submit
appropriate reports and recommendations thereon to the Council.
i. Keep informed concerning the availability of federal, state, and
county funds for local programs. Assist department heads and the
council in obtaining these funds under the direction of the Mayor
and the Council.
j. Represent the City in matters involving legislative and
intergovernmental affairs as authorized and directed as to that
representation by the Mayor and the Council.
k. Act as public information officer for the City with the responsibility
of ensuring that the news media are kept informed about the
operations of the City and that all open meeting rules and
regulations are followed.
l. Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communications
between citizens and City government to ensure that complaints,
grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt
attention by the responsible official, and to ensure that all such
matters are expeditiously resolved.
m. Promote the economic well-being and growth of the City through
public/private sector cooperation.
(2) Responsibilities to the Mayor and City Council. The Administrator's
responsibilities to the Mayor and Council are as follows:
Sec. 2-184 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-184
1:36
a. Attend all meetings of the Council, assisting the Mayor and the
Council as required in the performance of their duties.
b. In coordination with the Mayor, the Council and the Clerk, ensure
that appropriate agendas are prepared to all meetings of the
Council, all Council committees and all other appropriate
committees and commissions of the City, together with such
supporting material as may be required, with nothing in this
section being construed as to give the Administrator authority to
limit or in any way prevent matters from being considered by the
Council, or any of its committees and commissions.
c. Assist in the preparation of ordinances and resolutions as
requested by the Mayor or the Council, or as needed.
d. Keep the Mayor and Council regularly informed about the activities
of the Administrator's office by oral or written report at regular and
special meetings of the Council.
e. If action normally requiring Council approval is necessary at a time
when the Council cannot meet, the Administrator shall receive
directives from the Mayor, or in the absence of the Mayor, from the
Council President.
(3) Personnel responsibilities. The Administrator will be responsible to City
Council through Personnel Committee for the administrative direction
and coordination of all employees of the City according to the
established organization procedures, including:
a. Recommending to personnel the appointment, promotion, and
when necessary for the good of the City, the suspension or
termination of all City employees who are not subject to personnel
decisions by the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners or the
Library Board.
b. Evaluate in conjunction with department heads the performance of
all employees on a regular basis; develop and enforce high
standards of performance by City employees; ensure that City
employees have proper working conditions; and work closely with
department heads to promptly resolve personnel problems or
grievances.
c. Assist in labor contract negotiations and collective bargaining
issues.
d. Work closely with supervisors to assure that employees receive
adequate opportunities for training to maintain and improve their
job-related knowledge and skills and act as the approving authority
for requests by employees to attend conferences, meetings,
training schools, etc., provided that funds have been budgeted for
these activities.
Sec. 2-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-184
1:37
Sec. 2-185. Cooperation. [Ord. No. 03-01, §§ I, II, 1-27-2003]
All officials and employees of the City shall cooperate with and assist the
Administrator so that the City government shall function effectively and
efficiently.
Sec. 2-186. Limits of authority. [Ord. No. 03-01, §§ I, II, 1-27-2003]
Nothing in this division shall limit the authority or responsibility of the
Mayor, as chief executive officer, or the Common Council as the legislative
body.
Sec. 2-187. through Sec. 2-200. (Reserved)
(4) Budgeting and purchasing responsibilities. The budgeting and
purchasing responsibilities of the Administrator are as follows.
a. Responsibility for the preparation of the annual City budget, in
accordance with guidelines as may be provided by the City Council
and in coordination with department heads, and pursuant to state
statutes, for review and approval by the Mayor and the Council.
b. Administering the budget as adopted by the Council.
c. Reporting regularly to the Council on the current fiscal position of
the City.
d. Supervising the accounting system of the City ensuring that the
system employs methods in accordance with current professional
accounting practices.
e. Serving as the purchasing agent for the City, supervising all
purchasing and contracting for supplies and services, subject to the
purchasing procedures established by the Council and any
limitation contained in the state statutes.
f. Assist the Comptroller in examining investment accounts and
reports to ensure compliance with established fiscal policies and
procedures. [Amended 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 10-05]
Sec. 2-184 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-187
1:38
ARTICLE IV
ETHICAL CODE
Sec. 2-201. Declaration of policy. [Code 1992, § 1.07(1)]
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people; government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the
governmental structure; public office not be used for personal gain; and
the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition
of these goals, a Code of Ethics for the guidance of public officers and
employees will help them avoid conflicts, improve standards of public
service and promote and strengthen the confidence of the residents of this
City in their public officers and employees.
Sec. 2-202. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 1.07(2)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Any person excluded from the definition of a public
officer who is employed by the City.
PUBLIC OFFICER — All of those persons defined in W.S.A., § 62.09, and all
members of boards, commissions and agencies established or appointed by
the Mayor or City Council, whether paid or unpaid.
Sec. 2-203. Standards of conduct. [Code 1992, § 1.07(3)]
(a) There are certain provisions of the state statutes which should, while
not set forth in this section, be considered an integral part of any code
of ethics.
(b) Accordingly, the provisions of the following sections of the state
statutes are made a part of this article and shall apply to public officers
and public employees, whenever applicable:
(1) Fair and equal treatment. The principle of fair and equal treatment
shall be applied as follows:
a. Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or
permit the unauthorized use of City-owned vehicles,
equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or
profit.
b. Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any
special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen
beyond that which is available to every other citizen.
(2) Conflict of interest. Conflict of interest, financial or personal, shall
be avoided as follows:
Sec. 2-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-203
1:39
a. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when
used in this subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this Subsection (b)(2)a, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest which shall yield,
directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit to
the officer or employee or to any person employing or retaining
the services of the officer or employee.
PERSON — Any person, corporation, partnership or joint
venture.
PERSONAL INTEREST — Any interest arising from blood or
marriage relationships or from close business or political
associations, whether or not any financial interest is involved.
b. Financial and personal interest. No official or employee,
whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or
transaction or shall act in regard to financial or other personal
interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the
proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair
his independence of judgment or action in the performance of
his official duties.
(3) Specific conflicts enumerated. The following specific conflicts shall
be avoided:
a. Incompatible employment. No official or employee shall
engage in or accept private employment or render service for
private interest when such employment or service is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties,
unless otherwise permitted by law and unless disclosure is
made as provided in Subsection (3)b of this section.
b. Disclosure of confidential information. No official or employee
shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential
information concerning the property, government or affairs of
the City, nor shall be use such information to advance the
financial or other private interest of himself or others.
(4) Representing private interests before City agencies or courts. No
officer or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person,
other than himself, his spouse or minor children, before any City
agency or municipal court without full disclosure of that
relationship. However, a member of the City Council may appear
before City agencies on behalf of the citizenry in the course of his
duties as an elected official, or in the performance of public or civic
obligations.
(5) Disclosure of interest in legislation. Any member of the City
Council who has a financial interest or personal interest in any
proposed legislation before the City Council shall disclose on the
Sec. 2-203 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-203
1:40
Sec. 2-204. Distribution of code. [Code 1992, § 1.07(4)]
The City Clerk shall cause a copy of this article to be distributed to every
public officer and employee of the City within 30 days after enactment of
this article. Each public officer and employee elected, appointed or engaged
thereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of his
office or employment.
Sec. 2-205. through Sec. 2-229. (Reserved)
records of the City Council the nature and extent of such interest.
Any other official or employee who has a financial or personal
interest in any proposed legislative action of the City Council and
who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion or
recommendation to the City Council shall disclose on the records
of the City Council the nature and extent of such interest.
(6) Gifts and gratuities. No public officer, elected official or employee
shall accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan,
thing or promise from any person which, to his knowledge, is
interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in
business dealings with the City that may tend to influence him in
the discharge of his duties or grant in the discharge of his duties
any improper favor, service or thing of value. Gifts received under
unusual circumstances should be denied or returned immediately
or in the most expeditious manner possible. Acceptance of gifts or
gratuities shall not be interpreted to mean those social, education,
informative or public relations events open to many or all public
officers or employees that are not intended to influence them in
their official duties.
(7) Nepotism. No appointing authority shall appoint members of his
family to any full-time position, nor shall a supervisor supervise any
member of his family. This subsection shall not apply to any person
employed and having such relationship prior to September 10,
1990. No collective bargaining agreement shall be concluded or, if
concluded, shall be effective to the extent that it violates the intent
of this subsection. "Family," for purposes of this policy, includes
husband, wife, father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, fatherin-
law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law
and sister-in-law.
Sec. 2-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-205
1:41

ARTICLE V
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-230. Committee of the Whole. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008;
Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 6-23-2008]
Sec. 2-231. through Sec. 2-232. (Reserved)2
Sec. 2-233. Creation of ad hoc committees. [Ord. No. 08-02,
3-10-2008]
(a) Composition. The City Alderman shall be the Committee of the Whole.
The Council President shall serve as Chairman of the Committee of the
Whole. The Committee of the Whole may elect a Vice Chairman to serve
in the Chairman's absence.
(b) Meeting. The Committee of the Whole shall meet in the Council
Chambers of the City Hall on the first Monday of each month. The
Council President may change the meeting time and place and may call
special meetings of the Committee of the Whole.
(c) Committee powers and duties.
(1) The Committee of the Whole may hold informal discussions on any
agenda item and may make recommendations and suggestions to
the Common Council.
(2) The Committee of the Whole may receive reports from the
committees, commissions, and boards of the City.
(3) The Committee of the Whole may receive reports and information
from all City officials.
(4) The Committee of the Whole may take other actions and consider
other matters that may be assigned to it by the Common Council.
(a) Appointment. In addition to those committees set forth by ordinance,
the Mayor, with the approval of the Council, may from time to time
create such additional ad hoc committees as needed. All ad hoc
committees shall be established and governed by resolution, except
that if any ad hoc committee is expected to have a duration of one year
or more, it shall be established and regulated by ordinance in this code
section.
2. Editor’s Note: Former Sec. 2-231, Communications Committee, adopted 3-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-02, as amended, was repealed 12-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-22; and former Sec.
2-232, Committee powers and duties, adopted 3-10-2008 by Ord. No. 08-02, was repealed
1-14-2013 by Ord. No. 12-27.
Sec. 2-230 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-233
1:43
(b) Dissolution. Every ad hoc committee shall terminate automatically six
months after its appointment, unless the term is extended by the
Council. The Council, in its discretion, may extend the term of any ad
hoc committee.
Sec. 2-233 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-233
1:44
DIVISION 1.1
AVIAN (BIRD) COMMITTEE
[Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-12]
Sec. 2-234. Composition; appointment; term; vacancy; salary.
Sec. 2-235. Meetings; conduct; duties.
(a) Composition. There shall be seven members on the Avian (Bird)
Committee, comprised of six citizens and one Alderman. [Amended
11-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
(b) Appointment. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Common Council at the organization meeting each
April.
(c) Term. Citizen members shall serve two-year terms, except that for
initial appointments, two citizen members shall serve one-year terms
and two citizen members shall serve two-year terms. The citizen
members' terms shall be staggered so as to have two members' terms
expire annually.
(d) Vacancy. Any vacancy shall be filled through the appointment procedure
described above for the remaining term of the vacancy.
(e) Salary. Members of the Avian Committee shall serve without
compensation.
(a) Meeting. The Committee shall meet a minimum of four times per year
and shall fix its meeting dates and time at the beginning of each
calendar year or as soon as practical. Additional meetings may be called
by the Chairman or by action of the members at a duly called meeting.
All meetings shall be held at the City Hall unless otherwise designated
by the Chairman.
(b) Rules of Order. The Chairperson shall call the meeting to order, shall
preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order, and conduct
the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with Robert's Rules of
Order, unless otherwise provided by statute or by the rules stated
herein.
(c) Quorum. A majority of the membership of the Committee shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
(d) Organization. The members of the Avian Committee shall elect a
Chairman from amongst its members. The Avian Committee may elect
other officers necessary or appropriate to aid in the efficient running of
the Committee. [Amended 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-23]
(e) Agenda. The Chairperson is responsible for the preparation of the
agenda and shall provide a digital or electronic copy of such agenda to
the City Clerk for posting and distribution to other Committee members
Sec. 2-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-235
1:45
Sec. 2-236. through Sec. 2-245. (Reserved)
and the public at least 48 hours prior to such meeting. Informational
material for items identified on the agenda shall also be provided with
the agenda when practical.
(f) Committee action. Unless otherwise stated herein, the Avian
Committee is advisory in its capacity and shall make recommendations
to the City Council.
(g) Submittal of minutes. The acting Secretary shall submit in a timely
fashion a digital copy of the meeting minutes to the City Clerk for
posting and distribution. If action by the City Council is desired, such
action shall be so noted in the minutes.
(h) Duties. The Avian Committee shall:
(1) Make recommendations to the City Council:
a. To plan and celebrate International Migratory Bird Day
annually on the second Saturday of May.
b. To monitor and implement minimum criteria to achieve annual
certification as a "Bird City" community.
c. To apply for Bird City status annually.
d. To promote the City of Lake Geneva as a tourist destination for
bird enthusiasts.
(2) Submit at least one bird-related article for the City website or
media.
(3) Review annually all City ordinances and policies/procedures
related to birds and recommend changes or updates to the
Common Council.
Sec. 2-235 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-236
1:46
DIVISION 2
BOARD OF REVIEW
Sec. 2-246. Composition. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
There shall be six members of the Board of Review. The members shall be
the Mayor, the City Clerk, and four Aldermen.
Sec. 2-247. Appointment. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The Aldermen shall be appointed to the Board of Review by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by the Council. The Mayor shall appoint the
committee Chairman.
Sec. 2-248. Term. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended 7-13-2009
by Ord. No. 09-12]
The terms of the elected members on the Board of Review shall serve
contemporaneously with their terms on the Council.
Sec. 2-249. Salary. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
Members of the Board of Review shall not receive a salary beyond that
which they receive for serving as City officials.
Sec. 2-250. Committee powers and duties. [Ord. No. 08-02,
3-10-2008]
Board of Review. The Board of Review shall have the duties and powers
described by W.S.A., § 70.47, including those duties and powers set forth
below:
(1) Meeting. The Board of Review shall hold a meeting annually. The
meeting shall be held at any time during the thirty-day period beginning
on the second Monday of May. The meeting shall take place at the City
Hall. The Board shall give notice of the meeting every year as required
by W.S.A., § 70.47(2). The Board shall hold all meetings publicly and
shall have the meetings open to all citizens at all times. The Board shall
conduct the meeting as set forth in W.S.A., § 70.47(3). The Board may
adjourn from time to time until its business is completed. The Clerk
shall keep a record of all the proceedings. Fuller explanations of the
proceeding duties and powers are described in W.S.A., § 70.47(1)
through (5). The City Clerk shall create and post all agendas for this
committee.
(2) Duty. The Board shall carefully examine the tax roll or tax rolls and
correct all apparent errors in description or computation, and shall add
all omitted property. If the Board wishes to proceed in adding an
omitted property, it must follow the procedures as set forth in W.S.A.,
§ 70.47(10). The Board shall not raise or lower the assessment of any
property except after a hearing. The hearing must be conducted as per
Sec. 2-246 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-250
1:47
Sec. 2-251. Objections to evaluations. [Added 7-13-2009 by Ord. No.
09-123]
Sec. 2-252. Removal. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The City shall have the right and duty to remove a member of the Board
of Review for the hearing on a specific objection if any of the following
conditions apply:
the requirements set forth in W.S.A., § 70.47(8) and must conform to
W.S.A., § 70.47(10).
(a) Objections to evaluations shall comply with the provisions of § 70.47(7),
Wis. Stats.
(b) Hearing extension. Pursuant to § 70.47(7)(c), Wis. Stats., the Board of
Review shall grant a taxpayer a sixty-day extension for a hearing
related to the taxpayer’s objection to an assessment if the taxpayer
submits to the Board, along with the objection, a request for an
extension. The fee for a sixty-day extension shall be $100 paid to the
City.
(c) Presentation of evidence. Each taxpayer who submits an assessment
objection, regardless of whether the taxpayer has requested the
extension in Subsection (b) above, and the Assessor shall present to the
Board of Review all evidence, as specified in the manual under
§ 73.03(2a), Wis. Stats., to support their respective positions. If the
taxpayer receives an extension under Subsection (b), at least 10 days
before the scheduled Board of Review hearing, the taxpayer and the
Assessor shall simultaneously exchange all reports, documents and
exhibits that the taxpayer and Assessor will present at the hearing.
(d) Notice to taxpayer. Each year, at least 60 days prior to the first day on
which the Board of Review hears objections, the Assessor shall publish
or cause to be published, on the City’s internet site, the last day on
which a taxpayer may submit an assessment objection. Each year, at
least 15 days prior to the first day on which the Board of Review hears
objections, the Assessor shall include, with each notice a changed
assessment provided pursuant to § 70.365, Wis. Stats., information to
inform the taxpayer of the last day on which the taxpayer may submit
an assessment objection.
(1) A person who is objecting to a valuation requests the removal. The
request must be in compliance with the request procedure in W.S.A.,
§ 70.47(6m)(a)1. The City may not remove more than one member of
the Board of Review (per objection hearing) through this process.
(2) A Board of Review member has a conflict of interest under a City
ordinance.
3. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Secs. 2-251
through 2-254 as Secs. 2-251 through 2-255, respectively.
Sec. 2-250 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-252
1:48
Sec. 2-253. Comments. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended
7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-12]
The City Clerk has the duty to receive written comments about valuations,
assessment practices, and the performance of an Assessor from any person.
The City Clerk shall provide all the comments he or she receives to the
appropriate municipal officer.
Sec. 2-254. Correction of assessments. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The Board has the right and duty to, upon discovering an error in
assessment, raise or lower the assessment accordingly. The Board shall
state on the record the correct assessment and that the assessment is
reasonable in light of all the relevant evidence that the Board received. The
Board shall follow the rest of the correction process described in W.S.A.,
§ 70.47(9).
Sec. 2-255. Miscellaneous. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The Board shall otherwise organize and conduct itself as set forth in the
provisions of W.S.A., §§ 70.46 and 70.47.
Sec. 2-256. through Sec. 2-260. (Reserved)
(3) A member has bias. The party requesting removal must submit an
affidavit as per W.S.A., § 70.47(6m)(a)3.
Board members must recuse themselves for specific objections if they
would violate their ethical duties by attending the hearing.
Notwithstanding the above requirements, no fewer than three
members may hear the objection.
Sec. 2-252 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-256
1:49

DIVISION 3
POLICE AND FIRE COMMISSION
Sec. 2-261. Composition. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
There shall be five members on the Police and Fire Commission. All
members shall be citizens of the City. There shall not be more than three
members belonging to the same political party serving on the Commission
at any one time.
Sec. 2-262. Officers. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The Commission shall determine what other officers it requires to run
effectively. The Commission shall elect all its own officers from its
membership.
Sec. 2-263. Appointment. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The members shall be appointed to the Police and Fire Commission by the
Mayor. The members shall be appointed between the last Monday of April
and the first Monday of May, annually.
Sec. 2-264. Term. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The members shall serve five-year terms. The members shall serve
staggered terms.
Sec. 2-265. Vacancy. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
Any vacancy shall be filled through the appointment procedures described
above for the remainder of the term.
Sec. 2-266. Salary. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
Members of the Police and Fire Commission shall serve without
compensation.
Sec. 2-267. Quorum. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
A majority of the membership of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business.
Sec. 2-268. Committee powers and duties. [Ord. No. 08-02,
3-10-2008]
The Police and Fire Commission shall have the duties and powers set forth
in W.S.A., § 62.13, including those described below:
(1) Meeting. The Police and Fire Commission shall meet at least
semiannually. The Commission may meet as necessary, or as called by
the Chairman or as called by a majority of the committee. The City
Sec. 2-261 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-268
1:51
Sec. 2-269. through Sec. 2-280. (Reserved)
Clerk shall create and post all agendas for this committee. All meetings
shall be at City Hall.
(2) Appointment and removal duties.
a. The Board shall appoint the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire
Department. The Board may remove or suspend either Chief for
cause.
b. The Board shall approve or disapprove subordinates appointed by
the Chiefs.
c. The Board shall adopt, and may repeal or modify, rules calculated
to secure the best service in the Departments. These rules shall
provide for examination of physical and educational qualifications
and experience, and may provide such competitive examinations as
the Board shall determine, and for the classification of positions
with special examination for each class. The Board shall print and
distribute the rules and all changes in them, at City expense. The
rules shall be used to create lists of eligible appointees.
(3) Disciplinary powers.
a. The Board shall share the power of suspension with the Chiefs as
provided for in W.S.A., § 62.13(5).
b. The Board shall have the power of review of suspensions and shall
conduct reviews through the procedures given in W.S.A.,
§ 62.12(5).
(4) Dismissals and reemployment. The Board shall have the power to
dismiss and reemploy the subordinates based on need for economy, lack
of work funds, or other just causes. The Board shall follow the
procedure set forth in W.S.A., § 62.13(5m) for all such dismissals and
reemployment.
(5) Further optional powers of the Board. The Board shall have the power
to:
a. Organize and supervise the Fire and Police Departments and to
prescribe rules and regulations for their control and management.
b. Contract for and purchase all necessary apparatus and supplies for
the use of the departments under their supervision, exclusive of the
erection and control of the police and fire station buildings.
c. Audit all bills, claims and expenses of the Fire and Police
Departments before the same are paid by the Treasurer.
[Amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-08]
Sec. 2-268 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-269
1:52
DIVISION 4
LIBRARY BOARD
Sec. 2-281. Composition. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-11]
There shall be seven members of the Library Board. A minimum of four
members shall be residents of the City of Lake Geneva. One member may be
a resident of the Town of Bloomfield, and one member may be a resident of
the Town of Linn. There shall not be members from any other municipality,
except those approved pursuant to § 43.60(3), Wis. Stats. and the person
appointed by the School District Administrator. In the event there is not a
member who is a resident of Bloomfield or Linn, the positions shall be filled
by residents of Lake Geneva.
One of the seven members of the Library Board shall be the School District
Administrator or his/her representative, to represent the local public school
district.
There shall not be more than one member who is also a member of the
municipal governing body serving at any one time on the Library Board.
Up to five additional members may be appointed under § 43.60(3)(a), Wis.
Stats.
Sec. 2-282. Appointment. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-11]
The members shall be appointed to the Library Board by the Mayor. The
appointments shall be subject to approval by the Common Council.
Sec. 2-283. Officers. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The members of the Library Board shall elect a Chairman, Secretary, and
Financial Secretary from amongst its members. The Library Board may
elect other officers necessary or appropriate to aid in efficiently running the
Board.
Sec. 2-284. Term. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-11]
The members shall serve three-year terms.
Sec. 2-285. Vacancy. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
Any vacancy shall be filled through the appointment procedures described
above.
Sec. 2-286. Salary. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
Members of the Library Board shall not be compensated for their services,
except as follows:
Sec. 2-281 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-286
1:53
Sec. 2-287. Quorum. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
A majority of the membership of the Library Board shall constitute a
quorum.
Sec. 2-288. Powers and duties of Board. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The Library Board shall have the duties and powers as set forth in W.S.A.,
§ 43.58, including those duties and powers set forth below:
(1) The Common Council may, at its discretion, reimburse members for
their actual and necessary expenses incurred in performing duties
outside the municipality, if authorized both by the Library Board and
the Common Council.
(2) The Common Council may, at its discretion, pay members per diem,
mileage, and other necessary expenses incurred in performing their
duties if authorized both by the Library Board and the Common
Council.
(1) Meeting. The Library Board shall meet at least semiannually. The
Library Board may meet as necessary, or as called by the Chairman or
as called by a majority of the Library Board. The City Clerk shall post all
agendas for this Board. All meetings shall be at Lake Geneva Public
Library. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-11]
(2) Duties. The Library Board shall supervise the administration of the
public library and shall appoint a Librarian. The Librarian shall appoint
such other assistants and employees as the Library Board deems
necessary. The Librarian shall prescribe the duties and compensation of
the assistants and employees.
The Library Board may employ competent persons to deliver lectures
upon scientific, literary, historical, or educational subjects as outlined
in W.S.A., § 43.58(5).
(3) Control of assets. The Library Board shall have the exclusive control:
a. Of the use and expenditure of all monies collected, donated, or
appropriated for the library fund; and
b. Of the purchase of a site and the erection of a library building
whenever authorized; and
c. Charge, and custody of all lands, buildings, money, or other
property which is devised, bequeathed, given, granted to, or
otherwise acquired or leased by the City of Lake Geneva for library
purposes.
Sec. 2-286 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-288
1:54
The library shall audit and approve all expenditures of the public
library. The library shall forward bills or vouchers to the
appropriate City financial officer. The vouchers shall set forth the
following information:
a. The name of each claimant or payee,
b. The amount of each expenditure, and
c. The purpose for which it was expended.
In addition, the library shall also include a statement
indicating that the expenditure has been incurred and that
the Library Board has audited and approved the expenditure.
The statement shall be signed by the Library Board Secretary
or other designee of the Library Board. The City official shall
pay then pay all appropriately submitted bills. The official
may pay salaries to library employees or recurring expenses
authorized by the Librarian by the respective pay day or due
date. The Library Board shall audit and approve any such
payment at its next regular meeting.
(4) Management of gifts. The Library Board may receive, manage, and
dispose of gifts and donations in the following manner:
a. The Library Board may take title to a donation of property. The
Library Board shall be deemed special trustees.
b. If a gift, bequest, devise, or endowment is made, the Library Board
may:
i Pay or transfer the donation or its proceeds to the Treasurer of
the City; or [Amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08;
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
ii Entrust any donated funds to a public depository under ch. 34;
or
iii Pay or transfer the donation to the Library Board's Financial
Secretary. If the Library Board pays or transfers the donation
to the Library Board's Financial Secretary, the same officer
may invest the donation or may delegate investment authority
for the donation.
In the event there is a gift made for a library building, the
Library Board will retain the exclusive right to select and
contract for the purchase of a site.
Sec. 2-288 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-289
1:55
Sec. 2-289. Special duties regarding Financial Secretary. [Ord. No.
08-02, 3-10-2008]
If the Financial Secretary holds any property belonging to the public library,
the Library Board shall require a bond from the Financial Secretary to
the Library Board in a sum not less than the amount of the held property
and with such sureties as the Library Board requires. The bond shall be
conditioned in substantially the same form as an ordinary bond required in
the City.
The Financial Secretary shall make an annual report to the Library Board
showing in detail the amount, investment, income and disbursements from
the trust funds in the Financial Secretary's charge.
Sec. 2-290. Accounting to City. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
Within 60 days after the conclusion of the fiscal year of the City of Lake
Geneva, the Library Board shall make a report to the Division and to the
Common Council. The report shall:
(1) State the condition of the Library Board's trust and the various sums of
money received for the use of the public library during the year.
(2) Separately specify amounts received from:
a. Appropriations;
b. Income of trust funds;
c. Rentals;
d. Other revenues of the public library; and
e. Other sources.
(3) State the condition of all funds in the Library Board's control.
(4) State in detail the disbursements on account of the public library during
that fiscal year.
(5) Include the above-described annual Financial Secretary's report as an
appendix.
(6) In addition, the report to the Division shall also:
a. Include data concerning library materials, facilities, personnel,
operations, and other information as the division requests; and
b. Contain a statement by the Library Board indicating whether the
public library system in which the library participated did or did
not provide effective leadership and adequately meet the needs of
the library and an explanation of why the Library Board believes
so.
Sec. 2-289 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-291
1:56
Sec. 2-291. through Sec. 2-300. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-291 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-291
1:57

DIVISION 5
CEMETERY BOARD
[Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended in its entirety 1-13-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-01]
Sec. 2-301. Composition.
Sec. 2-302. Officers.
Sec. 2-303. Authority and duties.
(a) Size. The Cemetery Board shall consist of five members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Common Council. All
members of the Cemetery Board shall be residents of the City of Lake
Geneva. At least one member shall be a Common Council
representative.
(b) Term. The terms of all members of the Cemetery Board shall be for two
years. For the term beginning on May 1, 2014, two citizen member's
terms shall expire April 30, 2015, and two member's terms shall expire
April 30, 2016. Any member of the Common Council appointed to the
Cemetery Board shall be appointed for a one-year term and be
appointed at the annual organizational meeting or at a reasonable time
thereafter.
(c) Eligibility. Any elector of the City, whether or not he/she holds a public
office, shall be eligible to be appointed as a member of the Cemetery
Board. No more than two members of the Common Council shall be
members of the Cemetery Board at any one time.
(d) Members of the Cemetery Board shall serve without compensation.
(a) Officers of the Cemetery Board shall be elected annually in May.
(b) Officers of the Cemetery Board shall be elected by the appointive
members of the Cemetery Board. The Cemetery Board shall select a
President, Vice President and Secretary.
(a) The Cemetery Board shall have the following authority and duties:
(1) Serve in an advisory capacity to the Common Council on all
cemetery related issues.
(2) Cooperate with the Director of Public Works, subject to final
authority by the Common Council, in allocating labor and machine
work necessary to landscape and maintain the cemetery grounds in
accordance with rules and regulations of the cemetery.
(3) Recommend, in cooperation with the Comptroller and
Administrator, to the Common Council, from time to time, as to the
investment and handling of cemetery accounts and funds.
Sec. 2-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-303
1:59
Sec. 2-304. Authority of Common Council.
Sec. 2-305. Authority of Comptroller.
(4) Communicate with the public, in cooperation with the Comptroller
and Administrator, as to the funding needs of the cemetery, as those
needs may change from time to time, for the purpose of promoting
the proper designation of purpose for the funding, when members
of the public are considering gifting or bequesting monies to the
cemetery.
(b) All meetings shall be held at City Hall.
(a) Final authority. The Common Council shall have the final authority over
all issues and decisions which will likely have a substantial effect upon
the cemetery. The Common Council may not take action on such issues
or decisions until after review and recommendation by the Cemetery
Board. However, the Common Council may direct any other specific
issue not enumerated herein, to the Cemetery Board for review,
whereby the Cemetery Board shall have 60 days to complete a review
and report a recommendation to the Comptroller. If the Cemetery Board
fails to report on any issue within such sixty-day period, the Common
Council may act without recommendation, unless more time is
specifically granted to the Cemetery Board by resolution of the
Common Council. This authority shall cover, but not be limited to, the
following issues:
(1) Accepting or conveying personal property with a fair market value
of greater than $1,000.
(2) Borrowing or lending funds.
(3) Cemetery employee labor relations and negotiations.
(4) Entering into any service or other contracts where the
consideration for such contract has a fair market value of greater
than $1,000 in any one-year period.
(b) Exclusive authority. The Common Council shall have exclusive
authority, which means it has the sole authority to act with or without
review and recommendation of the Cemetery Board, over the following
issues:
(1) Accepting or conveying any interest in real estate, other than for
the sale of burial lots or individual grave site easements.
(2) Investment and control of all cemetery accounts and funds,
including, but not limited to, the investment and control of all gifts,
memorials or bequests from estates. The Administrator and/or the
Comptroller may be directed by the Common Council to act as
representative of the Common Council for the purpose of carrying
out the Common Council's authority under this subsection.
Sec. 2-303 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-305
1:60
Sec. 2-306. Review and reporting.
The Cemetery Board, under its normal meeting procedures, shall review
and prepare a recommendation for the Common Council on all cemeteryrelated
issues, with the exception of those issues falling under the Common
Council's exclusive authority as designated in Section 2-304(b). The
Common Council may also direct the Cemetery Board to review and prepare
a recommendation on any cemetery-related issue, as the Common Council
deems appropriate. The Cemetery Board shall then report in writing to
the City Clerk all such issues that have been acted upon by the Cemetery
Board. The Clerk shall place all such reported issues on the consent agenda
for action or approval at the Common Council's next regularly scheduled
meeting. If necessary, the Administrator may petition for the scheduling of
a special meeting for an issue which requires immediate action or approval.
Any member of the Common Council may choose to take an issue off the
consent agenda according to the Common Council's normal procedural
requirements, as that member deems appropriate. The Cemetery Board, in
so reporting such issues to the Clerk, shall provide a background summary
of the issue and a specific recommendation to the Common Council as to
action or approval.
(a) The Comptroller shall be responsible for the administration of all
cemetery accounts and funds and is subject to the direction and
authority of the Common Council as provided in Section 2-304(b)(2).
This responsibility includes, but is not limited to, bookkeeping,
accounting, collection and disbursement of funds, and any other duties
as specified elsewhere in this division or this Code, as such duties relate
to the cemetery.
(b) The Comptroller shall annually report to the Common Council as to the
status of all cemetery accounts and funds. Annual reports shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
(1) An accounting of amounts deposited in, amounts withdrawn from,
other income accruing to and the balance at the close of the
reporting period of such accounts.
(2) An accounting of all gifts received, income from gifts deposited in
accounts not accounted for under Subsection (b)(1) of this section,
amounts expended from those accounts and the balance of those
accounts at the end of the reporting period.
(3) The name of any financial institution or other location of funds at
the close of the reporting period.
(c) The Comptroller may, according the direction of the donor and the
conditions of any trust, invest or otherwise dispose of the moneys or
property received by him or her in trust for any of the purposes of this
division and according to the terms of the trust. The Comptroller shall
in all things faithfully discharge such trust according to law.
Sec. 2-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-307
1:61
Sec. 2-307. Sexton.
The Cemetery Board shall hire a Sexton, subject to the approval of a
majority of the Common Council, whose salary shall be paid from funds
as specified by the Common Council. The Sexton shall be responsible for
the day-to-day operations of the cemetery, subject to the direction of the
Director of Public Works and final authority of the Common Council. The
Sexton may attend Cemetery Board and/or Common Council meetings, but
is not required to and will not be paid for such attendance unless specifically
directed to attend by affirmative vote of the Cemetery Board or the Common
Council. The specific duties of the Sexton shall include:
Sec. 2-308. Cemetery rules, regulations and fee schedules.
Sec. 2-309. through Sec. 2-312. (Reserved)
(1) Administration and enforcement of the rules and regulations of the
cemetery as established in Section 2-308(b);
(2) Serving as an advisor to and representative of the Cemetery Board as
directed by the Cemetery Board.
(a) Cemetery Board's procedural rules. The Cemetery Board shall adopt its
own procedural rules for the operation of its meetings and for other
purposes, as needed.
(b) Establishment and review. The Cemetery Board shall establish and at
least annually review rules and regulations for the cemetery, as well as
a fee schedule for all cemetery-related fees, easement prices, and the
like. A copy of such rules and regulations and fee schedule shall be kept
and made available to the public at the Clerk's and the Comptroller's
office. The Cemetery Board shall report in writing to the Clerk and
Comptroller any proposed change, repeal or amendment to the rules
and regulations and fee schedule as the Cemetery Board has deemed
appropriate by affirmative vote. The Clerk shall then place such
proposals on the consent agenda for action or approval at the Common
Council's next regularly scheduled meeting. Any member of the
Common Council may choose to take a proposal off the consent agenda
according to the Common Council's normal procedural requirements,
as that member deems appropriate.
Sec. 2-307 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-309
1:62
DIVISION 6
PLAN COMMISSION
Sec. 2-313. Composition. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended
8-26-2019 by Ord. No. 19-13]
There shall be seven members on the Plan Commission. The membership
shall include the Mayor, the President of the Park Board, one Alderman, and
four citizens.
Sec. 2-314. Officers. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The Mayor shall preside over the Commission. The Commission shall
determine what other officers it requires to run effectively. The Commission
shall elect all its own officers except the Chairman.
Sec. 2-315. Appointment. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The members shall be appointed to the Planning Commission by the Mayor.
The appointments shall be subject to confirmation by the Common Council.
Sec. 2-316. Term. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The members shall each serve three-year terms. The terms of the citizen
members shall be staggered so as to have approximately one-third of the
members' terms expire each year. Appointments shall be made by the Mayor
during the month of April.
Sec. 2-317. Vacancy. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
Any vacancy shall be filled through the appointment procedures described
above for the remainder of the term.
Sec. 2-318. Salary. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
Members of the Plan Commission shall serve without compensation.
Sec. 2-319. Quorum. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
A majority of the membership of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business.
Sec. 2-320. Commission powers and duties. [Ord. No. 08-02,
3-10-2008]
(a) The Plan Commission shall have the duties and powers as set forth in
W.S.A., § 62.23(2), including those described below:
(1) Meetings. The Plan Commission shall meet at least semiannually.
The Commission may meet as necessary, or as called by the
Chairman or as called by a majority of the Commission. The City
Sec. 2-313 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-320
1:63
Sec. 2-321. Matters referred to City Plan Commission. [Ord. No.
08-02, 3-10-2008]
The Council shall refer to the City Plan Commission, for its consideration
and report before final action is taken by the Council the following matters:
Clerk shall create and post all agendas for this Commission. All
meetings shall be at City Hall.
(2) Duties. The Committee shall make and adopt a master plan for the
physical development of the City, including any areas outside of its
boundaries that in the Commission's judgment bear relation to the
development of the City. The master plan shall meet the
requirements in W.S.A., § 62.23(2) through (3).
(b) The Commission may amend, extend, or add to the master plan or carry
any part or subject matter into greater detail.
The Commission may adopt rules for the transaction of business and
shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and
determinations.
(c) Miscellaneous powers of the Commission. The Commission may make
reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of
the City to City government and the citizens.
The Commission may recommend programs for public improvements
and the financing thereof.
The Commission, its members and employees may enter upon any
land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain
necessary monuments and marks in the performance of its functions.
In general, the Commission shall have such powers as may be
necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal
planning.
(1) The location and architectural design of any public building;
(2) The location of any statue or other memorial;
(3) The location, acceptance, extension, alteration, vacation, abandonment,
change of use, sale, acquisition of land for or lease of land for any
street, alley or other public way, park, playground, airport, area for
parking vehicles, or other memorial or public grounds;
(4) The location, extension, abandonment or authorization for any public
utility whether publicly or privately owned;
(5) All plats of lands in the City or within the territory over which the City is
given platting jurisdiction by ch. 236;
Sec. 2-320 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-321
1:64
Sec. 2-322. through Sec. 2-330. (Reserved)
(6) The location, character and extent or acquisition, leasing or sale of
lands for public or semipublic housing, slum clearance, relief of
congestion, or vacation camps for children; and
(7) The amendment or repeal of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this
section.
Unless such report is made within 30 days, or a longer period as
may be stipulated by the Common Council, the Council may take final
action without it.
Sec. 2-321 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-322
1:65

DIVISION 7
(Reserved)4
Sec. 2-331. through Sec. 2-340. (Reserved)
4. Editor’s Note: Former Division 7, Parking Commission, adopted 3-10-2008 by Ord. No.
08-02, as amended, was repealed 12-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-20.
Sec. 2-331 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-331
1:67

ARTICLE VI
FINANCE
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-341. City funds to be spent in accordance with
appropriations. [Code 1992, § 3.04]
No money shall be drawn from the City treasury, nor shall any obligation for
the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual
appropriation in the adopted budget. At the close of each fiscal year, any
unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund
and shall be subject to reappropriation. Appropriations may be made by the
Council, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance
of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed
within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until
the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned.
Sec. 2-342. Budget. [Code 1992, § 3.03]
W.S.A., § 65.90 is accepted and adopted by the City.
Sec. 2-343. Fiscal year. [Code 1992, § 3.02]
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year.
Sec. 2-344. Letting of contracts. [Code 1992, § 3.07]
The authority vested in the Board of Public Works by W.S.A., § 62.15 shall
be exercised by the City Council, or as delegated by the City Council.
Sec. 2-345. Capital improvement referendum for City capital
expenditures of certain amount or more. [Ord. No. 04-19, §§ I, II,
4-15-2004; Ord. No. 06-12, §§ 1, 2, 4-4-2006; amended 6-8-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-05]
Prior to the start of any physical construction of any municipally financed
(in whole or in part) project requiring a City capital expenditure which
aggregates $1,500,000 or more, the City Council shall submit to the
electorate a binding referendum for approval of the project. Failure of
the binding referendum shall preclude the City from proceeding with the
project. The wording of any referendum shall provide the specific purpose,
location and cost of the project. Nothing in this provision shall be construed
to preclude the City from exercising its role in the planning or design
of such publicly financed projects. The City shall be precluded from
intentionally dividing up a project so that the total amount is less than
$1,500,000. A "project" is defined as work that can be bid and contracted
separately and requires no other work to be operable or complete. Capital
expenditures for new utilities, and maintenance, repair or replacement of
Sec. 2-341 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-345
1:69
existing utilities or other infrastructure, or pursuant to existing contractual
obligations or legal mandates shall be exempt from this section. Effective
as of the date of this ordinance amendment, the spending limit amount
will be adjusted on an annual basis based upon the Consumer Price Index
published January 1 of each year by the Wisconsin Employment Relations
Commission.
Sec. 2-346. through Sec. 2-360. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-345 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-346
1:70
DIVISION 2
CLAIMS
Sec. 2-361. Procedure. [Code 1992, § 3.05(1), (3)—(5)]
Sec. 2-362. Order checks. [Code 1992, § 3.05(2); amended
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
Except as provided in Section 2-361(b), no account or demand against the
City shall be paid except by order check, and no such order check shall be
released to the payee nor shall the order check be valid unless it is signed by
the City Clerk and Treasurer and countersigned by the Mayor or President
of the Council.
Sec. 2-363. through Sec. 2-375. (Reserved)
(a) Report to Council. The City Clerk shall cause to be presented to the
Council at each regular meeting a written report as to the identity and
number of bills, accounts or claims recommended or authorized for
payment by the Finance, Licensing and Regulation Committee.
[Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
(b) Claims to be verified. All accounts, demands or claims against the City
shall be verified by the claimant or proper official.
(c) Payment of regular wages or salaries. Regular wages or salaries of City
officers and employees shall be paid by payroll, verified by the proper
City official and filed with the City Clerk in time for payment on the
regular pay day.
(d) Prepaid claims. The City Clerk, Deputy Clerk, City Comptroller or
Deputy Comptroller are authorized to approve for payment those claims
which require timely payment and which are not in dispute. Such
payment shall be authorized in writing and funds disbursed as provided
by state statute and this Code. All claims paid under this procedure
shall be reported to the City Council and its committees by listing them
as prepaid claims. The City Council shall approve or disapprove these
claims in the manner provided by statute and ordinance.
Sec. 2-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-363
1:71

ARTICLE VII
PUBLIC RECORDS
Sec. 2-376. Adoption of applicable provisions of state statutes.
[Code 1992, § 3.06(1)(a), (c)]
All applicable provisions of W.S.A., § 19.32 et seq., public records, are
adopted by reference in this section as if fully set out.
Sec. 2-377. Public records retention policy. [Ord. No. 99-9, § I,
6-14-1999]
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a City records
retention schedule and authorize destruction of City records pursuant
to the schedule on an annul basis. Records custodians may destroy a
record prior to the time set forth in the schedule only if such a record
has been photographically reproduced as an original record or
converted to optical disk format pursuant to W.S.A. § 16.61(7).
Any record not covered by this or any regulation or law shall be
retained seven years unless the record is added by amendment into
the ordinance and the shorter time period approved by the state Public
Records and Forms Board.
(b) Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated.
LEGAL CUSTODIAN — The individual responsible for maintaining
records pursuant to W.S.A. § 19.33.
RECORD — Has the meaning defined in W.S.A. § 19.32(2).
(c) General provisions.
(1) Historical records — Notification to State Historical Society of
Wisconsin. Under W.S.A. § 19.21(4)(a), municipalities must notify
the State Historical Society of Wisconsin (SHSW) prior to
destroying records. However, the SHSW has waived the required
statutory sixty-day notice for any record designated in the retention
schedule with "waived" (waived notice). The SHSW must be
notified prior to destruction of any record designated with "notify"
(not waived). "N/A" indicated not applicable and applies to any
record designated for permanent retention with the original
custodian.
Notice to the SHSW is also required for any record not listed in
this ordinance.
(2) Microfilming or optical imaging of records. Local units of
government may keep and preserve public records through the use
of microfilm or optical imaging providing the microfilm or optical
imaging meets the applicable standards in W.S.A. §§ 16.61(7)
Sec. 2-376 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-377
1:73
(microfilm) and 16.612 (optical imaging). Retention periods and
estimated costs and benefits of converting records between
different media should be considered in deciding which records
to microfilm or store in the optical disk format. After verification,
records converted to microfilm or optical imaging should be
destroyed. The retention periods identified in this ordinance apply
to records in any media.
(3) Destruction after request for inspection. No requested records may
be destroyed until after the request is granted or 60 days after the
request is denied. If an action is commenced under W.S.A. § 19.37,
the requested record may not be destroyed until after a court order
is issued and all appeals have been completed. See W.S.A.
§ 19.35(5).
(4) Destruction pending litigation. No record subject to pending
litigation shall be destroyed until the litigation is resolved.
(5) Review and approval by Public Records and Forms Board. This
section and the retention periods of less than seven years have
been reviewed and approved by the Public Records and Forms
Board.
(d) Records retention schedules.
Police Department
Brief Description
Retention
Period SHSW Notify
911 ANI/ALI lookups and 911
records
EVT + 5 Waived
Accident reports EVT + 3 Waived
Accommodation requests CR + 1 Waived
Alcohol tickets EVT + 3 Waived
Arrest records EVT + 3 Waived
Arrest statistics CR + 3 Waived
Big Brother tapes CR + 120 days Waived
Bond receipt log book CR + 7 Waived
Case files—Arrest felonies EVT + 6 Waived
Case files—Arrest misdemeanors EVT + 3 Waived
Case files—Non-arrest, felonies EVT + 6 Waived
Case files—Non-arrest,
misdemeanors
EVT + 3 Waived
Case files—Non-arrest, no victims or
charges
EVT + 3 Waived
CIB/NCIC entry log CR + 2 Waived
Sec. 2-377 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-377
1:74
Police Department
Brief Description
Retention
Period SHSW Notify
Citizen complaints against personnel CR + 7 Waived
Compensatory time/vacation/admin.
leave requests
3 years after
leave ends
Waived
Complaint sheets CR + 3 Waived
Criminal history log CR + 2 Waived
Daily incarceration reports and
related documents
CR + 8 Waived
Dispatch rolling logs CR + 7 Waived
Employment references CR + 1 Waived
Evidence sheets CR + 3 Waived
Exposure records 30 years after
term of
employment
Waived
Fingerprint cards Indefinite
Housewatch forms CR + 1 Waived
Industrial accident forms and files CR + 5 Waived
Internship records CR + 2 Waived
Job advertisements CR + 6 Waived
Job applications 6 years from
receipt
Waived
Job evaluations CR + 6 Waived
Lockout forms CR + 2 Waived
Medical exams 30 years and
duration of
employment
Waived
Missing person reports (non-active) CR + 3 Waived
MMT hit sheets CR + 1 Waived
Mug shots CR + 8 Waived
Notices for overtime CR + 1 Waived
Officer alert sheets CR + 2 Waived
Officer daily activity reports CR + 7 Waived
Open records requests CR + 3 Waived
Ordinance tickets EVT + 3 Waived
Parking violation tickets EVT + 2 Waived
Payroll (overtime/holiday sheets) CR + 3 Waived
Personnel rosters CR + 7 Waived
Sec. 2-377 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-377
1:75
Police Department
Brief Description
Retention
Period SHSW Notify
Police and Fire Commission reports CR + 3 Waived
Promotion opportunity ads CR + 6 Waived
Protective custody forms EVT + 3 Waived
Radar certifications/report CR + 4 Waived
Receipt books CR + 2 Waived
Resumes 1 year after
receipt
Waived
Ride along records CR + 1 Waived
Roll call sheets CR + 1 Waived
Schedules CR + 3 Waived
Sick leave records CR + 1 Waived
Traffic tickets EVT + 3 Waived
Traffic/equipment violation warnings EVT + 2 Waived
Training notices/signups CR + 1 Waived
Triple-A reports CR + 3 Waived
TTY log sheets CR + 1 Waived
Validation verification CR + 2 Waived
Wrecker rotation list CR + 2 Waived
LEGEND:
Brief description: Provide a brief description of the records. Group
specific items such as forms into logical groups that have the same
function or purpose.
Retention period: Refers to the time that the identified record must be
kept until destruction.
• CR stands for creation which usually refers to receipt or creation of
the record.
• EVT stands for event and refers to an occurrence that starts the
retention clock ticking. Close of contract, termination of employee,
and disposition of a case are common events.
Period of time: Is expressed in years unless specifically identified as
months or days.
SHSW notification: Refers to whether or not a City must notify the
State Historical Society of Wisconsin of its intention to destroy
records.
• Waived means that the requirement notification has been waived.
Sec. 2-377 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-377
1:76
Sec. 2-378. through Sec. 2-400. (Reserved)
LEGEND:
Again, notice to the SHSW is required for any record not listed in this
section.
Sec. 2-377 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-378
1:77

ARTICLE VIII
EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT
Sec. 2-401. Policy and purpose. [Ord. No. 02-38, § I, 5-13-2002]
Sec. 2-402. Joint action ordinance adopted. [Ord. No. 02-38, § I,
5-13-2002]
(a) "Emergency government" shall mean the preparation for and the
carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which
the military forces are primarily responsible, to minimize the repair
injury and damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack,
sabotage or other hostile action, or by fire, flood or other natural
causes.
(b) By reason of the increasing possibility of disasters of unprecedented
size and destructiveness, and to insure that preparations will be
adequate to cope with such disasters and to provide for the common
defense, to protect the public peace, health, safety and general welfare
and to preserve the lives and property of the people, it is hereby
declared necessary:
(1) To establish a local emergency government organization.
(2) To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during all
emergencies listed above.
(3) To provide for the rendering of cooperation and mutual aid
between this City and other political subdivisions.
(c) It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of
the City that all emergency government functions of this City be
coordinated to the maximum extent practicable with existing services
and facilities of this City, and with comparable functions of the federal,
state and County governments and other political subdivisions, and of
various private agencies to the end that the most effective preparation
and use may be made of manpower, resources and facilities for dealing
with any disaster that may occur.
(d) Enforcement and penalty. In order to ensure compliance with the policy
and purpose of this chapter and to enforce any emergency orders duly
issued by officials of the State of Wisconsin or the City of Lake Geneva,
Wisconsin, any person who willfully violates or obstructs the execution
of any duly issued emergency orders by officials of the State of
Wisconsin or the City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $500 and no more than $1,000 for each
violation. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. The City of Lake Geneva may also seek equitable relief,
including injunctions to gain compliance with said orders. [Added
5-11-2020 by Ord. No. 20-03]
Sec. 2-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-402
1:79
Sec. 2-403. Rules. [Ord. No. 02-38, § I, 5-13-2002]
Sec. 2-404. Venetian festival. [Ord. No. 02-38, § I, 5-13-2002]
In case of severe storms or other disasters during Venetian Festival,
authority to shut down the carnival and all other activities will be given to
the Chief of Police or his designate.
(a) A joint action ordinance of the County Board of Supervisors provided
for a county-municipal joint action emergency government plan of
organization adopted by the County Board on the 15th day of June,
1971. A copy of the county ordinance is made a part hereof by reference
and is hereby ratified and accepted by the City.
(b) This ratification and acceptance of the Joint Action Ordinance No. 27
shall constitute a mutual agreement between the City and the county as
provided in such Joint Action Ordinance.
(c) The county-municipal Coordinator of Emergency Government,
appointed and employed by the County Board as provided in the
ordinance adopted herein by reference, is hereby designated and
appointed Coordinator of Emergency Government for the City, subject
to the conditions and provisions as set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes
and the county Joint Action Ordinance.
(a) Authority to declare a disaster will be the responsibility of the local
Director of Emergency Government, the Mayor of the City, or Deputy
Director, to be appointed by the Director of Emergency Government.
(b) Designation of command center: Old radio room in City Hall, lower level
with phone lines, separate numbers and supplies.
(c) Designate a public information officer (not a City official) by the
Director of Emergency Government.
(d) Designate a secondary building for City government, if City Hall is
destroyed (fire house).
(e) Designate where City government will be operated from, if City is
destroyed. (county buildings at Elkhorn).
(f) Need an assessment team to start approximately six hours after
disaster (real estate people, building inspector, etc.)
(g) Directive to Mayor, Police Chief, Fire Chief, EMS Coordinator, Director
of Emergency Government, Department of Public Works Director,
Police Dispatch Supervisor, Business Director to report to command
center, immediately or within one hour.
Sec. 2-402 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 2-404
1:80
Chapter 6
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Businesses — See Ch. 18.
Sec. 2-404 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 2-404
1:81

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. State statutes adopted. [Code 1992, § 11.03]
The provisions of W.S.A., ch. 125, including all definitions and subsequent
revisions, amendments and additions, relating to the sale and consumption
of alcohol beverages, inclusive of any provisions relating to the penalty to
be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are adopted
and made a part of this chapter by reference. A violation of any of such
provisions shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
Sec. 6-2. Penalty for violation of chapter. [Code 1992, § 11.40]
Sec. 6-3. Alcohol beverages in public places. [Code 1992, § 9.07]
No person shall carry any open can, bottle or other container of alcohol
beverages or drink from the same on any public walk, street, municipal
parking lot or in any park or other public place in the City.
Sec. 6-4. Fermented malt beverages on commercial quadricycles.
[Added 2-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
Sec. 6-5. through Sec. 6-30. (Reserved)
(a) Any person who commits a violation of this chapter shall be subject to a
forfeiture as provided in Section 1-12.
(b) Any underage person who commits a violation of this chapter shall be
subject to a forfeiture not to exceed the maximum forfeiture provided in
W.S.A., ch. 125, except that disposition in proceedings against a person
under 18 years of age on the date of disposition shall be as provided by
W.S.A., § 48.344.
(c) A violation of this chapter by an authorized agent or employee of a
licensee shall constitute a violation by the licensee.
(a) Definitions:
(1) "Commercial quadricycle" has the meaning given in § 340.01(8m),
Wis. Stats.
(2) "Alcohol beverages" has the meaning given in § 125.02(1), Wis.
Stats.
(3) "Fermented malt beverages" has the meaning given in § 125.02(6),
Wis. Stats.
(b) No person shall carry any open can, bottle, or other container of alcohol
beverages, which by definition include fermented malt beverages, or
drink from the same on a commercial quadricycle in the City of Lake
Geneva.
Sec. 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 6-5
1:83

ARTICLE II
LICENSES
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-31. Required. [Code 1992, § 11.04(1)]
No person, except as provided by W.S.A., § 125.06, shall distribute, vend,
sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or wholesale, deal or traffic in or, for the
purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any alcohol beverages,
or cause the same to be done, without having procured a license as provided
in this article, nor without complying with all the provisions of this chapter
and all statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state and City applicable
thereto.
Sec. 6-32. Application. [Code 1992, § 11.05]
Sec. 6-33. Numbering; issued to specific premises; expiration.
[Code 1992, § 11.06]
All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, date of issuance,
fee paid and name of the licensee and, unless sooner revoked, shall expire
on June 30 thereafter, except as otherwise provided.
Sec. 6-34. Posting and care. [Code 1992, § 11.08]
Every license issued under this chapter shall be posted and at all times
displayed as provided in W.S.A., § 125.04(10). No person shall post such
license or permit any other person to post it upon premises other than those
mentioned in the application, or knowingly deface or destroy such license.
Sec. 6-35. Nonrenewal. [Code 1992, § 11.10]
Before renewal of any license issued under this chapter is refused, the
licensee shall be given written notice of any charges or violations against
him or the reasons proposed for nonrenewal, a copy of any proposed motion
for nonrenewal, and shall have an opportunity to be heard before the City
Council.
(a) Form; fee; required descriptions. Application for a license to sell or deal
in alcohol beverages shall be made in writing on forms prescribed by
the state Department of Revenue and filed with the City Clerk. The fee
prescribed for such license in Section 6-36 shall accompany the
application. The premises shall be physically described, including every
room and storage space to be covered by the license and including all
rooms joined by connecting entrances or not separated by a solid wall.
(b) To be notarized. Applications shall be signed and sworn to by the
applicant as provided by W.S.A., § 887.01.
Sec. 6-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 6-36
1:85
Sec. 6-36. Fees. [Code 1992, § 11.01]
Unless otherwise indicated, fees for licenses issued under this chapter shall
be as set from time to time by the Council.
Sec. 6-37. Operator licenses. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04]
(a) Operator licenses shall be issued to individuals by the City for the
purpose of complying with §§ 125.32(2) and 125.68(2), Wis. Stats.
Operators' licenses shall be issued only upon written application on
forms provided by the City Clerk.
(b) Before issuance of any operator's license, every applicant shall provide
proof of having successfully completed a responsible beverage server
training course at any location that is offered by a vocational, technical,
adult education district, and online forum and that conforms to
curriculum guidelines specified by the board of vocational, technical
and adult. Those who complete such programs shall have an
appropriate endorsement recorded and placed on their licenses and
shall be eligible to operate or be employed in establishments operating
under a Class A or B license. An applicant is not required to provide
proof of successful completion of a responsible beverage server
training course if:
(1) The person is renewing an operator's license.
(2) Within the past two years, the person held a Class A or Class B
license or permit or a manager's or operator's license.
(3) Within the past two years, the person has completed such a
training course.
(c) Applicants who are applying for an operator license for the first time
within the City of Lake Geneva will be required to provide proof of
completing the training course under Subsection (a) of this section and
may only apply for a one-year license.
(d) Applicants who are renewing an operator license within the City of
Lake Geneva may apply for a two-year license.
(e) As a part of the operator's license review process, the Chief of Police
will conduct a background check of the applicant.
(f) The City Clerk or designee shall determine if there are any unpaid City
claims against the applicant; if an unpaid claim is found to be owed to
the City of Lake Geneva, the Clerk shall withhold issuance of the license
until such time that the unpaid City claim is satisfied.
(g) Upon favorable review by the Chief of Police, the City Clerk or Clerk's
office designee shall issue all operator licenses. It shall be within the
sole discretion of the Chief of Police to recommend issuance of a oneyear
renewal rather than a two-year renewal after the Chief of Police's
background check. [Amended 4-13-2020 by Ord. No. 20-02]
Sec. 6-36 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 6-37
1:86
Sec. 6-38. through Sec. 6-50. (Reserved)
(h) The City Clerk or designee may issue a provisional operator's license to
a person who is enrolled in a training course under Subsection (a) of
this section and shall revoke that license if the applicant fails to
successfully complete the course in which enrolled. Proof of enrollment
shall be required before a provisional operator license may be issued. A
provisional operator's license shall expire 60 days after its issuance or
when a license under Subsection (a) of this section is issued to the
holder, whichever is sooner.
(i) Denial of operator licenses.
(1) If an applicant is denied an operator license he/she may appeal the
decision of the Chief of Police to the Common Council; This matter
may be considered in open session or closed session. The Common
Council is responsible for the final decision of approval or denial of
a license.
(2) Any fees for denied operator license applications will not be
refunded by the City of Lake Geneva.
(j) Fees. Fees for the aforementioned licenses shall by set by a resolution
of the Common Council from time to time. Fee schedule shall be
available upon request.
Sec. 6-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 6-38
1:87

DIVISION 2
RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS
Sec. 6-51. Age requirement. [Code 1992, § 11.15(6)]
No license under this chapter, except an operator's license, shall be granted
to any person who has not attained the legal drinking age. Operator's
licenses may be issued only to applicants who have attained the age of 18.
Sec. 6-52. Effect of revocation. [Code 1992, § 11.15(7)]
Whenever any license has been revoked, at least 12 months shall elapse
before another license shall be granted to the person whose license was
revoked.
Sec. 6-53. Delinquent taxes, assessments and claims. [Code 1992,
§ 11.15(8); amended 4-27-2009 by Ord. No. 09-06; 4-12-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-02]
No license shall be granted for any premises for which taxes, assessments
or other claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid or to any person
delinquent in payment of such claims to the City. In the event a premises
or person is delinquent in payment of such claims to the City, at times
other than initial granting or renewal of a license, the Council may in its
discretion suspend or revoke said license(s). "Delinquent" for the purposes
of this section shall mean the claim remains unpaid for 30 days after it
became due. Being delinquent hereunder shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of a liquor license under § 125.12(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Sec. 6-54. Issuance for sales in dwellings. [Code 1992, § 11.15(9)]
No license shall be issued to any person for the purpose of possessing,
selling or offering for sale any alcohol beverages in any dwelling house, flat
or residential apartment.
Sec. 6-55. Regulation of licensed premises and licensees. [Code
1992, § 11.16; Ord. No. 98-4, § I, 3-23-1998]
(a) Gambling and disorderly conduct. Each licensed premises shall at all
times be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or
indecent conduct or gambling, except as provided by state law, shall be
allowed at any time on any licensed premises.
(b) Sales by clubs. No club shall sell intoxicating liquors or fermented malt
beverages except to members and guests invited by members.
(c) Safety and sanitation requirements. Each licensed premises shall be
maintained and conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and
proper place for the purpose for which used.
Sec. 6-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 6-55
1:89
Sec. 6-56. Sales of alcohol beverages to underage persons. [Code
1992, § 11.25]
No person shall procure for, sell, dispense or give away any alcohol
beverages to any underage person not accompanied by his parent, guardian
or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age.
Sec. 6-57. Free alcohol beverages in restaurants. [Code 1992,
§ 11.36]
No person holding a permit to operate a restaurant may give away or permit
to be given away any alcohol beverages on the restaurant premises.
Sec. 6-58. Consumption in public place. [Code 1992, § 11.37]
No owner, lessee or person in charge of a public place shall permit the
consumption of alcohol beverages on the premises of the public place unless
the person has an appropriate retail license or permit. This section does not
apply to municipalities, buildings and parks owned by counties, regularly
established athletic fields and stadiums, school buildings, churches,
premises in a state fair park or clubs.
Sec. 6-59. Closing hours. [Ord. No. 02-41, § I, 7-22-2002; amended
1-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-01]
Sec. 6-60. through Sec. 6-75. (Reserved)
(d) Sales to intoxicated persons. No licensee or permittee shall sell, vend,
deal or traffic in alcohol beverages to or with a person who is
intoxicated.
(e) Solicitation of drinks. No person shall solicit or be allowed to solicit
drinks on a licensed premises.
(f) Required period open for business. Any license duly issued under this
chapter which is not used for 90 consecutive days or a license duly
granted and not issued within 90 days shall be subject to review and
possible revocation by the Common Council. These licenses may not be
regranted during this ninety-day period. In case of revocation under
this section, no refund of the license fee is to be made.
(a) Between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. no person may sell fermented malt
and intoxicating liquor beverages on Class "B" licensed premises in an
original unopened package, container or bottle, or for consumption
away from the premises.
(b) Class "A" premises may remain open for the conduct of their regular
business but may not sell fermented malt beverages or intoxicating
liquor between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Sec. 6-55 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 6-60
1:90
DIVISION 3
RESTAURANT LICENSES FOR ESTABLISHMENTS IN MUSEUMS
Sec. 6-76. Authorization. [Code 1992, § 11.02(j)]
Restaurant licenses may be issued for museums under the provisions of
W.S.A., § 125.51(4)(m).
Sec. 6-77. Use of museum and restaurant areas. [Code 1992,
§ 11.02(j)1]
(a) Museum area. Use of the museum area shall be as follows:
(1) The area shall be determined on a total square footage of floor
space three times that of the defined restaurant area.
(2) Museum area shall not include any areas defined in the total square
footage of the restaurant area.
(3) Museum area shall be a place for the exhibition of objects of
interest from history, the arts or science. Such museum exhibits
shall constitute a majority of the items placed in each room or area
and shall be of a permanent nature.
(4) No displayed items in the museum area shall be for sale or display a
price tag.
(5) No museum area shall include multipurpose rooms other than open
sitting areas.
(6) All museum areas shall be open to the public during all hours of
operation of the intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverage
license.
(7) All museum areas shall be open to the public at all times the
restaurant is open.
(8) No food shall be served at any time in any area defined as museum
area.
(9) A reasonable fee may be charged for admission to the museum, but
such admission fee may not be in excess of the usual and customary
museum admission fees charged within the state.
(b) Restaurant area. The use of the restaurant area of the museum shall be
as follows:
(1) Area shall be computed on a total square footage of floor space,
including the following:
a. Dining room.
b. Kitchen and food preparation areas.
Sec. 6-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 6-77
1:91
Sec. 6-78. Floor plan required. [Code 1992, § 11.02(j)2]
A license applicant shall provide the License and Judicial Committee with
a detailed floor plan of the applicant's building clearly delineating in two
colors all areas of the restaurant and all areas of the museum, respectively.
Sec. 6-79. Documentation. [Code 1992, § 11.02(j)3]
An applicant must provide ample and sufficient documentation to the
License and Judicial Committee in proof that the applicant's building was
built during the first eight years of statehood or earlier.
Sec. 6-80. Application of appropriate provisions of state or City
ordinances and codes. [Code 1992, § 11.02(j)4]
All other statutes, ordinances or codes enacted by the state or the City shall
be applicable to this license, license holder and licensed premises.
Sec. 6-81. Transferral. [Code 1992, § 11.02(j)5]
All licenses issued under this division are transferable under W.S.A.,
§ 125.04(12), provided that all conditions and criteria of W.S.A.,
§ 125.51(4)(m) are met.
Sec. 6-82. Issuance to owner. [Code 1992, § 11.02(j)6]
This license shall be issued only in the name of the owner of the museum
and restaurant described in the license.
Sec. 6-83. Violations of division. [Code 1992, § 11.02(j)7]
Any violation of this division shall be deemed grounds for revocation of this
license.
c. Pantry and/or storage.
d. Restrooms.
e. Service station areas.
f. Hallways, corridors necessary for restaurant service or
business.
g. Any area where food is served or prepared in any manner.
(2) The restaurant shall be open for the service of regular meals,
excluding snacks, during all hours of operation of the intoxicating
liquor and fermented malt beverage license.
Sec. 6-77 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 6-83
1:92
Chapter 10
ANIMALS
Sec. 6-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 6-83
1:93

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. Crimes against animals. [Code 1992, § 9.17]
W.S.A. Ch. 951, including all future revisions, additions and amendments
thereto, is adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this section.
Sec. 10-2. Horseback riding. [Code 1992, § 12.03(4)]
Sec. 10-3. Removal of fecal matter. [Code 1992, § 12.03(2)(a)]
The owner or person in charge of any animal shall not permit solid fecal
matter of such animal to be deposited on any street, alley or other public or
private property unless such matter is immediately removed therefrom by
the owner or person in charge. No person shall walk an animal beyond the
limits of his own property without carrying or having in his possession an
item designed to pick up and remove fecal matter. No person shall dispose
of fecal matter in public storm sewers or on public or private property, other
than his own property.
Sec. 10-4. Zoning permit required for raising or propagating
domestic animals. [Code 1992, § 12.03(2)(b)]
No person shall raise or propagate domestic fowl, hogs, cattle, goats, sheep,
horses or any other kind of domestic animal of any kind, except dogs and
cats, or maintain what are commonly known as a chicken house or yard,
horse barn or yard, rabbit house or yard, for such purpose within the limits
of the City without obtaining a zoning permit so to do from the Council
under the procedures specified in the City Zoning Ordinance.
(a) Restrictions. No person shall ride a horse in or upon any of the
following areas of the City:
(1) Terraces.
(2) Sidewalks.
(3) Broad Street between Geneva Street and Wrigley Drive.
(4) Main Street between Center Street and Cook Street.
(b) Hours. No person shall ride a horse within the City from sunset to
sunrise.
(c) Speed. No person shall ride a horse within the City at a gait faster than
a walk.
(d) Exceptions. The prohibitions contained in this section shall not apply to
individuals who obtain a permit from the City Council or are riding in a
parade or other event for which a permit has been granted.
Sec. 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 10-5
1:95
Sec. 10-5. Feeding of waterfowl. [Ord. No. 97-1, § I, 1-13-1997]
No person shall feed or participate in feeding any waterfowl on any property
owned by the City at any time.
Sec. 10-6. Responsibility for penalty and pound fees for animals
owned by minors. [Code 1992, § 12.03(1)(g), (5)(d)]
The parent or guardian of any minor claiming ownership of any dog or cat
shall be deemed to be the owner of such animal and shall be responsible for
all penalties and pound fees imposed by this article.
Sec. 10-7. Wild and exotic animals prohibited. [Ord. No. 01-30, § I,
11-12-2001]
Sec. 10-8. through Sec. 10-35. (Reserved)
(a) No person shall keep, maintain or have in such person's possession or
under such person's control any poisonous reptile, dangerous or wild
insect including, but not limited to, poisonous insects and arachnids, all
poisonous snakes, constrictor snakes, nonhuman primates, bears,
crocodiles, alligators, coyotes, elephants, gamecocks and other fighting
birds, hippopotami, hyenas, jaguars, leopards, lions, lynx, pumas,
cougars, mountain lions, panthers, ocelots, tigers or other wild feline
species, and wolves.
(b) Exceptions. The prohibitions set forth in Subsection (a) shall not apply
to licensed pet shops; zoological gardens; public or private educational
institutions; circuses and professional animals acts or other shows
requiring a license as required by Section 18-12 of this Code; provided
that:
(1) Their location conforms to the zoning requirements of Chapter 98
of the Zoning Code.
(2) All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors.
(3) Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent
their escape.
(c) Enforcement. Any person violating this section may be subject to a
penalty as provided for in Section 1-12 of this Code.
Sec. 10-5 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 10-8
1:96
ARTICLE II
DISEASE CONTROL
Sec. 10-36. Inoculation against rabies, distemper and other
dangerous diseases required. [Code 1992, § 12.03(1)(f), (5)(b)]
All persons residing in the City and owning or having in their possession any
dog or cat, shall be required to have such dog or cat inoculated for rabies,
distemper or other dangerous diseases.
Sec. 10-37. Disease investigation. [Code 1992, § 12.03(3)]
Sec. 10-38. through Sec. 10-65. (Reserved)
(a) Any animal suspected of being infected or diseased, or who has come
into contact with any human being under circumstances which will
subject that human being to medical treatment if such animal were
infected or diseased, may be taken into custody in such an emergency
situation by any police or peace officer, whether or not it shall be
necessary for such officer to enter the premises and buildings of the
owner of such animal in order to effect such taking.
(b) Any animal taken into custody may be impounded at a suitable place for
such time as is reasonably necessary for a determination of the animal's
condition. Such animal shall be inspected by a veterinarian licensed to
practice in the state. If the veterinarian determines such animal to be so
infected or diseased, he shall immediately report such fact to the state
hygiene laboratory. If he determines such animal is not so infected or
diseased, it shall be returned to its owner.
(c) The owner of such animal shall pay all expenses incurred by such
detention and testing.
Sec. 10-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 10-38
1:97

ARTICLE III
DOGS AND CATS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 10-66. Adoption of applicable state statute definitions. [Code
1992, § 12.03(1)(a)]
The applicable definitions of W.S.A. § 174.001 are adopted by reference in
this section as if fully set out.
Sec. 10-67. Running at large. [Code 1992, § 12.03(1)(b), (5)(c); Ord.
No. 01-23, § I, 6-25-2001; Ord. No. 02-39, § I, 5-28-2002; amended
9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 12-20]
(a) Subject to the exceptions set forth below, no owner of any dog or cat in
the City shall allow such dog or cat to run at large within the City limits.
A dog or cat shall not be considered to be running at large if it is on
such owner's premises or is controlled by a handheld leash of a fully
extended length of not more than five feet. No owner of any dog or cat
shall allow such dog or cat to run at large or be present in Donian
Wetland Nature Preserve, Harold Fritz Veterans Park, Dunn Field,
Maple Park and Riviera Beach. Any dog or cat found within the City
limits not on the owner's premises or controlled by a five-foot handheld
leash shall be deemed to be running at large, and the owner of the dog
or cat shall be deemed to have allowed such dog or cat to run at large.
Further, no dogs shall be allowed on any municipal pier unless such dog
is controlled by a five-foot handheld leash and is being loaded on or
unloaded from a boat.
(b) The prohibitions of Section 10-67(a) shall not apply to the following:
(1) Dogs shall be permitted off their leashes in designated dog
swimming areas as established by resolution of the Common
Council from time to time. Owners shall be responsible for the
control of their dog at all times the dog is off its leash in the
designated swim area. Dog owners and dogs shall yield to all
people utilizing the ramps for their dinghies or kayaks shall and
yield to watercraft accessing or exiting the lake through the
designated dog swimming area.
(2) Dogs shall be permitted off their leashes in the area known as the
"Lake Geneva Dog Park," designated as such and located off of
Sage Street and east of Eastview Elementary School. Owners shall
be responsible for the control of their dogs at all times while their
dogs are off their leashes. All dogs in the dog park shall be licensed.
Dog owners shall immediately clean up all dog feces made by their
pet. Users of the dog park shall also abide by all rules and
regulations adopted by resolution and posted by the City Council
Sec. 10-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 10-67
1:99
Sec. 10-68. Impoundment—generally. [Code 1992, § 12.03(1)(c)]
Any dog or cat found running at large may be immediately taken into
custody by any police or peace officer, whether or not it shall be necessary
for such officer to enter the premises and buildings of the owner of such dog
or cat in order to effect such taking.
Sec. 10-69. Same—disposition. [Code 1992, § 12.03(1)(d), (5)(f)]
Any dog or cat taken into custody under this article shall be impounded in a
suitable place to be provided by the City. The officer in charge of the custody
of the dog or cat shall fulfill the requirements of W.S.A. § 174.046. The
release of any dog or cat so impounded shall be conditioned upon payment
by the owner of such dog or cat of the minimum penalty imposed hereby
and an additional penalty of $15, together with costs of the maintenance of
such dog or cat while so impounded.
Sec. 10-70. Noisy cats. [Code 1992, § 12.03(5)(g)]
All persons owning, possessing or harboring a cat shall prevent such cat
from whining or making other sounds common to its species in excessive,
continuous or untimely fashion.
Sec. 10-71. Barking dogs. [Code 1992, § 12.03(1)(e)]
The keeping of howling, barking and whining dogs to the continuous
annoyance and discomfort of surrounding neighbors so that their rest is
broken, sleep interrupted and the reasonable use and enjoyment of their
property disturbed is declared to be a public nuisance. Such dog may be
taken into custody as provided by Sections 10-68 and 10-69.
Sec. 10-72. through Sec. 10-90. (Reserved)
from time to time. Each user of the park acknowledges that dogs
running at large create the risks for injury, damage or even death.
Therefore anyone entering or using the dog park enters and uses
the dog park at his or her own risk and hereby waives any claim for
injury, damage, or death resulting from his or her entry or use of
the dog park. [Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-10]
Sec. 10-67 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 10-72
1:100
DIVISION 2
LICENSING
Sec. 10-91. Required for animals over five months of age. [Code
1992, §§ 12.01(1), (2), 12.03(5)(e)]
No person shall harbor or permit to remain about the premises any dog or
cat more than five months of age for which no license exists. The fee for
such license shall be as set from time to time by the City Council.
Sec. 10-92. Applications. [Code 1992, § 12.03(5)(h); amended
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
Application for licenses shall be made to the Treasurer and shall include
the name and address of the applicant, description of the animal, the
appropriate fee, information whether the animal is spayed or neutered and
a rabies certificate or tag issued by a licensed veterinarian or antirabies
clinic. Application for a required cat license shall be obtained by the last
day of February of each year, except the year in which the cat attains five
months of age and then within 30 days from the date such cat becomes five
months old.
Sec. 10-93. Collecting officials; remittance of fees. [Ord. No. 95-3,
3-27-1995]
Sec. 10-94. Penalty for violation of article. [Ord. No. 01-23, § II,
6-25-2001]
There shall be a forfeiture of $100 plus court costs for violation of Article
III, Dogs and Cats of this Code.
(a) Lakeland Animal Welfare Society, Inc. and its authorized employees are
designated as collecting officials under W.S.A. § 174.065 with full
authority to issue dog and cat licenses and collar tags pursuant to
W.S.A. § 174.07.
(b) Lakeland Animal Welfare Society, Inc., shall remit all license fees and
license blanks to the Treasurer as directed. [Amended 5-29-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
Sec. 10-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 10-94
1:101
Chapter 14
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and protection — See Ch. 30.
Historical preservation — See Ch. 34.
Manufactured homes and trailers — See Ch.
42.
Utilities — See Ch. 78.
Sec. 10-94 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 10-94
1:102
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1. Building Inspector; appointment and term.
The appointment and term of the Building Inspector shall be as described
in Section 2-3.
(Code 1992, § 1.19(1))
Sec. 14-2. Penalty for violation of chapter. [Code 1992, § 14.05)]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person found to be in
violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted
under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 1-12.
Sec. 14-3. Fees. [Code 1992, § 14.02(2)]
The Building Inspector shall charge a fee at the time of issuing a permit for
new construction, which shall be placed in the park fund and which fee shall
be in addition to the fees charged for the building permit as provided in the
building code and in the following amounts:
Sec. 14-4. through Sec. 14-30. (Reserved)
(1) Residential buildings. Fees for new construction of residential buildings
shall be as follows:
a. Single-family: $50.
b. Multifamily: $50 for the first unit, $25 for the second unit, $15 for
the third unit, $10 per additional unit.
(2) Commercial buildings. Fees for new construction of commercial
buildings shall be as follows:
a. Up to 25,000 cubic feet: $50.
b. Over 25,000 cubic feet: $50, plus $2 per additional 1,000 cubic feet
or portion over 25,000 cubic feet.
Sec. 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 14-4
1:103

ARTICLE II
BUILDING CODE
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 14-31. Wisconsin Administrative Code. [Code 1992, § 14.01(1)]
Sec. 14-32. Wisconsin Uniform Building Code. [Code 1992,
§ 14.01(2)]
(a) Adoption; inclusions. The Wisconsin Administrative Code is adopted
and made a part of this chapter by reference as if fully set forth in this
section. The adopted Code includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Chapters ILHR 20--25, Uniform Dwelling Code.
(2) Chapters ILHR 50--64, Building and Heating, Ventilating and Air
Conditioning Code, and commonly referred to as the "Commercial
Building Code."
(3) Chapters ILHR 82--86, Plumbing Code.
(4) Chapter PSC 114, Electrical Code, Vol. I.
(5) Chapter ILHR 16, Wisconsin State Electrical Code, Vol. II.
(6) Chapter ILHR 67, Rental Unit Energy Efficiency.
(7) Chapters ILHR 160--164, Existing Buildings.
(8) Chapters ILHR 17, 26, 68 and 81, Certification of Inspectors, or
Apprenticeships, Licensures and Registrations.
(9) Chapter Ind. 19, Illumination.
(10) Chapter HSS 171, Public Swimming Places.
(11) All other chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code applicable
to the protection and maintenance of the public's health, safety and
welfare.
(b) Amendments. All amendments, changes and interpretations of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code shall hereby be adopted as of their
effective date of issuance or publication.
(a) Adoption. The Wisconsin Uniform Building Code is adopted by
reference, etc., to the extent that the provisions of the Wisconsin
Uniform Building Code do not further restrict provisions of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code. The adoption of this Code is intended to
provide the Building Inspector with more specific information in areas
where the Wisconsin Administrative Code provides only general
guidelines or where no provision exists. It shall in no way be used to
Sec. 14-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 14-32
1:105
Sec. 14-33. Scope of article. [Code 1992, § 14.01(3)]
The codes adopted in this article apply to construction and inspection
procedures used for all construction of new buildings and additions to or
alterations of existing buildings.
Sec. 14-34. through Sec. 14-50. (Reserved)
require more restrictive standards than those specified in the
Wisconsin Administrative Code, and any provisions of the Wisconsin
Uniform Building Code which may be considered more restrictive are
hereby deleted from this Code.
(b) Deletions. The following sections of the Wisconsin Uniform Building
Code are hereby specifically deleted from the Code:
(1) Section 30.03(4)(c), Alterations, when not required.
(2) All of section 30.15, General requirements.
(3) Section 30.43(3), Garage area.
(c) Amendments. All amendments to, changes and interpretations of the
Wisconsin Uniform Building Code shall hereby be adopted as of their
effective date of issuance or publication, unless such amendment,
change or interpretation is more restrictive than applicable provisions
of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Sec. 14-32 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 14-34
1:106
DIVISION 2
PERMIT FEES
Sec. 14-51. Schedule. [Code 1992, § 14.01(4); Ord. No. 97-10, § I,
12-22-1997]
Sec. 14-52. through Sec. 14-65. (Reserved)
(a) Enumeration. At the time of issuing any permit required under this
chapter, the Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code and/or
Wisconsin Uniform Building Code, the Building Inspector shall charge a
fee as set forth in the schedule of fees on file with the Building
Inspector and as set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
[Amended 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 09-01]
(b) Double fees. Upon failure to obtain a permit before work on a building
has been started, except in emergency cases, the total fee shall be
double the fees charged.
(c) Gross square footage calculations. Fees shall be charged on gross
square footage defined as follows: the exterior dimensions, including
attached garage and each floor level. Unfinished areas of basements of
one- and two-family dwellings are not included.
(d) Determination of costs. In determining costs, all construction shall be
included with the exception of heating, air conditioning, electrical or
plumbing work.
(e) Rounding up of fee amounts. All fee amounts shall be rounded up to the
next full dollar amount.
(f) Plan review fee. An additional fee for plan review may be assessed at
the time of application for renewal of the permit.
Sec. 14-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 14-52
1:107

DIVISION 3
ELECTRICAL PERMITS
Sec. 14-66. Required; exceptions; application. (Code 1992, § 14.04)
In addition to the requirements of the Wisconsin Administrative Code
regarding electrical wiring and equipment, no electric wiring or other
equipment shall be installed or altered without first securing a permit
therefor from the Building Inspector, except that repairs or replacements
of broken or defective sockets, switches or base receptacles may be made
without a permit. The application for such permit shall be on a form
furnished by the Inspector and shall state clearly the work planned,
alterations to be made and equipment and materials to be used, and all
later deviations from such plan must be submitted to and approved by the
Inspector.
Sec. 14-67. through Sec. 14-80. Reserved.
Sec. 14-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 14-67
1:109

ARTICLE III
DEMOLITION AND REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 14-81. Permit required. [Code 1992, § 14.03(1)]
Prior to the demolition, razing or removal of any building in the City where
utilities are involved, a permit shall be issued therefor by the Building
Inspector upon payment of the fee as set by resolution of the Council from
time to time and on file in the office of the Building Inspector.
Sec. 14-82. Notice to utilities. [Code 1992, § 14.03(2)]
Before such permit shall be issued, the Building Inspector shall be satisfied
that the owner or his agent has notified in writing all utilities having service
connections with the building of his intention to so raze such building at
least five days prior to the commencement of the razing, demolition or
removal.
Sec. 14-83. Service connection sealed. [Code 1992, § 14.03(3)]
The Building Inspector shall further establish and ascertain that all service
connections and appurtenant equipment has been removed or sealed and
plugged in a safe manner.
Sec. 14-84. Excavations filled. [Code 1992, § 14.03(4)]
Excavations shall be filled with solid fill to match lot grade within 30 days of
removal of the structure. Such excavations shall be protected and enclosed
with appropriate fences or barriers and lights, if required by the Building
Inspector.
Sec. 14-85. through Sec. 14-100. (Reserved)
Sec. 14-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 14-85
1:111

DIVISION 2
PLUMBING WORK
Sec. 14-101. Permit required. [Code 1992, § 14.03(5)(a)]
Any person demolishing or moving a building or structure that is served
by sewer or water, or both, shall engage a licensed master plumber under
permit to properly abandon the building sewer or water service, or both,
immediately inside the front lot line on private property. Such plumbing
permit shall be obtained from the Building Inspector after receiving
approval for abandonment from the Utilities Department.
Sec. 14-102. Building sewer disconnection. [Code 1992,
§ 14.03(5)(b)]
The building sewer shall be disconnected at the front lot line and a pipe
or bulkhead installed. On a vitrified clay or concrete sewer a pipe shall be
cemented into the bell or hub. If the pipe bell or hub is broken, a swab
and six inches of concrete shall be inserted in the sewer as a permanent
bulkhead. On a cast-iron sewer a cast-iron plug with a lead caulk joint or
rubber tite joint shall be installed.
Sec. 14-103. Septic tanks. [Code 1992, § 14.03(5)(c)]
Any septic tank or distribution box on premises shall be pumped dry of its
contents and filled with sand and compacted.
Sec. 14-104. Water disconnection. [Code 1992, § 14.03(5)(d)]
The water supply to the premises shall be turned off at the street main
or at the curb or lot line by an authorized employee of the City Water
Commission.
Sec. 14-105. Wells filled. [Code 1992, § 14.03(5)(e)]
Any well on the premises shall be permanently abandoned by completely
filling it with concrete. Any pipe, pump or equipment inside the well or
conduit shall be removed before filling the well with concrete.
Sec. 14-106. through Sec. 14-120. (Reserved)
Sec. 14-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 14-106
1:113

ARTICLE IV
REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF MULTIFAMILY DWELLING
UNITS AND RENTAL PROPERTY
Sec. 14-121. Purpose. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I, 3-22-1999]
The City recognizes a need for an organized inspection program of
residential rental units within the City in order to upgrade and maintain the
condition of rental units so that they meet and comply with all provisions of
the Code of Ordinances as well as all applicable safety, health, fire, building
and construction requirements promulgated by the state. The City also
desires to provide a more efficient system for compelling both absentee and
local landlords to correct violations and to maintain, in proper condition,
rental property within the City. The City recognizes that the most efficient
system to provide for rental inspections is the creation of a program
requiring the registration of all residential rental units within the City so
that orderly inspection schedules can be made by City officials.
Sec. 14-122. Definitions. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I, 3-22-1999]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
CITY — The City of Lake Geneva, County of Walworth, Wisconsin.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLINGS —
PERMANENT RESIDENT — A person or entity which occupies, or has the
right to occupy, any room or rooms in a hotel or motel, or a dwelling unit,
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building or portion thereof containing
two or more dwelling units, including a duplex;
(a)
BOARDINGHOUSE, ROOMING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE AND
TOURIST HOUSE — A building arranged or used for the lodging,
with or without meals, for compensation, by individuals who are not
members of the same family;
(b)
DORMITORY — A space in a building where sleeping accommodations
are provided for more than one person not members of the same family
group, in one room; and
(c)
HOTEL — A room or rooms in any building or structure kept, used,
maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be an inn, motel,
apartment hotel, lodging house, boardinghouse, rooming house, tourist
house, dormitory or place where sleeping, rooming, office, conference
or exhibition accommodations are furnished for lease or rent, whether
with or without meals.
(d)
Sec. 14-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 14-122
1:115
rooming unit or dwelling, for at least 30 or more consecutive days, without
an intervening occupancy interval of less than 30 days.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, jointstock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
PROPERTY — Any building containing a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.
Sec. 14-123. Registration requirements. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I,
3-22-1999]
No person shall hereafter occupy, allow to be occupied or let to another
person for occupancy any property within the City for which a registration
statement has not been properly made and filed with the Building Inspector.
Registration shall be made upon forms furnished by the Building Inspector
of the City for such purpose and shall specifically require the following
minimum information:
(1) Name, address and phone number of the property owner and all
persons or entities having any ownership interest in the property;
(2) Name, address and phone number of the designated local property
manager if the property owner or owners live outside the City;
(3) The street address of the property;
(4) The number and types of units within the property;
(5) The maximum number of occupants permitted for each dwelling unit,
rooming unit or dwellings in accordance with the applicable provisions
of the Code of Ordinances; and
(6) The name, phone number and address of the person authorized to
make, order or direct repairs or services for the property, if in violation
of City or state codes, if the person is different than the owner, owners
or local manager;
(7) Name, address and phone number of any and all person(s), entities or
financial or other lending institution(s) having any interest in the
property, and a detailed description of the type of all such interests held
in the property by such person(s), entities or financial or other lending
institution(s).
Sec. 14-122 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 14-124
1:116
Sec. 14-124. Manner of registering. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I, 3-22-1999]
The registration must be made on or before January 1 of each even
numbered year commencing January 1, 2000, by the property owner(s) or
designated local property manager in the office of the Building Inspector of
the City. Registration shall be required prior to the issuance of any building
permits relating to the property.
Sec. 14-125. Transfer of property. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I, 3-22-1999]
Every new owner(s) of property (whether as fee owner or land contract
purchaser or upon conveyance or transfer of any interest in the property)
shall be required to furnish to the Building Inspector the new owner's
or owners' name, address and phone number and the name, address and
phone number of the new owner's or owners' duly designated local manager
before closing or taking possession of the property. A new registration
statement will be required from the new owner(s).
Sec. 14-126. Registration fees. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I, 3-22-1999]
A registration fee of $5 shall be charged for registrations required under
this article.
Sec. 14-127. Inspection required. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I, 3-22-1999]
Sec. 14-128. Frequency of inspections. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I,
3-22-1999]
(a) All dwelling units, rooming units, dwellings, boardinghouses, rooming
houses, lodging houses, tourist houses and hotels that rent to
permanent residents and dormitories shall be inspected systematically
in compliance with this article and all other applicable laws.
(b) These inspection requirements are not intended to conflict with
licensing and inspection requirements promulgated by the state.
(c) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses owned and/or operated
by a governmental agency; and
(2) Hotels that do not rent to permanent residents.
(d) Where a nonresidential business or activity, or a state licensed and
inspected use occupies a portion of a building and premises, which
would be otherwise subject to this article, the provisions of this article
shall be applicable to the residential and common or public areas of
such building and premises.
(a) All property subject to inspection shall be inspected no less than once
every five years.
Sec. 14-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 14-128
1:117
Sec. 14-129. Inspection certificate required. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I,
3-22-1999]
No person shall rent, let or let for occupancy any dwelling unit, rooming
unit or dwelling without having a valid, current certificate of inspection for
that dwelling unit, rooming unit or dwelling.
Sec. 14-130. Inspection procedure. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I, 3-22-1999]
Sec. 14-131. Request for inspection. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I, 3-22-1999]
The owner(s) of any property subject to this article may request inspections
of said property at any time.
Sec. 14-132. Certificate expiration date. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I,
3-22-1999]
Sec. 14-133. Certificate transferability. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I,
3-22-1999]
A certificate of inspection issued pursuant to this article shall not be
transferable to succeeding owners.
(b) Nothing in this section shall preclude the inspection of said dwellings
more frequently than once every five years.
(a) If, upon completion of the inspection, the premises or property is found
to be in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Code of
Ordinances, and the appropriate fee(s) has been paid, the City shall
issue a certificate of inspection for the property;
(b) If, upon completion of the inspection, the premises or property is found
to be in violation of one or more provisions of all applicable provisions
of the Code of Ordinances, the City shall provide written notice of such
violations and shall set a reinspection date before which such
violation(s) shall be corrected. If such violation(s) has been corrected
within that period, the City shall issue a certificate of inspection for the
property. If such violation(s) has not been corrected within that period,
the City shall not issue the certificate of inspection and may take any
action necessary to enforce compliance with all applicable provisions of
this article and the Code of Ordinances. If such uncorrected violation(s)
does not pose an immediate threat to the health, safety, and welfare of
the occupants or other residents of the City, the Building Inspector or
the Building Inspector's designee may authorize the occupancy of the
premises for a period not to exceed 60 days.
(a) A certificate of inspection issued pursuant to this article shall expire
five years from the date of its issuance.
(b) The certificate of inspection shall have the expiration date prominently
displayed on its face.
Sec. 14-128 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 14-134
1:118
Sec. 14-134. Certificate availability. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I, 3-22-1999]
Upon the request of an existing or prospective tenant, the owner(s) or the
duly designated agent or local manager shall produce the certificate of
inspection for review.
Sec. 14-135. Suspension or revocation of certificate. [Ord. No. 99-5,
§ I, 3-22-1999]
If the Building Inspector determines that any owner(s) has failed to comply
with this article or any applicable provision of the Code of Ordinances,
after having given that person written notice of said violation(s) and an
opportunity to correct said violation(s), the Building Inspector may suspend
or revoke the certificate of inspection held by such owner(s).
Sec. 14-136. Fees. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I, 3-22-1999]
Sec. 14-137. Nuisance injunction. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I, 3-22-1999]
Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In addition
to any other relief provided by this article, or the Code of Ordinances,
the City Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an
injunction to prohibit the continuation of any and all violations of this
article. Such application for relief may include seeking a temporary
(a) There is hereby established the following fee schedule for each
inspection required by this article:
Number of Units Within a
Structure Fee
1 $30
2 $20
Plus per each additional unit over 2 $10
(b) There is hereby established the following fee schedule for reinspection
required by this article which is necessitated by the existence of a
violation(s) of this article ascertained during an inspection:
(1) First reinspection per unit or common area: $10.
(2) All subsequent reinspections, per unit or common area: $15.
(c) The units enumerated above shall include units used or occupied by the
owner or the owner's representative(s).
(d) Where a property does not have a current certificate of inspection, then
for purposes of calculating the fee therefor, the first required inspection
date for the property shall be deemed the first inspection.
(e) For purposed of this section that term "unit" shall mean dwelling unit,
rooming unit, or dwelling.
Sec. 14-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 14-137
1:119
restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent injunction. The City
Attorney may request and receive, on behalf of the City, reimbursement
for any and all costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees,
related to such injunction proceedings and any other enforcement action
or litigation related to or arising from a violation(s) of this article. All such
penalties or awards to the City related to a violation(s) of this article may be
applied as a special assessment or lien against the property for collection
by the City.
Sec. 14-138. Penalty. [Ord. No. 99-5, § I, 3-22-1999]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be fined not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 plus court costs and
expenses, including reasonable attorney fees, for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation(s) occurs or continues.
Sec. 14-137 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 14-138
1:120
ARTICLE V
[AddeLdI3C-E2N8-S2E0S1 1ANBDy OPrEdR. MNIoT. S11-11]
Sec. 14-139. Delinquent taxes, assessments and claims.
No license, certificate, or permit shall be granted for any premises for which
taxes, assessments or other claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid
or to any person delinquent in payment of such claims to the City. In the
event a premises or person is delinquent in payment of such claims to the
City, at times other than initial granting or renewal of a license, the Council
may, in its discretion, suspend or revoke said license(s). "Delinquent" for
the purposes of this section shall mean the claim remains unpaid for 30
days after it became due. Being delinquent hereunder shall be grounds for
suspension or revocation of the license, permit, or certificate applicable
hereunder.
Sec. 14-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 14-139
1:121
Chapter 18
BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General provisions — See Ch. 1. Vehicles for hire — See Ch. 86.
Sec. 14-139 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 14-139
1:122
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. through Sec. 18-30. (Reserved)
Sec. 18-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-1
1:123

ARTICLE II
LICENSING
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 18-31. General business license. [Code 1992, § 12.16; Ord. No.
03-11, §§ I, II, 10-27-2003; Ord. No. 06-02, § I, 1-23-2006]
Sec. 18-32. Bond and insurance. [Code 1992, § 12.02(4)]
All required bonds shall be executed by two sureties or a surety company
and be subject to the approval of the City Council. Where policies of
insurance are required, such policies shall be approved as to substance and
form by the City Attorney. Satisfactory evidence of coverage by bond or
insurance shall be filed with the City before the license or permit is issued.
Sec. 18-33. Approval or denial. [Code 1992, § 12.02(5)]
Where the approval of any City or state officer is required prior to the
issuance of any license or permit, such approval shall be presented to the
City before any license or permit is issued.
(a) Required. No person shall establish any business, trade or profession
without first obtaining a license therefor.
(b) Application. Application for a general business license shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk upon forms provided by the City, and the
applicant shall state the location, type of activity to be conducted and
such facts as may be required for or be applicable to the granting of
such a license. A copy of the application shall be forwarded to the
Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator, Health Officer and Fire
Inspector.
(c) Payment of fee. The fee specified in Section 18-56 shall be paid at the
office of the City Clerk at the time the application is submitted. No
application shall be accepted or acted upon until such fee is paid. No
fee shall be refunded, unless the license is denied. Any payment after
July 1 of each year shall be subject to a late fee as specified in Section
18-56.
(d) Approvals required prior to issuance. No license shall be issued under
the section until the Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator, Health
Officer and Fire Inspector have reviewed and made recommendations
for approval of the application.
(e) Terms. The general business license shall expire each year on June 30.
A renewal license application must be filed with the City Clerk.
Sec. 18-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-34
1:125
Sec. 18-34. Certificate—contents; records. [Code 1992, § 12.02(6)]
Licenses or permit certificates shall show the name of the licensee or
permittee, the date of issue, the activity licensed and the term of the license
or permit and shall be signed in the name of the City by the Mayor and City
Clerk and be impressed with the City Seal. The Clerk shall keep a record of
all licenses and permits issued.
Sec. 18-35. Same—exhibition. [Code 1992, § 12.02(8)]
Every licensee or permittee shall carry his license or permit certificate upon
his person at all times when engaged in the activity for which the license or
permit was granted, except that where such activity is conducted at a fixed
place or establishment, the license or permit certificate shall be exhibited at
all times in some conspicuous place in his place of business. The licensee or
permittee shall exhibit the license certificate when applying for a renewal
and upon demand of any police officer or person representing the issuing
authority.
Sec. 18-36. Terms. [Code 1992, § 12.02(7)]
Sec. 18-37. Transfer. [Code 1992, § 12.02(9)]
Unless otherwise provided, no license or permit shall be transferable or
assignable.
Sec. 18-38. Determinations of the City Council. [Code 1992,
§ 12.02(10)]
All determinations made by the City Council shall be subject to the
provisions of Chapter 2 of this Code.
Sec. 18-39. Inspection of premises. [Code 1992, § 12.02(11)]
City officials may enter upon the premises where any licensed or permitted
activity is being conducted for the purpose of inspection at any reasonable
time.
Sec. 18-40. Revocations and suspension. [Code 1992, § 12.02(13)]
(a) Unless otherwise provided, the license year shall end on June 30 of each
year.
(b) Where the issuance of licenses for a period of less than one year is
permitted, the effective date of such license shall commence with the
date of issuance.
(c) Permits shall be issued for the term set forth in the permit.
(a) Except as otherwise provided, any license issued under this chapter
may be revoked for cause by the City Council. No license shall be
revoked except upon written verified complaint filed with the City
Sec. 18-34 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-40
1:126
Sec. 18-41. Delinquent taxes, assessments and claims. [Added
3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
No license, certificate, or permit shall be granted for any premises for which
taxes, assessments or other claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid
or to any person delinquent in payment of such claims to the City. In the
event a premises or person is delinquent in payment of such claims to the
City, at times other than initial granting or renewal of a license, the Council
may, in its discretion, suspend or revoke said license(s). "Delinquent" for
the purposes of this section shall mean the claim remains unpaid for 30
days after it became due. Being delinquent hereunder shall be grounds for
suspension or revocation of the license, permit, or certificate applicable
hereunder.
Sec. 18-42. through Sec. 18-55. (Reserved)
Council by the Mayor, a member of the City Council, the Chief of Police
or a resident of the City. The licenses shall be served with a written copy
of the charges and shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the
City Council. The licenses shall be given notice of such hearing, which
shall be not more than 20, nor less than five days after notice, except as
otherwise agreed between the parties.
(b) At such hearing the licensee shall be entitled to be represented by
counsel, shall have the right to present and cross examine witnesses,
and, upon request, may have subpoenas issued by the Mayor or
presiding officer of the Council to compel the attendance of witnesses.
(c) After hearing the evidence, the Council may revoke such license or
impose a limited period of suspension. The determination of the Council
shall be final, subject to review under Chapter 2 of this Code, provided
the licensee shall not be entitled to a further hearing unless granted by
the City Council.
(d) The Police Department shall repossess any license revoked under this
chapter.
(e) If the licensee does not apply for a hearing within the time provided, the
license may be revoked by the City Council.
Sec. 18-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-42
1:127

DIVISION 2
FEES AND CHARGES
Sec. 18-56. Established. [Code 1992, §§ 12.01, 12.15; Ord. No.
96-10, § I, 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 99-1, § I, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 03-12,
§ I, 10-27-2003]
Fees and charges for the business licenses in this section shall be paid
before any license to conduct such business or occupation in the City shall
be issued. License fees shall be listed in the City fee schedule and shall be
set from time to time by City Council.
Sec. 18-57. through Sec. 18-75. (Reserved)
Sec. 18-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-57
1:129

ARTICLE III
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 18-76. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 12.19(1)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as its stock-in-trade for
sale, rent, lease, inspection or viewing books, films, video cassettes,
magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specific
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and, in conjunction
therewith, have facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment,
including adult-oriented films, movies or live performances, for observation
by patrons therein.
ADULT CABARET — A cabaret which features topless dancers, strippers,
male or female impersonators or similar entertainers.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any motion picture, live
performance, display or dance of any type which has as its dominant theme
or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any actual or
simulated specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or the
removal of articles of clothing or appearing partially or totally nude.
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material having as
its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material having as
its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — But is not limited to, adult
bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini motion-picture
establishments or adult cabaret and further means any premises to which
public patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so
physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments
or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purposes
of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or wherein an entertainer
provides adult entertainment and such establishment is held, conducted,
operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect.
Sec. 18-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-76
1:131
OPERATORS — Any person, partnership or corporation operating,
conducting, maintaining or owning any adult-oriented establishment.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — As follows:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Simulated or actual:
Sec. 18-77. Physical layout of establishment. [Code 1992,
§ 12.19(9)]
Any adult-oriented establishment having available for customers, patrons or
members any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult
entertainment must comply with the following requirements:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks and female breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the areola.
(a)
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely
covered.
(b)
(a) Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus.
(b)
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breasts.
(c)
(1) Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and
from aisles and public areas of the adult-oriented establishment and
shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control type devices.
(2) Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements:
a. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent
booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
b. Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that
there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying the
booth, room or cubicle.
c. All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the
floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored,
nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
d. The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and
easily cleanable.
e. The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use
shall be a minimum of 10 footcandles at all times, as measured
from the floor.
Sec. 18-76 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-77
1:132
Sec. 18-78. Responsibilities of the operator. [Code 1992,
§ 12.19(10)]
Sec. 18-79. through Sec. 18-95. (Reserved)
(3) Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at
any time. No occupant of the same shall engage in any type of sexual
activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No
individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth.
(a) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs, either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
(b) Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license
shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
(c) No employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow any minor
to loiter around or to frequent an adult-oriented establishment or allow
any minor to view adult entertainment.
(d) The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary
manner at all times.
(e) The operator shall maintain at least 10 footcandles of light in the public
portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if
a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a
patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle
adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in
such aisles; provided, however, that at no time shall there be less than
one footcandle of illumination in such aisles, as measured from the
floor.
(f) The operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its
patrons with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 18-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-79
1:133

DIVISION 2
LICENSE
Sec. 18-96. Required; limitations; transferal; application deadline.
[Code 1992, § 12.19(2)]
Sec. 18-97. Application contents and requirements. [Code 1992,
§ 12.19(3)]
(a) Required. Except as provided in Subsection (d) of this section, from and
after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is
derived, no adult-oriented establishment shall be operated or
maintained in the City without first obtaining a license to operate issued
by the City.
(b) Limited to one establishment. A license may be issued only for one
adult-oriented establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any
person who desires to operate more than one adult-oriented
establishment must have a license for each.
(c) Transferal. No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any
person.
(d) Application deadline. All adult-oriented establishments existing at the
time of the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived
must submit an application for a license within 90 days of the passage
of the ordinance from which this section is derived. If an application is
not received within such ninety-day period, then such existing adultoriented
establishment shall cease operations.
(a) Filing; distribution. Any person desiring to secure a license shall make
application to the City Clerk. The application shall be filed in triplicate
with and dated by the City Clerk. A copy of the application shall be
distributed promptly by the City Clerk to the City Police Department
and to the applicant.
(b) Form; contents; oath. The application for a license shall be upon a form
provided by the City Clerk. An applicant for a license interested directly
in the ownership or operation of the business shall furnish the following
information under oath:
(1) Name and address.
(2) Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
(3) The address of the adult-oriented establishment to be operated by
the applicant.
(4) If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall specify the
name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the
name and address of the registered agent, the name and address of
Sec. 18-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-97
1:135
Sec. 18-98. Standards for issuance. [Code 1992, § 12.19(4)(a)]
To receive a license to operate an adult-oriented establishment, an applicant
must meet the following standards:
all shareholders owning more than 5% of the stock in such
corporation and all officers and directors of the corporation.
(c) Notification of applicant of grant or denial. Within 21 days of receiving
an application for a license, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant
whether the application is granted or denied.
(d) Denial; hearing. Whenever an application is denied, the City Clerk shall
advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. If the
applicant requests a hearing within 10 days of receipt of notification of
denial, a public hearing shall be held within 10 days thereafter before
the Council as provided in this section.
(e) Grounds for denial. Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any
information relevant to the investigation of the application, his refusal
or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination
under oath regarding such application or his refusal to submit to or
cooperate with any investigation required by this article shall constitute
an admission by the applicant that he is ineligible for such license and
shall be grounds for denial thereof by the City Clerk.
(1) If the applicant is an individual:
a. The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.
b. The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated
this article within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
(2) If the applicant is a corporation, all officers, directors and stockholders
required to be named under Subsection (3)b of this section shall not
have been found to have previously violated this article within five years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
(3) If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of
organization where two or more persons have a financial interest:
a. All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall be at least 18 years of
age.
b. No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall have been found to have
violated any provision of this article within five years immediately
preceding the date of the application.
Sec. 18-97 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-99
1:136
Sec. 18-99. Fees. [Code 1992, § 12.19(5)]
A license fee, as provided in Section 18-56 shall be submitted with the
application for a license. If the application is denied, 1/2 of the fee shall be
returned.
Sec. 18-100. Display. [Code 1992, § 12.19(6)]
The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adultoriented
establishment
Sec. 18-101. Renewal. [Code 1992, § 12.19(7)]
Sec. 18-102. Revocation. [Code 1992, § 12.19(8)]
(a) Every license issued pursuant to this article will terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked,
and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year.
Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the
City Clerk. The application for renewal must be filed not later than 60
days before the license expires. The application for renewal shall be
filed in triplicate with and dated by the City Clerk. A copy of the
application for renewal shall be distributed promptly by the City Clerk
to the City Police Department and to the operator. The application for
renewal shall be upon a form provided by the City Clerk and shall
contain such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as
is required for an application for a new license.
(b) A license renewal fee as provided in Section 18-56 shall be submitted
with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late
penalty as provided in Section 18-56 shall be assessed against the
applicant who files for a renewal less than 60 days before the license
expires. If the application is denied, 1/2 of the total fees collected shall
be returned.
(c) If the City Police Department is aware of any information bearing on the
operator's qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with
the City Clerk.
(a) The Council shall revoke a license or permit for any of the following
reasons:
(1) Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on
any application or material facts were omitted from any
application.
(2) The operator or any employee of the operator violates any provision
of this article or any rule or regulation adopted by the Council
pursuant to this article; provided, however, that in the case of a
first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an
employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if
the Council shall find that the operator had no actual or
Sec. 18-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-102
1:137
Sec. 18-103. through Sec. 18-120. (Reserved)
constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the
exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive
knowledge.
(3) The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license or permit.
(4) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this article is not paid.
(5) Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or
consumed on the premises of the adult-oriented establishment.
(b) The Council, before revoking or suspending any license or permit, shall
give the operator at least 10 days' written notice of the charges against
him and the opportunity for a public hearing before the Council as
provided in this section.
(c) The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically
and immediately revoke the license.
(d) Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a
license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or
premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an adultoriented
establishment for six months from the date of revocation of the
license.
Sec. 18-102 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-103
1:138
ARTICLE IV
ALARM SYSTEMS
Sec. 18-121. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 4.07(1)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALARM, FALSE — But the following provisions do not include, false alarms
caused by weather conditions, violent conditions or prior arrangements for
testing of the alarm system:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device designed for the detection of an
unauthorized entry on premises or for alerting others of the commission of a
prohibited act, or both, or for the detection of a fire which, when activated,
produces a signal, visible or audible, or both, which signal is caused to be
transmitted by such system to the Police Department.
ALARM SYSTEM, APPROVED — An alarm system which is Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc. listed or equivalent, except that the City Council may
approve a system not having the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. listing
when such system is being tested by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.
ALARM SYSTEM OPERATOR — Any person in the business of operating
a receiving device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on
premises or for alerting others of the commission of a prohibited act, or
both, or for the detection of a fire which, when activated, produces a signal,
visible or audible, or both, which signal is caused to be transmitted to the
operator of the alarm system, who in turn by telephone or other means
transmits such information to the City Police or Fire Departments.
ALARM SYSTEM, SELF-CONTAINED — Any device designed for the
detection of unauthorized entry on the premises or for alerting others of the
commission of a prohibited act, or both, or for the detection of a fire which,
when activated, produces a signal, visible or audible, or both, which signal
is caused to be retransmitted to the general area surrounding the premises
so as to give notice to the general public.
Sec. 18-122. Terminal or modular gear; use. [Code 1992, § 4.07(2)]
Residents of the City, or businesses located in the City, shall be entitled to
the use of terminal or modular gear located in the City Police Department
The activation of an alarm system through the negligence of the owner
or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents.
(a)
The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure or
malfunction because of improper maintenance by the alarm user.
(b)
The activation of an alarm system because of improper installation and/
or use of the equipment by the alarm business.
(c)
Sec. 18-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-122
1:139
headquarters upon making proper application therefor. Such use is a
privilege and not a right.
Sec. 18-123. Telephone systems. [Code 1992, § 4.07(4)]
Except as authorized by the City Council and the Police and Fire
Commission, no telephone line systems shall be connected with the City
Police Department telephones.
Sec. 18-124. Application for permission to connect to Police
Department terminal gear; fee. [Code 1992, § 4.07(3)]
Applications for permission to connect to City Police Department terminal
gear shall be made upon forms prescribed by the Police Chief, and
applicants shall pay a yearly service charge as determined by resolution of
the Council from time to time.
Sec. 18-125. Liability of City. [Code 1992, § 4.07(5)]
The City hereby disclaims and refutes any liability to users of any alarm
system upon which or to which the City Police Department is connected for
any negligence of its employees arising out of its failure to respond to alarm
notifications, of termination of the privileged use or for improper response
to alarm notifications. All users of alarm systems connected to City facilities
shall, prior to their connection to City facilities, execute a disclaimer or
waiver of liability in writing to this extent.
Sec. 18-126. Penalty for false alarm. [Code 1992, § 4.07(6)(a), (b)]
(a) Penalties.
(1) Warning for first in a year. For the first false alarm in a calendar
year, resulting in the dispatching of police or fire personnel, the
licensee, or his agent, shall be given a written warning.
(2) Forfeiture for second in a year. For the second false alarm in the
same calendar year, the licensee shall be subject to a forfeiture not
to exceed $20.
(3) Forfeiture for third in a year. For the third false alarm in the same
calendar year, the licensee shall be subject to a forfeiture not to
exceed $40.
(4) Forfeiture for additional false alarms. For each false alarm violation
thereafter during the same calendar year, the licensee shall be
subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $45.
(5) Ten alarms; termination of terminal use privilege by Police
Department. The occurrence of 10 false alarms within any sixmonth
period shall be grounds for immediate termination of the
privilege of use of the alarm system terminal by the City Police
Department. Notice of such termination shall be sent by certified
Sec. 18-122 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-126
1:140
Sec. 18-127. through Sec. 18-150. (Reserved)
mail to the individual and address named and indicated on the
respective application for use. Failure to terminate the privilege for
10 false alarms within a six-month period shall not foreclose, bar or
estop the City Police Department from termination of the privilege
following any subsequent false alarm.
(b) Penalty for violations of section. Except as otherwise stated in this
section, any person who shall violate any provision of this section, or
any regulation, rule or order made under this section, shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in Section 1-12.
(c) Enforcement of section. Actions for violations shall be commenced by
citation as provided by W.S.A., § 66.119 for summons and complaint, or
warrant as provided by W.S.A., § 66.12(1)(a).
Sec. 18-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-127
1:141

ARTICLE V
AMUSEMENTS
Sec. 18-151. Amusement rides and devices. [Code 1992, § 12.06]
(a) Licenses required. No person shall conduct, operate or maintain within
the City, any amusement rides, water or aquabicycles for rental to the
general public or similar devices without a license therefor. This section
shall not apply to events conducted by permanently organized clubs,
societies or religious or fraternal organizations, nor to events
conducted under the sole control and supervision of educational,
charitable or religious organizations or service organizations and
where the entire proceeds thereof shall be devoted to the purposes of
such organizations. This section shall not apply to persons conducting
theaters, public dances, billiard and pool rooms and bowling alleys or
any other amusements for which a license is otherwise required by the
City.
(b) Application. Application for such license shall be made to the City. The
City Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, Health
Officer and Chief of the Fire Department who shall inspect or cause to
be inspected each application to determine whether the place and
device sought to be licensed complies with the regulations, ordinances
and laws applicable thereto and is a proper place for the purposes for
which it is to be used. These officials shall furnish to the City Clerk in
writing the information derived from such investigation, accompanied
by a recommendation as to whether a license should be granted or
refused.
(c) Insurance. Before any license shall be granted under this section, the
owner or operator shall file with the City Clerk proof that public liability
insurance covering all persons who may use any of the devices
mentioned in this section is in full force and effect.
(d) Council action. An application under this section shall be presented by
the City Clerk to the Council at the next regular meeting thereof after
such application if filed, and the Council shall act upon such application
and either grant or deny the application.
(e) License fees. License fees shall be as listed in Section 18-56.
(f) Disorderly conduct. No licensee under this section shall permit any
disorderly conduct or the use of any immoral, profane or indecent
language or permit the sale, giving away, delivering, drinking or use
therein of any drugs or alcohol beverages. No loud or unusual noises
shall be permitted upon the premises nor shall any music be played so
as to constitute a nuisance.
(g) Administrative Code adopted. Chapter ILHR 34, Wis. Adm. Code, is
hereby adopted in its entirety.
Sec. 18-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-152
1:143
Sec. 18-152. Shows, circuses and carnivals. [Code 1992, § 12.04]
Sec. 18-153. Closing hours of amusement places. [Code 1992,
§ 12.02(12)]
No person shall operate, or cause to remain open for business, any public
place of amusement within the City between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any
day of the week.
Sec. 18-154. Bowling alleys, billiard and pool tables and shooting
galleries. [Code 1992, § 12.07]
Sec. 18-155. Theaters, license required; application of section.
[Code 1992, § 12.08]
No person shall engage in the business of operating any theater or place
for theatrical performances or for the exhibition of motion pictures without
a license therefor. This section shall not apply to the exhibition of motion
pictures or theatrical performances in public schools, churches or in
fraternal halls in connection with the work of fraternal orders, or to the
exhibition of such pictures in connection with educational or scientific
lectures wherever given or to the exhibition of motion pictures for
advertising purposes only and without charge.
Sec. 18-156. through Sec. 18-180. (Reserved)
(a) License required. No person shall engage in the exhibition for money
within this City of any natural or artificial curiosity, any show, circus or
tented or open air theatrical performance without first having obtained
a license therefor.
(b) License fee. The fee for such licenses shall be as required by Section
18-56.
(a) License required. No person shall keep any billiard table, pool table,
bowling alley or shooting gallery for gain or hire, directly or indirectly
within the City without a license therefor.
(b) License fee. The fee for such license shall be as required by Section
13-56.
Sec. 18-152 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-156
1:144
ARTICLE VI
AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND ARCADES
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 18-181. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 12.10(1)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
MAJOR ARCADE — Any single premises or location at which is located more
than nine mechanical or electronic amusement devices.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine,
device or game which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token or similar
item, permits a person or operator to use the device as a game or contest
of skill or amusement, whether or not the device registers a score, and
which is not a gambling device. The term shall include, but not be limited to,
jukeboxes, electronic or mechanical game machines, pinball machines and
pool or billiard tables.
MINOR ARCADE — Any single premises or location at which is located
between four and nine mechanical or electronic amusement devices.
Sec. 18-182. Premises to be safe and sanitary. [Code 1992,
§ 12.10(3)(a)]
No license shall be granted for any mechanical or electronic amusement
device or arcade unless the premises complies with all fire and building
code requirements of the City and state, provides adequate room for
operation of the devices without blocking access and is an otherwise safe
and sanitary environment.
Sec. 18-183. Premises to be supervised. [Code 1992, § 12.10(3)(b)]
No mechanical or electronic amusement device or arcade license shall
be granted unless the applicant therefor shows that the premises will be
adequately supervised.
Sec. 18-184. Orderly conduct required. [Code 1992, § 12.10(3)(c)]
The licensee shall maintain supervision of the premises in such a manner as
to ensure that no disorderly conduct, gambling or other activity prohibited
by local ordinance or state or federal law is permitted on such premises.
Sec. 18-185. Department of Justice registration required. [Code
1992, § 12.10(3)(d)]
No mechanical or electronic amusement device may lawfully be operated in
the City unless there is affixed thereto a Department of Justice AD number,
Sec. 18-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-185
1:145
if required by law. If any device is found in the City without such registration
number, any police officer is authorized to summarily revoke the license of
the premises where the offense is committed.
Sec. 18-186. Offering of prizes or awards. [Code 1992,
§ 12.10(3)(e)]
No licensee under this article shall offer, advertise, make or give any
reward, prize, money or thing of value to any person by reason of the
operation of any mechanical or electronic amusement device.
Sec. 18-187. Consent to inspection. [Code 1992, § 12.10(3)(f)]
An applicant for a license under this article thereby consents to the entry of
police or authorized representatives of the City upon the licensed premises
at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection and search, and
consents to removal from the premises and introduction into evidence in
prosecutions for violations of this article all things found therein in violation
of this article or state law.
Sec. 18-188. through Sec. 18-205. (Reserved)
Sec. 18-185 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-188
1:146
DIVISION 2
LICENSE
Sec. 18-206. Required; issuance; display. [Code 1992, § 12.10(2)(a)]
Any person maintaining, operating or permitting the operation of a
mechanical or electronic amusement device shall obtain a license to operate
such device from the Clerk, unless the premises on which the device is
maintained or operated is licensed as a minor or major arcade. The
applicant shall submit an application for each place where a mechanical
or electronic amusement device is to be operated, stating the name of the
owner of the device, the place where the device is to be operated and
such other information as the Clerk may reasonably require. If the Clerk
is satisfied that the applicant meets all the requirements of this article, he
shall issue the license. Such license shall be conspicuously displayed on the
premises at all times while the device is operable.
Sec. 18-207. Minor arcade license. [Code 1992, § 12.10(2)(b)]
(a) Required. Any person owning or operating a premises on which
between four and nine mechanical or electronic amusement devices are
kept at any one time shall, in lieu of obtaining a license under Section
18-206, obtain a minor arcade license for the premises which shall
permit the holder thereof to operate or maintain the specified number
of devices on the licensed premises.
(b) Application; contents. The application shall contain the following
information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Name and address of person responsible for management of the
arcade, including a list of such person's qualifications, experience
and references, and the date, place and circumstances of
conviction of violation of any local ordinance or state or federal law
directly related to the activity proposed to be licensed.
(3) Complete description of the premises to be licensed.
(4) Statement of the number of devices to be kept on the premises,
describing each by make and type.
(5) Name of the owner of the machines.
(6) Type of supervision to be provided.
(7) A zoning permit or current zoning application.
(8) Detailed operating plan, including hours of operation and manner
of supervision to be provided.
(9) Such other information as the Clerk may reasonably require.
Sec. 18-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-207
1:147
Sec. 18-208. Major arcade license. [Code 1992, § 12.10(2)(c)]
Sec. 18-209. Transferal. [Code 1992, § 12.10(4)]
Sec. 18-210. Revocation. [Code 1992, § 12.10(5)]
(c) Issuance; display. If the Clerk is satisfied that the premises and
management thereof meet the requirements of this article, he shall
issue a minor arcade license to the applicant. The applicant shall
display such license conspicuously on the premises at all times during
which the arcade is in operation.
(a) Required; expiration date. Any person owning or operating a premises
on which 10 or more mechanical or electronic amusement devices are
kept at any time shall obtain for such premises a major arcade license in
lieu of obtaining a license under Section 18-206. Such license shall
expire on June 30 of each year.
(b) Application; contents. Application for a major arcade license shall be in
writing on forms provided by the Clerk and shall contain the
information required under Section 18-207(b).
(c) Incorporation of operating plan and zoning permit restrictions;
approval; display. The operating plan and any restrictions placed on the
premises under the zoning permit, if required, shall be incorporated by
reference in any arcade license or renewal of such license. No major
arcade license shall be valid until approved by the City Council. The
license shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises at all times
during which the arcade is in operation.
(a) Mechanical or electronic amusement device license. Mechanical or
electronic amusement device licenses may be transferred from
premises to premises during the license year without charge. The
holder of such license shall notify the Clerk within 10 days of the time
such transfer is made.
(b) Minor arcade license. A minor arcade license may be transferred from
one premises to another or from the holder to another person upon
application to the Clerk and payment of a fee of $10. The Clerk may
grant or deny such application for transfer, and if denied, the applicant
has the right to review of such determination under Chapter 2.
(c) Major arcade license. Major arcade licenses are not transferable.
(a) Notice of charges. Any license issued under this article may be revoked
for cause by the City Council. No license shall be revoked except upon
written verified complaint filed with the City Council by a member of
such body, a law enforcement officer or resident of the City. The
licensee shall be served with a written copy of the charges and shall be
given an opportunity to be heard. The licensee shall be given notice of
Sec. 18-207 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-210
1:148
Sec. 18-211. through Sec. 18-220. (Reserved)
such hearing not more than 20 nor less than five days after notice,
except as otherwise agreed between the parties.
(b) Hearing. At such hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to be
represented by counsel, shall have the right to present and cross
examine witnesses and, upon request, may have subpoenas issued by
the presiding officer to compel the attendance of witnesses.
Sec. 18-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-211
1:149

ARTICLE VII
CLOSING OUT SALES
Sec. 18-221. License—required. [Ord. No. 96-10, § II, 9-9-1996]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct at retail within the City
any sale of goods, wares or merchandise under the circumstances stated
in this section without a closing out sales license. Such license must be
obtained prior to conducting, at retail, a sale or advertise for sale any goods,
wares or merchandise represented in any manner to be the goods, wares
or merchandise of a bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, liquidator, adjuster,
administrator, trustee, executor, receiver, wholesaler, jobber, manufacturer
or of any business that is in liquidation, that is closing out or going out of
business, or department thereof, that has lost its lease or has been or is
being forced out of business, that is disposing of stock on hand because
of damage by fire, water, smoke or other cause, or that for any reason
is forced by circumstances to dispose of stock on hand. The applicant is
hereby required to obtain such license before it shall conduct a sale of, or
advertise goods, wares and merchandise for sale if such advertisement or
representation, expressed or implied, tends to lead the public to believe that
such sale is a selling out or closing out of the business conducting the sale.
Sec. 18-222. Same—application. [Ord. No. 96-10, § II, 9-9-1996]
Applications shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk and specify
the name and address of the applicant and if an agent, the person for whom
he is acting as agent, the place at which the proposed sale is to continue,
which time shall not exceed 60 successive days, Sundays and legal holidays
excepted, from the date of the issuance of the license.
Sec. 18-223. Same—extension. [Ord. No. 96-10, § II, 9-9-1996]
The City may grant an extension of a closing out sale license if a written
application for such extension is filed with the City Clerk. Such extension, if
granted, shall not exceed 30 days from the expiration of the original license.
Sec. 18-224. Exception. [Ord. No. 96-10, § II, 9-9-1996]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to sales under judicial process.
Sec. 18-225. through Sec. 18-270. (Reserved)
Sec. 18-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-225
1:151

ARTICLE VIII
DIRECT SELLERS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 18-271. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 12.05(2)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic
or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation or one
purporting to be such.
DIRECT SELLER — Any individual who, for himself or for a partnership,
association or corporation, sells goods or takes sales orders for the later
delivery of goods at any location other than the permanent business place
or residence of such individual, partnership, association or corporation
and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and transient
merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the direct
seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
GOODS — Personal property of any kind and shall include goods provided
incidental to services offered or sold.
PERMANENT MERCHANT — A direct seller who, for at least one year prior
to the consideration of the application of this article to such merchant, has
continuously operated an established place of business in the City, or has
continuously resided in the City and now does business from his residence.
Sec. 18-272. Exemptions. [Code 1992, § 12.05(3)]
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this article:
(1) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods
to regular customers on established routes.
(2) Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods.
(3) Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown.
(4) Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away
from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for
sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such goods
in their regular course of business.
(5) Any person who has an established place of business where the goods
being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the
buyer has initiated contact with and specifically requested a home visit
by such person.
Sec. 18-271 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-272
1:153
Sec. 18-273. Prohibited practices. [Code 1992, § 12.05(7)(a)]
(6) Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has
had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer.
(7) Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the
sale or offering for sale of goods.
(8) Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court
and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
(9) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for or on behalf of such organization, provided
that there is submitted to the Clerk proof that such charitable
organization is registered under W.S.A., § 440.41. Any charitable
organization not registered under W.S.A., § 440.41, or which is exempt
from that statute's registration requirements, shall be required to
register under this article.
(10) Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom
complaint has been made to the Clerk that such person is a transient
merchant; provided, however, that there is submitted to the Clerk proof
that such person has leased for at least one year, or purchased, the
premises from which he is conducting business, or proof that such
person has conducted such business for at least one year prior to the
date the complaint was made.
(a) A direct seller shall be prohibited from calling at any dwelling or other
place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except by
appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is
displayed bearing the words "no peddlers," "no solicitors" or words of
similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place or
remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner,
occupant or other person having authority over such premises.
(b) A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or
misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of
any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his visit, his identity or the
identity of the organization he represents. A charitable organization
direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of
goods being offered shall actually be used for the charitable purpose for
which the organization is soliciting. Such portion shall be expressed as
a percentage of the sale price of the goods.
(c) No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by
pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all
traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
(d) No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying
device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being
plainly heard outside a one-hundred-foot radius of the source.
Sec. 18-272 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-273
1:154
Sec. 18-274. Disclosure requirements. [Code 1992, § 12.05(7)(b)]
Sec. 18-275. Records. [Code 1992, § 12.05(8)]
The Chief of Police shall report to the Clerk all convictions for violation of
this article, and the Clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the
registrant convicted.
Sec. 18-276. through Sec. 18-290. (Reserved)
(e) No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around
the area in which he is conducting business.
(a) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a
prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his name,
the name of the company or organization he is affiliated with, if any, and
the identity of goods or services he offers to sell.
(b) If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales order for the
later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the
right to cancel the transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is
a cash transaction of more than $25, in accordance with the procedure
as set forth in W.S.A., § 423.203, the seller shall give the buyer two
copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall
conform to the requirements of W.S.A., § 423.203(1)(a) through (c), (2),
(3).
(c) If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, he
shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written
statement containing the terms of the agreement; the amount paid in
advance, whether full, partial or no advance payment is made; the
name, address and telephone number of the seller; and the delivery or
performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided
and, if so, the terms of such guarantee or warranty.
Sec. 18-273 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-276
1:155

DIVISION 2
REGISTRATION
Sec. 18-291. Required. [Code 1992, § 12.05(1)]
No direct seller shall engage in direct sales within the City without being
registered for that purpose as provided in Section 18-292.
Sec. 18-292. Application; contents; presentation of documents; fee;
issuance of permit. [Code 1992, § 12.05(4)]
(a) Contents of registration form. Applicants for registration shall complete
and return to the Clerk a registration form furnished by the Clerk which
shall require the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number and temporary
address, if any;
(2) Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is
employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold;
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business
shall be conducted, if any;
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
goods offered and any services offered;
(6) Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable;
(7) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by
applicant in the conduct of his business;
(8) Last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where applicant
conducted similar business;
(9) Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving the City; and
(10) A statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any
crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient
merchant business within the last five years, the nature of the
offense and the place of conviction.
(b) Examination of documents. Applicants shall present to the Clerk for
examination:
(1) A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required.
Sec. 18-291 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-292
1:157
Sec. 18-293. Investigation of applicant. [Code 1992, § 12.05(5)]
Sec. 18-294. Appeal. [Code 1992, § 12.05(6)]
Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal
procedure provided by Chapter 2.
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the Sealer of
Weights and Measures where applicant's business requires the use
of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities.
(3) A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business
involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under state law. Such certificate shall state that the
applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious
disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the
application for the license is made.
(c) Fee for registration. At the time the registration is returned, the fee
required by Section 18-56 shall be paid to the Clerk to cover the cost of
processing such registration, and the applicant shall sign a statement
appointing the Clerk his agent to accept service of process in any civil
action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service
performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities
of the applicant, if the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be
served personally. Upon payment of the fee and the signing of the
statement, the Clerk shall register the applicant as a direct seller and
date the entry. Such registration shall be valid for a period of one year
from the date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in
Section 18-293(b).
(d) Issuance of permit. Upon registration by the Clerk as a direct seller and
all is in order, the Clerk shall issue a direct seller's permit. This
procedure applies also to charitable organizations not registered under
W.S.A., § 440.41.
(a) Upon receipt of each application, the Clerk may refer it immediately to
the Chief of Police who may make and complete an investigation of the
statements made in such registration.
(b) The Clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined,
pursuant to the investigation of Subsection (a) of this section, that the
application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate
statement; complaints of a material nature have been received against
the applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages and towns, not
exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business; the
applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance
violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly
related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or the
applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of Section
18-292(b).
Sec. 18-292 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-295
1:158
Sec. 18-295. Revocation. [Code 1992, § 12.05(9)]
Sec. 18-296. through Sec. 18-320. (Reserved)
(a) Registration may be revoked by the City Council, after notice and
hearing, if the registrant made any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement in the application of registration; made any
fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation
in the course of engaging in direct sales; violated any provision of this
article; or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory
violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in
direct selling.
(b) Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the
registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing. Such
notice shall contain the time and place of hearing and a statement of
the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
Sec. 18-295 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-296
1:159

ARTICLE IX
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA SALES
Sec. 18-321. Sale prohibited.
The possession or sale of drug paraphernalia in violation of W.S.A.,
§ 161.577 is prohibited in the City.
Sec. 18-322. through Sec. 18-360. (Reserved)
Sec. 18-321 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-322
1:161

ARTICLE X
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 18-361. Purpose and intent of article. [Code 1992, § 12.12(1)]
It is the purpose and intent of the City that the operation of massage
establishments and massage technicians shall be regulated so as to further
the public interest, safety and welfare by providing minimum building,
sanitation and health standards for such establishments and providing
minimum qualifications for massage technicians.
Sec. 18-362. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 12.12(2)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
HEALTH OFFICER — The health officer of the City or his authorized
representative.
MASSAGE — Any method of rubbing, pressing, stroking, kneading, tapping,
pounding, vibrating or stimulating the superficial parts of the human body
with the hands or with any instrument.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment wherein a principal
function is such that massage is given, engaged in or carried on, or
permitted to be given, engaged in or carried on.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN — Any person who administers to another person
for any form of consideration a bath massage, manipulation of the body,
electric vibration, magnetic stimulation or similar procedure.
REFLEXOLOGY/SHIATSU — Methods of therapy in which the feet, hands
and/or ears are massaged and which does not require removal of clothing.
Sec. 18-363. Sanitation requirements. [Ord. No. 94-14, § I,
7-25-1994; Code 1992, § 12.12(9)]
(a) All premises used by permittees under this article shall be subject to
periodic inspection by the City for safety of the structure and the
propriety of plumbing, electrical wiring, ventilation, heating and
sanitation. One artificial white light of not less than 100 watts shall be
provided in each room where a massage is being administered. Walls
shall be clean and painted with an approved washable, mold resistant
paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given. Floors shall be
free from dust, dirt or refuse. All equipment used in the massage
operation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
Separate restrooms shall be provided for men and women.
Sec. 18-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-363
1:163
Sec. 18-364. Inspection by City Officials. [Code 1992, § 12.12(10)]
The investigating officials of the City, including the health officer, shall
have the right to enter the premises from time to time during regular
business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to enforce
compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations.
If the applicant for either a massage establishment permit or a massage
technician's permit has a communicable or venereal disease, or if the
applicant is in violation of any federal, state or local health law or
regulation, the application may be denied. If a permit has been issued, it
may be revoked or suspended in the manner set forth in this article.
Sec. 18-365. through Sec. 18-380. (Reserved)
(b) Towels, sheets and linens of all types and items for personal use of
operators and patrons shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels,
clothes and sheets shall not be used for more than one person until
relaundered. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets,
provided such paper is used once for each person and discarded into a
sanitary receptacle.
(c) Every massage establishment shall have the following facilities for
patrons:
(1) Number of toilet rooms as required by the state building code.
(2) Shower rooms with hot and cold running water as required by the
state building code.
(3) A minimum of one wash basin shall be provided in the facility.
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections (a) through (c) of this
section, any location upon which the sole form of massage therapy shall
be reflexology/shiatsu, the sanitation requirements beyond those
required by Chapter 14 of this Code shall be waived with the exception
that all premises so used by permittees shall be subject to periodic
inspection by the City for the safety of structure and the propriety of
electrical wiring, ventilation and heating. Walls shall be clean and
painted or wallpapered.
Sec. 18-363 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-365
1:164
DIVISION 2
PERMITS
Subdivision I
In General
Sec. 18-381. Display. [Code 1992, § 12.12(15)]
The owner or operator shall display the massage establishment permit
issued and the permit of every massage technician employed in the
establishment in an open and conspicuous place on the premises.
Sec. 18-382. Notification of changes. [Code 1992, § 12.12(16)]
Every massage establishment owner or operator shall report immediately to
the City Clerk any and all changes of address or ownership of the massage
establishment and any changes or transfers of massage technicians
employed in the business or practice.
Sec. 18-383. Suspension or revocation. [Code 1992, § 12.12(17)]
Any permit issued under this article shall be subject to suspension or
revocation by the Council for violation of any prevision of this article or for
any grounds that would warrant the denial of the issuance of such permit in
the first instance.
Sec. 18-384. Injunctive relief. [Code 1992, § 12.12(18)]
In addition to legal remedies provided in this Code, the operation of any
massage establishment in violation of the terms of this article shall be
deemed a public nuisance and may be enjoined by the City.
Sec. 18-385. through Sec. 18-400. (Reserved)
Subdivision II.
Massage Establishment Permit
Sec. 18-401. Required. [Code 1992, § 12.12(3)]
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged
in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the City, as the
owner or operator of, a massage establishment without having procured a
permit as provided in this division, nor without complying with all statutes,
ordinances and regulations applicable to such establishment and unless
such permit is in effect at the time of such operation.
Sec. 18-381 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-402
1:165
Sec. 18-402. Application; contents. [Code 1992, § 12.12(4);
amended 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
The application for a permit shall be upon a form provided by the City
Clerk and shall set forth the exact nature of the services to be provided, the
proposed place of business and facilities therefor, and the name and address
of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and residence
addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and of
each stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock of the corporation
shall be set forth. If applicant is a partnership, the names and residence
addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners, shall be
set forth. In addition, any applicant for such a permit shall furnish the
following:
Sec. 18-403. Exemptions. [Code 1992, § 12.12(5)]
The permits required by this article shall not apply to hospitals, nursing
homes, sanitaria, persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the
healing arts under the laws of the state, physical therapists, athletic trainers
under contracts or anyone who has been engaged in a massage business
continuously for the three years immediately preceding the effective date of
the ordinance from which this section is derived.
(1) Written proof that the individual or partnership applicant is over 18
years old.
(2) A listing of the name and address of each massage technician employed
or subcontracted by the establishment. Each technician shall provide of
copy of a current and valid State of Wisconsin massage therapist or
bodywork therapist certificate and a copy of a current and valid driver's
license or identification card.
(3) Occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years
immediately preceding the date of application.
(4) The history of the applicant in the operation of a massage establishment
or similar business or occupation, including, but not limited to, whether
or not such person, in previously operating in this or another city or
state under permit, has had such permit revoked or suspended and the
reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to
such action of suspension or revocation.
(5) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations and
the reasons therefor.
(6) Such other information as is necessary to discover the truth of matters
required in the application.
(7) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to deny to the
investigating official the right to take fingerprints and additional
photographs of the applicant.
Sec. 18-402 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-404
1:166
Sec. 18-404. Investigation and fee. [Code 1992, § 12.12(6);
amended 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
All applicants for a massage establishment permit shall be accompanied by
an investigation fee, no part of which shall be refundable. Upon receipt of
the application, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the Building
Department, Fire and Police Departments and City Planning Department,
within 30 days of the date of the application, shall review records or
make an inspection of the premises proposed to be devoted as a massage
establishment and shall make a written recommendation to the Council
concerning compliance with the respective requirements.
Sec. 18-405. Issuance or denial. [Code 1992, § 12.12(7)]
Sec. 18-406. Transfer. [Code 1992, § 12.12(11)]
No massage establishment permit shall be transferable except with the
written approval of the Council. An application for such a transfer shall be
in writing and shall be accompanied by a filing and investigation fee, no part
of which shall be refundable. The application for such transfer shall contain
the same information as required in this section for an initial application
for such permit. If the transfer is denied, notification and reasons for denial
shall be set forth in writing and shall be sent to the applicant by means of
registered or certified mail or hand delivery.
Sec. 18-407. Temporary permit. [Code 1992, § 12.12(8)]
Upon application for a permit, the Clerk may issue a temporary permit
to any applicant who is currently the owner or operator of such an
establishment pending review and investigation of the application. Such
temporary permit shall remain in effect for 30 days, or until the issuance
(a) The Council shall issue such permit if upon investigation and the
reports filed it is found that:
(1) The operation as proposed, if permitted, would comply with all
applicable laws, including but not limited to the City's building,
plumbing, electrical, zoning and health regulations and the
provisions of this article.
(2) The applicant has not been convicted of any offense directly related
to the activity for which applicant is seeking a permit from the City.
(3) The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made
any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of facts in the permit
application or any other document required by the City in
conjunction therewith.
(b) If the application is denied, notification and reasons for denial shall be
set forth in writing and sent to the applicant by means of registered or
certified mail or hand delivery to the address given in the application.
Sec. 18-404 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-407
1:167
of the permit, unless such permit is denied under Section 18-405, in which
event the temporary permit shall become void.
Sec. 18-408. through Sec. 18-428. (Reserved)5
5. Editor’s Note: Former Subdivision III, Massage Technician Permit, adopted Code 1992, §
12.12(12) through (14), as amended, and which comprised Secs. 18-426 through 18-428,
was repealed 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05.
Sec. 18-407 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-408
1:168
ARTICLE XI
[AddeWdE5I-G1H0-T2S0 1A0NDBy MOErAdS. NURo.E 1S0-07]
Sec. 18-430. Application of state codes.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, the provisions of
Chapter 98, Wis. Stats., Weights and Measures and Chapters ATCP 90,
91 and 92 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code are hereby adopted and
by reference made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.
Any act required to be performed, or prohibited by any statute or code
incorporated herein by reference, is required or prohibited by this section.
Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes and codes
incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this section.
Sec. 18-431. State contract; appointment of inspectors; compliance
required.
Sec. 18-432. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES — Weights and measures of every kind,
instruments and devices for weighing and measuring, and any appliances
and accessories used with any or all such instruments and devices, except
meters for the measurement of electricity, gas (natural and manufactured)
or water when the same are operated in a public utility system. "Weights
and measures" shall include devices used or employed in establishing the
size, quantity, extent, area or measurement of quantities, things, produce
or articles for sale, hire or award, or in computing any basic charge or
payment for services rendered on the basis of weight or measure, and
(a) State contract. In order to assure compliance with the requirements of
the State of Wisconsin related to the inspection and certification of
weights and measures, the City shall contract with the State of
Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection,
pursuant to § 98.04(2), Wis. Stats., in lieu of the establishment of a
department of weights and measures.
(b) Appointment of inspectors. The provisions of the contract set forth in
Subsection (a), shall provide for the enforcement of the statutes and
regulations set forth herein, and the City hereby grants the authority
and duties of sealers and inspectors required by this section to the
State of Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer
Protection.
(c) Compliance required. All persons and entities required to be licensed
hereunder shall comply with the enforcement of the statutes and
regulations set forth herein, shall comply with the orders and
inspections of the inspectors appointed herein, and shall comply with
the licensing requirements set forth herein.
Sec. 18-430 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-432
1:169
shall include, but not be limited to, commodities, liquid measuring devices,
scales, weighing, measuring, price verification systems, timing devices and
linear measuring devices.
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES PROGRAM — The program that includes
administration and enforcement of this section, Chapter 98, Wis. Stat,
applicable Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions, and any related
actions.
Sec. 18-433. License required.
Sec. 18-434. Application for license.
An application for a weights and measures license shall be made in writing
on a form provided by the City Clerk and shall be signed by the owner of
the commercial business or by its authorized agent. Such application shall
state the type of business, the type and number of weighing, measuring
and scanning devices used by the business, the location of the devices,
the number of check-out lanes present on the premises, the applicant’s
full name, post office address and telephone number, and whether such
applicant is an individual, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation or other entity. If the applicant is a partnership, the application
shall state the names and addresses of each partner. If the applicant is
a corporation or limited liability company, the application shall state the
names and addresses of all officers and agents of the applicant, including
the registered agent thereof.
Sec. 18-435. Issuance of license; fees.
Upon compliance with this section, the City Clerk shall determine the fee
based on the number of devices, and shall issue a license to the applicant
upon payment of the annual license fee of $20. Each store or other business
shall require a separate license.
Sec. 18-436. License term.
(a) License requirements. Except as provided in Subsection (b), no person
or entity shall use, operate or maintain any commercial weights and
measures as defined in this section unless the person or entity is
licensed by a weights and measures license issued pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
(b) Exemptions. Sales by a person registered as a direct seller or by a
holder of a farmer’s market, vendor or special event permit are exempt
from licensing under this section, but if any person exempted herein is
required by the state to hold a state certificate of examination by the
Sealer of Weights and Measures, a copy of said certificate shall be
provided to the City with his or her application for said permit.
Sec. 18-432 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-436
1:170
Sec. 18-437. Enforcement for nonrenewal.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to notify appropriate City officials and
to order the immediate enforcement of the provisions of this section in cases
involving a failure to renew a weights and measures license. A licensee
shall be prohibited from engaging in any business involved in weights and
measures until such time as a valid license has been obtained under the
provisions of this section.
Sec. 18-438. Fees assessment.
Sec. 18-439. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other remedy, any person who fails to comply with the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than
(a) A license issued under this section shall expire on June 30 of each year.
Except as provided in Subsection (b), the license fee shall not be
prorated for a partial year.
(b) The initial license issued to businesses existing on the effective date of
this section shall be for the balance of the year 2010, and the license fee
shall be 1/2 of the cost of a full-year’s license.
(a) Annual assessment. In addition to the cost of the license, the City Clerk
shall annually assess fees to each licensee based on the number of
devices it holds. The total of the fees assessed and collected under this
subsection shall not exceed the actual costs of the weights and
measures contract between the City and the state.
(b) Failure to pay assessment. If the assessed fee is not paid within 30 days
of the date of the mailing of the invoice, an additional administrative
collection charge of $20 shall be added to the amount due, plus interest
shall accrue on the assessment at the rate of 1.5% per month or fraction
thereof until paid. To the extent permitted by law, if the licensee is the
owner of the real estate where the licensed business is located, any
delinquent assessment shall be extended upon the current or the next
tax bill as a special charge against the real estate premises for current
services. No license shall be issued or renewed under this section if the
licensee is delinquent in the payment of a fee assessed under this
section.
(c) Mailing of notices. Schedules, notices and invoices shall be considered
mailed to a licensee when mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at the licensee’s address as shown on the application form.
(d) Change of ownership. If the ownership of a commercial business
licensed under this section is transferred during a license year, the
owner of the business as of July 1 of the license year shall be liable and
responsible for the payment of the fees assessed under this section.
Sec. 18-436 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 18-439
1:171
$100 nor more than $250 plus court costs. Each day a violation exists or
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 18-439 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 18-439
1:172
Chapter 19
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plan Commission — See Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 6.
Buildings and building regulations — See Ch.
14.
Historical preservation — See Ch. 34.
Impact fees — See Ch. 39.
Subdivisions — See Ch. 66.
Sec. 19-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to § 62.23(2) and (3), Wis. Stats., the City of Lake Geneva is
authorized to prepare and adopt a comprehensive plan as defined in
§ 66.1001(1)(a) and 66.1001(2), Wis. Stats., and create Chapter 19 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Lake Geneva.
Sec. 19-2. Provisions for public participation.
The City Council of the City of Lake Geneva has adopted and followed
written procedures designed to foster public participation in every stage
of the preparation of a comprehensive plan as required by § 66.1001(4)(a),
Wis. Stats.
Sec. 19-3. Recommendation of Plan Commission.
The Plan Commission of the City of Lake Geneva, by a majority vote of the
entire Commission recorded in its official minutes, has adopted a resolution
recommending to the City Council the adoption of the document entitled
"City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive Plan," containing all of the elements
specified in § 66.1001(2), Wis. Stats.
Sec. 19-4. Public hearing.
The City of Lake Geneva has held at least one public hearing on this
chapter, in compliance with the requirements of § 66.1001(4)(d), Wis. Stats.,
and provided numerous other opportunities for public involvement per its
adopted public participation strategy and procedures.
Sec. 19-5. Formal adoption.
The City Council of the City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, does, by enactment
of this chapter, formally adopt the document entitled, "City of Lake Geneva
Comprehensive Plan," pursuant to § 66.1001(4)(c), Wis. Stats., which shall
be on file with the City Clerk as amended from time to time.
Chapter 22
Sec. 18-439 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 19-5
1:173
COURT
Sec. 22-1. Municipal court created. [Code 1992, § 1.11(1)(a); Ord.
No. 04-35, § 1, 9-27-2004]
There is created and established a municipal court under the provisions of
W.S.A. ch. 755 to be designated as the "Municipal Court for the City of Lake
Geneva."
Sec. 22-2. Jurisdiction of municipal judge. [Code 1992, § 1.11(1)(f);
Ord. No. 04-35, § 1, 9-27-2004]
The municipal judge of the municipal court shall have jurisdiction as
provided under W.S.A. §§ 755.045, 755.05 and as otherwise provided state
law.
Sec. 22-3. Term. [Ord. No. 04-35, § 1, 9-27-2004]
The term of office for municipal judge shall be two years. The term shall
commence on May 1 of the year of the judge's election.
Sec. 22-4. Sessions of court. [Ord. No. 04-35, § 1, 9-27-2004]
The municipal court shall be in session as provided under W.S.A. § 755.06.
Chapter 26
ELECTIONS
Sec. 26-1. Description of boundaries of Aldermanic Districts. [Ord.
No. 01-27, § I, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 03-10, § I, 9-8-2003; amended
9-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-24]
(a) Aldermanic District No. I. Commencing at a point at the northwest
corner of the junction of the center of the river channel of the White
River and Geneva Lake; continuing northeasterly along the center of
the main channel of the White River to the center line of Mill Street;
continuing northerly along the center line of Mill Street to the center
line of Sage Street; thence northerly along the center line of Sage
Street extended as a line to the intersection with the center line of
Wisconsin Street; thence easterly along the center line of Wisconsin
Street to the intersection with the center of the main channel of the
White River; thence northeasterly along the center of the river channel
of the White River to a point at which it is intersected by the center line
of Water Street extended eastward; thence westerly along the center
line of Water Street to the center line of Center Street; thence northerly
along the center line of Center Street to the center line of the alley
north of Marshall Street; thence westerly along the center line of that
alley to the center line of Williams Street; thence southerly along the
center line of Williams Street to the center line of Marshall Street;
Sec. 19-5 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 26-1
1:174
thence westerly along the center line of Marshall Street to the center
line of Madison Street; thence southerly along the center line of
Madison Street to the center line of Park Row; thence westerly along
the center line of Park Row to the center line of Clover Street; thence
northerly along the center line of Clover Street to the center line of
Pleasant Street; thence westerly along the center line of Pleasant Street
to the center line of High Street; continuing westerly along the center
line of Conant Street to the western City limit; thence southerly along
the western City limit to a point; thence westerly along the western
City limit to a point; thence southerly along the western City limit to
a point; thence easterly along the western City limit to a point; thence
southerly along the western City limit to a point; thence northwesterly
along the western City limit to a point; thence southeasterly along the
western City limit to a point; thence southwesterly along the western
City limit to a point; thence northwesterly along the western City
limit to a point; thence southerly along the western City limit to a
point; thence southeasterly along the western City limit to the shore
of Geneva Lake; thence northeasterly along the shore of Geneva Lake
to a point; thence easterly along the shore of Geneva Lake to a point;
thence southeasterly along the shore of Geneva Lake to the point of
origin; including the area commonly known as Cobb Park. Aldermanic
District No. I shall be comprised of Voting Wards 1 and 2, as established
by resolution of the Common Council.
(b) Aldermanic District No. II. Commencing at the southeast corner of the
intersection of the center lines of Wells Street and Townline Road and
continuing easterly along the center line of Townline Road to the
eastern City limit; thence southerly along the eastern City limit to a
point; thence westerly along the southern City limit to a point; thence
northwesterly along the southern City limit to a point; thence southerly
along the southern City limit to a point; thence westerly along the
southern City limit to a point; thence southerly along the southern City
limit to a point; thence easterly along the southern City limit to a point;
thence southerly along the southern City limit to a point; thence
westerly along the southern City limit to a point; thence northerly along
the southern City limit to a point; thence westerly along the southern
City limit to the center line of Wells Street; thence southeasterly along
the center line of Wells Street to the southern City limit; thence
westerly along the southern City limit to a point; thence southerly along
the southern City limit to a point; thence westerly along the southern
City limit to a point; thence southerly along the southern City limit to a
point; thence westerly along the southern City limit to a point; thence
northerly along the southern City limit to a point; thence westerly along
the southern City limit to a point; thence southerly along the southern
City limit to a point; thence westerly along the southern City limit to a
point; thence northerly along the western City limit to a point; thence
westerly along the western City limit to a point; thence northerly along
the western City limit to a point; thence easterly along the western City
limit to a point; thence northerly along the western City limit to a point;
thence westerly along the western City limit to a point; thence northerly
Sec. 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 26-1
1:175
along the western City limit to a point; thence easterly along the
western City limit to a point; thence northerly along the western City
limit to a point; thence northeasterly along the western City limit to a
point; thence southerly along the western City limit to a point; thence
easterly along the western City limit to a point; thence northerly along
the western City limit to a point; thence easterly along the western
City limit to a point; thence southerly along the western City limit to
a point; thence easterly along the western City limit to a point; thence
northerly along the western City limit to a point; thence northeasterly
along the western City limit to a point; thence southeasterly along the
western City limit to a point; thence northeasterly along the western
City limit to a point; thence easterly along the western City limit to
a point; thence northeasterly along the western City limit to a point;
thence easterly along the western City limit to a point; thence northerly
along the western City limit to a point; thence northwesterly along the
western City limit to a point; thence northerly along the western City
limit to a point; thence easterly along the western City limit to a point;
thence northeasterly along the western City limit to a point; thence
easterly along the western City limit to a point; thence northerly along
the western City limit to a point; thence westerly along the western
City limit to the shore of Geneva Lake; thence northerly along the
shore of Geneva Lake to the western City limit; thence easterly along
the western City limit to a point; thence northerly along the western
City limit to a point; thence easterly along the western City limit to a
point; thence northerly along the western City limit to a point; thence
easterly along the western City limit to a point; thence southerly along
the western City limit to a point; thence easterly along the western
City limit to a point; thence southerly along the western City limit to a
point; thence westerly along the western City limit to a point; thence
southerly along the western City limit to a point; thence easterly along
the western City limit to a point; thence northerly along the western
City limit to a point; thence westerly along the western City limit to a
point; thence northerly along the western City limit to a point; thence
easterly along the western City limit to a point; thence northerly along
the western City limit to a point; thence westerly along the western
City limit to a point; thence northerly along the western City limit to
a point; thence easterly along the western City limit to a point; thence
northerly along the western City limit to a point; thence easterly along
the western City limit to a point; thence northerly along the western
City limit to a point; thence westerly along the western City limit to a
point; thence southerly along the western City limit to a point; thence
westerly along the western City limit to a point; thence northerly along
the western City limit to a point; thence westerly along the western City
limit to a point; thence southwesterly along the western City limit to a
point; thence easterly along the western City limit to a point; thence
southerly along the western City limit to a point; thence northwesterly
along the western City limit to a point; thence southwesterly along the
western City limit to a point; thence southeasterly along the western
City limit to a point; thence southwesterly along the City limit to the
Sec. 26-1 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 26-1
1:176
shore of Geneva Lake; thence continuing generally northeasterly along
the shore of Geneva Lake to the southeast corner of the junction of
the center of the main channel of the White River and Geneva Lake;
continuing northeasterly along the center of the main channel of the
White River to the center line of Main Street; thence easterly along
the center line of Main Street to the center line of Wells Street; thence
southerly and southeasterly along the center line of Wells Street to the
point of origin; including the area commonly known as Four Seasons
Nature Preserve; excluding the Town of Bloomfield islands located
therein. Aldermanic District No. II shall be comprised of Voting Wards
7, 8 and 9, as established by resolution of the Common Council.
(c) Aldermanic District No. III. Commencing at the southeast corner of the
intersection of the center lines of Main Street and Wells Street and
continuing southeasterly along the center line of Wells Street to the
center line of Townline Road; thence easterly along the center line of
Townline Road to the eastern City limit; thence northwesterly along the
eastern City limit to a point; thence easterly along the eastern City limit
to a point; thence northerly along the eastern City limit to a point;
thence continuing northwesterly along the eastern City limit to a point;
thence northerly along the eastern City limit to a point; thence
northwesterly along the eastern City limit to a point, thence westerly
along the northern City limit to a point; thence northerly along the
northern City limit to a point; thence easterly along the northern City
limit to a point; thence northwesterly along the northern City limit to a
point; thence southerly along the northern City limit to a point; thence
easterly along the northern City limit to a point; thence southerly along
the northern City limit to a point; thence easterly along the northern
City limits to a point; thence southerly along the northern City limits to
a point where the center line of Sheridan Springs Road intersects with
the center line of Center Street; thence southerly along the center line
of Center Street to the center line of Grove Street; thence easterly
along the center line of Grove Street to the center line of Sage Street;
thence southerly along the center line of Sage Street to the center line
of Spring Street; thence easterly along the center line of Spring Street
to the center line of Waverly Street; thence southerly along the center
line of Waverly Street to a point at which Waverly Street is intersected
by a line extended eastward to the northern terminus of Pioneer Drive;
thence southerly along the center line of Pioneer Drive to the center
line of Walworth Street; thence westerly along the center line of
Walworth Street to the center line of Waverly Street; thence southerly
along the center line of Waverly Street to the center line of Water
Street; thence easterly along the center line of Water Street and
continuing easterly along the center line of Water Street extended to
the middle of the river channel of the White River; thence southwesterly
along the center of the river channel of the White River to a point at
which it is intersected by the center line of Wisconsin Street extended
by a line eastward; thence westerly along the center line of Wisconsin
Street extended by a line eastward to the center line of Sage Street;
thence southerly along the center line of Sage Street to the center line
Sec. 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 26-1
1:177
of Mill Street; thence southerly along the center line of Mill Street to
the center line of Main Street; thence easterly along the center line of
Main Street to the point of origin; excluding the Town islands located
therein. Aldermanic District No. III shall be comprised of Voting Wards
5, 6 and 10, as established by resolution of the Common Council.
(d) Aldermanic District No. IV. Commencing at a point a which the center
line of Conant Street intersects with the western City limit and
continuing easterly along the center line of Conant Street to the center
line of High Street; continuing easterly along the center line of Pleasant
Street to the center line of Clover Street; thence southerly along the
center line of Clover Street to the center line of Park Row; thence
easterly along the center line of Park Row to the center line of Madison
Street; thence northerly along the center line of Madison Street to the
center line of Marshall Street; thence easterly along the center line of
Marshall Street to the center line of Williams Street; thence northerly
along the center line of Williams Street to the center line of the alley
north of Marshall Street; thence easterly along the center line of that
alley to the center line of Center Street; thence southerly along the
center line of Center Street to the center line of Water Street; thence
easterly along the center line of Water Street to the center line of
Waverly Street; thence northerly along the center line of Waverly Street
to the center line of Walworth Street; thence easterly along the center
line of Walworth Street to the center line of Pioneer Drive; thence
northerly along the center line of Pioneer Drive to the northern
terminus of Pioneer Drive; thence westerly along a line extended
westward from the northern terminus of Pioneer Drive to the center
line of Waverly Street; thence northerly along the center line of Waverly
Street to the center line of Spring Street; thence westerly along the
center line of Spring Street to the center line of Sage Street; thence
northerly along the center line of Sage Street to the center line of Grove
Street; thence westerly along the center line of Grove Street to the
center line of Center Street; thence northerly along the center line of
Center Street to the center line of Sheridan Springs Road; thence
westerly along the northern City limit to a point; thence northerly along
the northern City limits to a point; thence westerly along the northern
City limits to a point; thence northerly along the northern City limit to a
point; thence easterly along the northern City limit to a point; thence
northerly along the northern City limit to a point; thence westerly along
the northern City limit to a point; thence northerly along the northern
City limit to a point; thence westerly along the northern City limit to a
point; thence southeasterly along the northern City limit to a point;
thence southwesterly along the northern City limit to a point; thence
southeasterly along the northern City limit to a point; thence
northwesterly along the northern City limit to a point; thence northerly
along the northern City limit to a point; thence westerly along the
northern City limit to a point; thence southerly along the northern City
limit to a point; thence westerly along the northern City limit to a point;
thence southerly along the western City limit to a point; thence
westerly along the western City limit to a point; thence southerly along
Sec. 26-1 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 26-1
1:178
Sec. 26-2. Board of Canvassers. [Code 1992, § 1.41]
Sec. 26-3. Election officials. [Code 1992, § 1.42]
Sec. 26-4. Voting machines. [Code 1992, § 1.43]
Sec. 26-5. Primary election. [Code 1992, § 1.44]
The City shall hold a primary election on the third Tuesday of February
if more than two candidates have filed nomination papers for the same
municipal office.
Sec. 26-6. Polling places. [Ord. No. 03-10, § II, 9-8-2003; amended
1-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-01]
There shall be two polling places for the City. Residents of Aldermanic
Districts I and II shall vote at the City Hall building, 626 Geneva Street.
Residents of Aldermanic Districts III and IV shall vote at the fire station,
730 Marshall Street. The City Council may by resolution designate the City
the western City limit to the point of origin; excluding the Town of
Geneva island located therein. Aldermanic District No. IV shall be
comprised of Voting Wards 3 and 4, as established by resolution of the
Common Council.
(a) Constitution. The Board of Canvassers shall consist of the City Clerk
and two citizen members appointed by the Clerk who shall serve twoyear
terms commencing January 1 of each odd-numbered year.
(b) Powers and duties. The Board shall have all the powers and duties set
forth in W.S.A. § 7.53.
(a) Number. Unless otherwise provided under W.S.A. § 7.30, the number of
election officials in the several aldermanic districts of the City shall be
five inspectors. The City Clerk can reduce the number of inspectors by
resolution.
(b) Chairman and Chief Inspector; duties. The City Clerk shall be the
Chairman of the Election Board. On election day, the Chairman shall
select an inspector to act as Chief Inspector whose duty it shall be to
supervise the other election officials in his aldermanic district pursuant
to the directions of the Chairman. The inspectors so selected shall
perform such duties in addition to their other duties or be subject to
removal from office.
(a) The City hereby adopts the use of an electronic voting system
authorized by the state statutes and approved under W.S.A. § 5.91, for
use in the state. [Amended 1-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-01]
(b) The City authorizes the purchase of all necessary materials and
equipment for such system for use in Aldermanic Districts I, II, III and
IV.
Sec. 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 26-6
1:179
Hall building, 626 Geneva Street, as the sole polling place for Aldermanic
Districts I, II, III and IV when only statewide primaries and referendums are
on the ballot, and when low voter turnout is anticipated.
Chapter 30
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Sec. 26-6 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 26-6
1:180
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 30-1. Appropriate chapters of state administrative code
adopted. [Code 1992, § 5.09]
Sec. 30-2. Penalty for violation of chapter. [Code 1992, § 5.15]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person found to be in
violation of any provision of this chapter, or any order, rule or regulation
made under this chapter, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section
1-12.
Sec. 30-3. Ban on burning. [Code 1992, §§ 8.08, 9.11; Ord. No.
05-14, § 1, 6-27-2005; Ord. No. 05-22, § 1, 7-11-2005]
(a) Enumeration. The following chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code relating to fire protection and prevention are adopted and by
reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this section.
Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any chapter of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code incorporated in this section by
reference is required or prohibited by this section:
Chapter
Ind. 1 Safety
ILHR 7 Explosive materials
ILHR 15 Cleaning and dyeing
Ind. 8 Flammable and combustible liquids
ILHR 11 Liquefied petroleum gases
Ind. 221 Spray coating
Ind. 35 Safety in construction
ILHR 50—64 Building and heating, ventilating and air
conditioning
Ind. 65 Fire prevention
ILHR 16 Electrical code, volume 2
(b) Copies on file. Copies of the chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code enumerated in Subsection (a) of this section shall be available for
inspection during reasonable hours in the City Clerk's office.
(a) Purpose of section. The purpose of this section is to prohibit or strictly
control the burning of materials in the City because of the health risk
from air and water pollution which results from such burning. It is felt
that only by completely prohibiting the outside burning of rubbish,
leaves and other combustibles can this unnecessary health risk and
pollution be abated. This section is also adopted in the interests of
safety and to avoid unnecessary property damage within the City.
Sec. 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-3
1:181
(b) Prohibited acts. No person shall burn any leaves, trash, garbage, wood,
grass, rubbish or other material or permit such burning to be done
within the City upon any public street, court, alley or upon any
premises, except as provided in Subsection (d).
(c) Incinerators. The use of outdoor incinerators, drums, barrels or other
containers or outdoor or inside fireplaces for the burning of leaves,
trash, garbage, wood, grass, rubbish or other materials is hereby
prohibited, except as explicitly provided for in Subsection (d) of this
section.
(d) Exceptions. Exceptions to the ban on burning are as follows:
(1) The ban on burning prohibition provided for in this section does not
apply to the burning of charcoal or similar substances outdoors for
noncommercial cooking, as long as such cooking is done without
danger of spread of fire and in a grill or other cooking device.
(2) This section does not apply to fires set for practice and instruction
of firefighters or for the testing of firefighting equipment.
(3) Campfires or commercial cooking fires are allowed only upon a
permit issued by the Fire Chief or his designated representative.
Such permit may only be issued upon application stating the
limited time and limited area in which such campfires are to be
built. Such application must describe the plan for supervision of
such activities and must be signed by the person who will be
responsible for such supervision. The Fire Chief or his designated
representative has the express right to revoke any permits issued
under this section.
(4) In all circumstances where burning is expressly allowed, such
burning must be attended at all times. Further, such burning is
specifically prohibited when the Fire Chief, by notice in the local
newspaper, prohibits such due to extreme fire danger.
(5) The burning of rubbish, leaves, trash and other flammable material
in the City from razed or demolished buildings is prohibited without
a permit in writing issued by the Fire Chief. Such permit shall set
forth the material to be burned, the time and date of the proposed
burning and the location of the site upon which the burning will
take place.
(6) This section does not apply to enclosed above ground fire pits
meeting the NFPA-1 requirements listed in Subsection (e).
(e) Portable fire pits. Portable fire pits meeting the following NFPA-1
requirements shall be permitted:
(1) Portable fire pits shall not be used or kindled on any balcony or
under any overhanging portion or within 10 feet of any structure.
(2) Portable fire pits must be placed on a noncombustible surface.
Sec. 30-3 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 30-3
1:182
Sec. 30-4. Use of siren and red lights. [Code 1992, § 5.10]
Pursuant to the State Motor Vehicle Code and written permit from the Fire
Chief, fire and rescue members, when acting on orders of the Fire Chief,
may use a siren and red lights when on emergency calls.
Sec. 30-5. Mutual aid. [Code 1992, § 5.11]
Mutual aid shall be granted to any community or fire department requesting
the same following notification to the Chief of the Fire Department and in
accordance with mutual aid agreements on file with the City under strict
orders and supervision of the Fire Chief.
Sec. 30-6. through Sec. 30-30. (Reserved)
(3) Portable fire pits shall be listed by a nationally recognized testing
organization or acceptance to AHJ.
(4) Burning of yard waste or garbage refuse is prohibited; only clean,
dry, untreated wood can be used.
(5) Flammable or combustible liquids shall not be used to ignite the
fire.
(6) Smoke shall be limited and shall not be a nuisance to neighbors or
public roads.
Sec. 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-6
1:183

ARTICLE II
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
Sec. 30-31. Purpose and intent of article. [Ord. No. 95-9, § I,
7-10-1995]
The intent of this article is designed to require the installation of automatic
fire suppression systems for the better protection of life and property within
the City.
Sec. 30-32. Buildings requiring installation. [Ord. No. 95-9, § I,
7-10-1995]
(a) This article requires the installation of an automatic fire sprinkler
system in the following buildings:
(1) Multifamily;
(2) Industrial;
(3) Government buildings;
(4) Hotels;
(5) Dormitories;
(6) Nursing;
(7) Old age and other similar institutional buildings;
(8) Commercial;
(9) Institutional;
(10) Public buildings;
(11) Motels;
(12) Rooming houses; and
(13) Convalescent.
(b) A complete approved automatic fire sprinkler protection system shall
be provided in all the buildings listed in Subsection (a) of this section,
except multifamily, as follows:
(1) Fire-resistive buildings. Throughout every building which is either:
a. Ten thousand square feet or more in total area;
b. Is over one story in height and exceeds 6,000 square feet in
total area; or
c. Is over two stories in height.
Sec. 30-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-32
1:185
Sec. 30-33. Accessory buildings and special principal building
areas. [Ord. No. 95-9, $ I, 7-10-1995]
Approved automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed and maintained
in the following accessory buildings and special principal building areas as
follows:
(2) Nonfire-resistive buildings. Throughout every building which is
either:
a. Five thousand square feet or more in total area; or
b. Is over two stories in height.
(1) Garages. Automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed in garages as
follows:
a. Garages within, attached to above or below other occupancies.
b. Garages used as passenger terminals.
(2) Basements and subbasements. In the basements and subbasements of
principal and accessory buildings approved automatic sprinkler
equipment shall be installed as follows:
a. All basements having a total floor area of 2,500 square feet or
more.
b. All subbasements regardless of size.
(3) Multifamily buildings. All multifamily buildings which exceed the
thresholds established in Chapter ILHR 66 Uniform Multifamily
dwellings, Table 66.33-B, shall have automatic fire sprinklers installed
unless the building is provided with two-hour fire separations as
required by Chapter ILHR 66.
(4) Day-care centers, including adult day-care centers. All buildings in daycare
centers and adult day-care centers, regardless of size, shall have
complete sprinkler protection throughout.
(5) Community-based residential facilities (CBRF). All buildings in
community-based residential facilities (CBRF), regardless of size, shall
have sprinkler protection throughout.
(6) Theaters and assembly buildings. All buildings in theaters and assembly
buildings, regardless of size, shall have sprinkler protection
throughout.
(7) Hospitals, nursing, convalescent, old age and other similar institutional
buildings. All buildings of nonfire-resistive construction in hospitals,
nursing, convalescent, old age and other similar institutional buildings,
regardless of size, shall have sprinkler protection throughout.
Sec. 30-32 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 30-33
1:186
Sec. 30-34. High-hazard occupancies. [Ord. No. 95-9, § I,
7-10-1995]
(8) Schools, colleges and universities. All buildings of nonfire-resistive
construction in schools, colleges and universities, regardless of size,
shall have sprinkler protection throughout.
(9) Dormitories, fraternities and sorority houses. All buildings in
dormitories, fraternities and sorority houses, regardless of size, shall
have sprinkler protection throughout.
(10) Hotels, motels and rooming houses. All buildings of nonfire-resistive
construction in hotels, motels and rooming houses, regardless of size,
shall have sprinkler protection throughout.
(11) Commercial, industrial and institutional garages and service centers.
Any building with a total area of 3,000 square feet in area or greater in
commercial, industrial and institutional garages and service centers,
regardless of size, shall have sprinkler protection throughout.
(a) Approved automatic fire suppression equipment shall be installed and
maintained in the following buildings, regardless of size, in which it is
expected there will be high-hazard occupancy, including, but not limited
to:
(1) Aircraft hangars.
(2) Dry-cleaning establishments using or storing gasoline or other
volatile flammable liquids.
(3) Enameling or Japanning operations.
(4) Mills: sugar, starch, cereal, feed, hay flour and grist mills.
(5) Paint and varnish: manufacturing, storing, handling, spraying and
other related operations.
(6) Paint stripping establishments.
(7) Manufacture and storage of pyroxylin products.
(8) Smoke houses.
(9) Storage of explosive gages under pressure (15 psi and over 5,400
cubic feet) such as acetylene, hydrogen and natural gas.
(10) Storage of materials with a flashpoint under 200° F., such as
celluloid products, kerosene, etc.
(11)Woodworking and other such establishments with combustible
dust.
(12) Chemical works and/or storage facilities.
(13) Explosive and pyrotechnics manufacturing.
Sec. 30-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-34
1:187
Sec. 30-35. Approval of plans. [Ord. No. 95-9, § I, 7-10-1995]
Sec. 30-36. Installation methods and standards. [Ord. No. 95-9, § I,
7-10-1995]
(14) Oil refineries.
(b) This article applies to all new construction after the effective date of the
ordinance from which this section is derived.
(a) Submission for review by Fire Chief. Prior to the installation of any
portion of a fire suppression system, or the alteration to an existing fire
suppression system, plans shall be submitted to the Fire Chief for
review. All fire suppression systems must comply with all applicable
NFPA standards.
(b) Stamping, signing and sealing of plans. Four copies of the plans,
specifications and calculations shall be submitted for review; reviewed
plans shall be stamped "conditionally approved by the Fire Prevention
Bureau." Two copies will be returned to the submitter. One copy with
the "conditionally approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau" stamp must
remain on the job site at all times. All copies of the plans, specifications
and calculations submitted shall be signed and sealed by a state
registered architect, fire protection engineer, fire protection designer
or the qualifier before the fire suppression contractor installs the work.
Plans and/or calculations which are not signed and sealed will not be
reviewed.
(c) Conditional approval; effect. The City Fire Department's conditional
approval of fire suppression plans does not affirm the accuracy of any
calculations performed by the contractor. Full responsibility for the
accuracy of the system design and calculations is the responsibility of
the fire protection contractor.
(d) Work not to commence prior to plan review and permit issuance. No
work may begin on the installation of any fire suppression system or the
alteration of an existing system until the plans, specifications and
calculations have been reviewed by the City Fire Department and a
permit for installation is obtained.
(a) Approved fire suppression systems shall be installed in accordance with
current National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards and/or
recommended practices which are applicable.
(b) All fire sprinkler systems shall use hydrant water flow test data which is
dated no greater than six months prior to the submission of the
sprinkler plans for review. The data shall be obtained during peak water
demand conditions, and conducted in such a manner that it represents
true orientation (direction of flow) of the supply to the system being
designed.
Sec. 30-34 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 30-36
1:188
Sec. 30-37. Maintenance of equipment. [Ord. No. 95-9, § I,
7-10-1995]
Sec. 30-38. Inspections. [Ord. No. 95-9, § I, 7-10-1995]
Sec. 30-39. Testing of systems. [Ord. No. 95-9, § I, 7-10-1995]
The following tests shall be witnessed by the Fire Department or its
representative:
(c) All sprinkler system designs shall be based on no more than 90% of the
available water supply. A minimum safety factor of 10% shall be
maintained.
(d) All fire suppression systems shall be installed in accordance with all
applicable state codes.
(e) Fire Department connections. The location of all Fire Department
connections shall be approved by the Fire Chief.
(f) Audible alarm bells are required on the inside and outside of all
buildings.
(a) All fire suppression equipment shall be maintained in proper working
order in accordance with the state code.
(b) The Fire Department shall be notified prior to shutting down any
system for any reason and again when the system has been restored to
service.
(a) All fire sprinkler systems shall be inspected, tested and maintained in
accordance with NFPA 25, 1991 edition. A copy of all inspection and
testing reports shall be sent to the Fire Department on a yearly basis
and/or if requested by the Fire Chief or Fire Inspector.
(b) Inspections of fire suppression systems during construction will be
made by the Fire Department or their designated representative.
(c) The fire protection contractor must request an inspection prior to any
fire protection system component being concealed.
(d) The fire protection contractor must request an inspection upon
completion of the system installation.
(e) The fire protection contractor must request an inspection 24 hours in
advance.
(1) Fire protection water supply hydrostatic test.
(2) Fire protection water supply flushing.
(3) Sprinkler system hydrostatic test.
(4) Standpipe system hydrostatic test.
Sec. 30-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-39
1:189
Sec. 30-40. Fees. [Ord. No. 95-9, § I, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 06-04, § I,
2-27-2006]
Fees for the following items shall be charged;
(5) Dry sprinkler system air/hydrostatic test.
(6) Dry pipe valve trip test.
(7) Deluge system trip test.
(8) Fire pump acceptance test.
(9) Carbon dioxide system acceptance tests.
(10) Dry chemical system acceptance tests.
(11) Foam system acceptance tests.
(12) Special agent system acceptance tests.
(13) Standpipe system acceptance tests.
(14) Full flow backflow preventer tests.
(15) Sprinkler system acceptance tests.
(16) Foam system acceptance tests.
(17) Fire hydrant flow tests.
(18) The fire protection contractor must request the Fire Department to
witness all testing at least 24 hours in advance.
(1) Basic fire sprinkler plan review.
(2) Each additional review of the same system.
(3) Fire pumps per review.
(4) Modifications to existing sprinkler systems.
(5) Review of additional hydraulic calculations only.
(6) Fire protection underground piping.
(7) Fire hydrants.
(8) Fire hose connections.
(9) Standpipe systems.
(10) All other suppression systems.
(11) Inspections.
(12)Witness tests.
Sec. 30-39 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 30-41
1:190
Sec. 30-41. Permits. [Ord. No. 95-9, § I, 7-10-1995]
Permits are required for all installations prior to installation of any
equipment. Permits will not be issued until the plans and calculations have
been reviewed.
Sec. 30-42. Additions or change of use. [Ord. No. 95-19, § I,
9-22-1995]
All existing public, commercial and industrial buildings 6,000 square feet or
more in size, exterior wall dimensions, shall conform to this article. If life
occupancy is present in any such structure, this article will apply regardless
of size as follows:
Sec. 30-43. through Sec. 30-55. (Reserved)
(1) Application of article. This article applies to, but is not limited to, places
of employment, schools and municipal, state and federal government
structures.
(2) Additions of 50% or more of gross area of structure. This article refers
to and is intended to apply to additions to the structures referred to in
Section 30-42 wherein the addition is 50% or more of gross area or
more than the original structure. In such case the entire building shall
be provided with the requirements of this article.
(3) Additions of between 25% to 50% of gross area of structure. Where the
addition to any applicable structure under this article is between 25%
and 50% of the gross area that part of the building which is added must
meet the requirements of this article. The areas of the structure or
building which have not changed do not need to meet the requirements
of this article, unless the remodeling includes dwelling units.
(4) Incremental additions. In the event of incremental periodic additions to
an existing structure any such additions from the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived shall be added together
(gross area) and when any such additions total at least 25% of the gross
area of the original structure this article and its requirements shall
apply to all additions added from the effective date of this ordinance
from which this article is derived.
(5) Change of use. If the use of an existing public, commercial or industrial
building is changed to any new use the building shall be made to comply
with this article. Hotels, motels and other similar buildings, if converted
to condominiums or other private ownership, shall be made to comply
with the requirements of this article.
Sec. 30-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-43
1:191

ARTICLE III
FIRE DEPARTMENT
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 30-56. Recognized; delegation of duties. [Code 1992, § 5.01]
The Lake Geneva Fire Department is officially recognized as the Fire
Department of the City, and the duties of firefighting and fire prevention in
the City are delegated to such Department.
Sec. 30-57. Appropriations. [Code 1992, § 5.03]
The City Council shall appropriate funds for Fire Department operations
and for such apparatus and equipment for the use of the Fire Department as
the Council may deem expedient and necessary to maintain efficiency and
properly protect life and property from fire.
Sec. 30-58. Compensation of officers and members. [Code 1992,
§ 5.04]
The officers and members of the Fire Department shall receive such
compensation from the City as may from time to time be fixed by the City
Council.
Sec. 30-59. Emergency response fees. [Ord. No. 01-17, § I,
2-12-2001; Ord. No. 04-26, § I, 7-12-2004]
Emergency response fees by the City Fire Department shall be charged as
follows:
(1) Ambulance service transport charge. An ambulance service transport
fee shall be adopted by resolution of the Common Council and shall be
maintained as fee schedules in the office of the City Clerk. The
ambulance service transport charge may be waived by mutual aid
agreement and/or automatic aid agreements entered into between the
City and other municipalities. [Amended 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
15-07]
(2) Fire run/emergency medical service (EMS) charge. A fire run/
emergency medical service charge under this chapter, shall be set from
time to time as recommended by the Police and Fire Commission and
approved by Common Council and maintained on a schedule kept in the
City Clerk's office and at the Fire Department.
(3) The emergency response fees provided for in this chapter may be
waived in whole or in part by the Police and Fire Commission based
upon a person's ability to pay or age.
Sec. 30-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-59
1:193
Sec. 30-60. Fire and emergency medical services fees. [Ord. No.
05-38, § I, 12-12-2005]
The City shall charge the following fire service and emergency medical
service fees:
Sec. 30-61. through Sec. 30-75. (Reserved)
(4) Emergency response fees shall be invoiced to persons and/or business
organizations whose negligence and/or misconduct results in an
unnecessary emergency response from the City Fire Department.
(5) Emergency response fees shall be invoiced to persons involved in
emergencies requiring the City Fire Department response which occurs
on state highways and roads maintained by the state.
(1) Fire apparatus and personnel fees.
(2) EMS first response and ambulance transport fees.
(3) Permit fees.
(4) Fire protection systems.
The fire service and emergency service fees shall be adopted by
resolution of the Common Council and shall be maintained as fee
schedules in the office of the City Clerk.
Sec. 30-59 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 30-61
1:194
DIVISION 2
FIRE CHIEF
Sec. 30-76. Presiding officer. [Code 1992, § 5.06(2)]
The Chief shall preside at all meetings, call special meetings, preserve order
and decide all points of order that may arise.
Sec. 30-77. Command at fires. [Code 1992, § 5.06(3)]
The Chief shall be present at all fires and shall have complete command
of and entire responsibility for all firefighting operations, plan the control
of the same, direct the action of the Department when it arrives at a fire,
observe that the Department does its duty, grant leaves of absence at a fire
when he deems it proper and see that the firefighting apparatus is kept in
proper condition at all times. In the absence of the Chief, the next ranking
officer of the Department assume command.
Sec. 30-78. Reports. [Code 1992, § 5.06(4)]
The Chief shall submit a written report to the City Council each year, and at
such other times as he deems desirable, relating to the condition of various
pieces of apparatus and appurtenances, the number of hydrants and the
condition of the same, the number of fires occurring since the previous
report and the date of the same and the loss occasioned thereby, the
number of members of each company, the total number of active members
in the Department and resignations and expulsions from the Department.
He shall also report upon the drill and training program of the Department,
together with such other pertinent information, including recommendations
for improvements, as he deems proper and necessary for the operation of
the Department.
Sec. 30-79. Enforcement of fire prevention ordinances. [Code 1992,
§ 5.06(5)]
The Fire Chief and Fire Inspector shall enforce all fire prevention
ordinances of the City and state laws and regulations pertaining to fire
prevention and shall keep citizens informed of fire prevention methods and
on the activities of the Department.
Sec. 30-80. Fire record book. [Code 1992, § 5.06(6)]
The Fire Chief shall keep records of every fire to which the Department
was called in a fire record book and shall enter the locality of the fire, the
time the alarm was received, the cause of the fire, where the fire started,
the cause of delay (if any) in responding, the method of extinguishment and
the equipment used, the amount of insurance carried on the building and
its contents, the estimated fire loss, the time the fire was extinguished, the
names of the men responding and general remarks.
Sec. 30-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-81
1:195
Sec. 30-81. Apparatus inventory. [Code 1992, § 5.06(7)]
The Fire Chief shall keep an inventory of all apparatus, equipment and
hoses, individually numbered and showing the dates and results of tests on
each length.
Sec. 30-82. Additional duties. [Code 1992, § 5.06(8)]
The Fire Chief shall perform such other duties as are usually incumbent on
the commanding officer of a fire department.
Sec. 30-83. through Sec. 30-95. (Reserved)
Sec. 30-81 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 30-83
1:196
DIVISION 3
ORGANIZATION AND CONTROL
Sec. 30-96. Bylaws. [Code 1992, § 5.02]
The Fire Department shall adopt bylaws for its control, management and
government and for regulating the business and proceedings of the
Department, which bylaws, after adoption by the members of the
Department, shall not become effective until approved by the City Council.
Amendments shall be adopted in the same manner.
Sec. 30-97. Organization. [Code 1992, § 5.05]
Sec. 30-98. Control and care of apparatus. [Code 1992, § 5.07]
(a) Generally. The organization and internal regulation of the Fire
Department shall be governed by the provisions of this article and by
such bylaws adopted by the Department as are approved by the City
Council, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(b) Selection of officers. The election of the secretary, treasurer and such
social officers as the bylaws may require, shall be held at the annual
meeting of the Department in the manner provided in the bylaws. In
case of any vacancy, the Chief shall appoint a member in good standing
to fill the office until the next annual election.
(c) Chief's appointment. The Police and Fire Commission shall appoint the
Chief of the Fire Department, who shall hold office during good
behavior, subject to suspension or removal by the Commission for
cause.
(d) Subordinate selection. The selection process for members of the
Department shall be as follows:
(1) Volunteer members. Volunteer members of the Department shall be
selected according to the bylaws.
(2) Full-time members. Full-time members of the Fire Department
shall be selected by the procedures prescribed in W.S.A., § 62.13.
(a) Chief responsible. The Fire Chief shall have control of all apparatus
used by the Department and shall be responsible for its proper
maintenance. Emergency repairs may be authorized by the Chief.
(b) Use. No apparatus shall be used for any purpose except for firefighting
within the City, or in training therefor, except pursuant to an agreement
approved by the City Council after the Chief has given his
recommendations on such use. With the approval of the Chief, such
apparatus may be used for emergency purposes within the City. A
written report of all such uses shall be made quarterly to the City
Council.
Sec. 30-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-98
1:197
Sec. 30-99. Authority of Department at fires. [Code 1992, § 5.08]
Sec. 30-100. Fire prevention code. [Ord. No. 04-25, § I, 7-12-2004]
The current and subsequent additions of NFPA 1. Fire Prevention Code and
Chapter 32 of that code are adopted and by reference made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth in this section.
(c) Injury to equipment. No person shall wilfully injure any hose, hydrant or
fire apparatus belonging to the City. No vehicle or railroad equipment
shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department when
laid down on any street, private driveway, track or other place to be
used at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire
Department official in command.
(a) Police powers at fires. The Fire Chief or the Fire Department officers in
command at any fire shall have full and complete police authority at
fires. Any officer of the Department may cause the arrest of any person
who fails to give the right-of-way to the Fire Department in responding
to a fire.
(b) Control at fires. The Fire Chief may prescribe certain limits in the
vicinity of any fire within which no person except firefighters and police
officers and those admitted by order of any officer of the Fire
Department may come. The Chief may cause the removal of any
property whenever it becomes necessary for the preservation of such
property from fire, to prevent the spread of fire, or to protect the
adjoining property and during the progress of any fire, he may order the
removal or destruction of any property necessary to prevent the further
spread of fire. He may also cause the removal of all wires or other
facilities and the turning off of all electricity or other services where the
same impedes the work of the Department during the progress of a fire.
(c) Entering premises. Any firefighter acting under the direction of the Fire
Chief or other officer in command may enter upon the premises
adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property then on
fire to extinguish such fire. If any person hinders, resists or obstructs a
firefighter in the discharge of his duty as provided in this section, the
person so offending shall be guilty of resisting a firefighter in the
discharge of his duties.
(d) Duties of bystanders. Every person who is present at a fire shall be
subject to the orders of the Fire Chief or officer in command and may be
required to assist in fighting the fire or in removing or guarding
property. Such officer may cause the arrest of any person who refuses
to obey such orders.
Sec. 30-98 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 30-101
1:198
Sec. 30-101. Records inspection. [Ord. No. 04-25, § I, 7-12-2004]
Copies of NFPA 1. Fire Prevention Code (Chapter 32) shall be on file and
open to inspection in the office of the City Clerk and Fire Prevention Bureau
for the City.
Sec. 30-102. through Sec. 30-115. (Reserved)
Sec. 30-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-102
1:199

ARTICLE IV
FIREWORKS
Sec. 30-116. Possession, storage, sale or use. [Code 1992, § 9.10;
Ord. No. 98-7, § I, 8-10-1998]
(a) Prohibited. No person or organization, shall possess, store, sell, offer to
expose for sale, use discharge or cause to be discharged, ignited or
otherwise set into action within the City any type of fireworks including
the following fireworks as defined in W.S.A. § 167.10:
(1) A fuseless device that is designed to produce audible or visible
effects or audible and visible effects, and that contains less than
one-quarter grain of explosive mixture.
(2) A device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic smokeproducing
mixtures, at a controlled rate, and that produces audible
or visible effects, or audible and visible effects.
(3) A cylindrical fountain that consists of one or more tubes and that is
classified by the Federal Department of Transportation as a
Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50.
(4) A cone fountain that is classified by the Federal Department of
Transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR
173.50.
(b) Nonfireworks. Under this section, "fireworks" do not include toy caps,
sparklers, toy snakes or confetti poppers.
(c) Fireworks users permit. Fireworks user permits may be issued to
individuals or civic organizations upon written application to the
Common Council pursuant to Section 167.10(3). All fireworks user
permit applications shall be reviewed by the Fire Chief. Any permits
issued under this section shall include the requirement that the
fireworks display be supervised by trained personnel certified in the
safe handling of fireworks. The permits shall also require proof of
liability insurance in an amount acceptable to the Common Council.
Sec. 30-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-116
1:201

ARTICLE V
FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
Sec. 30-117. Definitions. [Ord. No. 00-7, § I, 5-8-2000]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
APPROVAL — With the approval and consent of the Fire Chief of the City or
his/her designee.
KNOX BOX ENTRY SYSTEMS — Approved key boxes manufactured by the
Knox Company that meet the specification and approval of the City Fire
Department. These key boxes are for the exclusive use of the City Fire
Department for emergency purposes only.
REQUIRED SYSTEMS — Fire alarm systems that are required by this article
or of other state, local or federal law and ordinance. Required system
shall also include systems agreed to by the City Fire Department and the
building owner/occupant as an alternative to other code requirements that
are difficult or impractical to comply with.
Sec. 30-118. Adoption of fire alarm systems requirements. [Ord. No.
00-7, § I, 5-8-2000]
Sec. 30-119. Applicability. [Ord. No. 00-7, § I, 5-8-2000]
These requirements of this article shall apply to all new buildings within the
inspection boundaries of the City Fire Department.
(a) The installation, maintenance, operation and transmission of fire alarm
systems, to which the City Fire Department may respond including nonrequired
systems, shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
National Fire Protection Association Standard 72 (National Fire Code)
1996 Edition or currently adopted edition. In addition fire alarm
systems shall be subject to the amendments set forth in Section 30-120
of this article.
(b) This article adopts by reference the following codes and standards as
they apply to automatic fire alarm systems:
NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm Code 1996 Edition;
NFPA 70 National Electrical Code;
NFPA 13 Installation of Sprinkler Systems 1996 Edition;
(c) If there is any conflict between the language of this article and the
language of the aforementioned codes and standards, the most
restrictive shall apply.
(1) New buildings should comply with the requirement of this article before
the building is occupied or used for any purpose other than its
construction.
Sec. 30-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-119
1:203
Sec. 30-120. Amendments. [Ord. No. 00-7, § I, 5-8-2000]
The codes adopted in Section 30-118 of this article are hereby amended as
follows:
(2) False alarms provisions shall apply to both new and existing structures.
(3) All cost associated with the installation, operation, transmission, and
maintenance of automatic fire alarm systems shall be borne by the
building owner and/or occupant.
(1) Transmission of alarm signals:
a. All alarm signals emanating from automatic fire alarm systems
shall transmit by dedicated circuit.
b. Non-required systems may transmit clear signals via digital
communicator with a daily test signal or other means to a UL listed
central station. All alarm signals received by the central station
must be relayed to the City Fire Department alarm center via
public switched telephone network at (414) 248-4434 or at said
number as established from time to time. A copy of the current UL
listing for central station alarm receiving locations shall be on file
at the City Fire Department. Alarm installation company shall
provide for current UL listing for central stations. Note: After
September 25, 1999, the area code will change to (262).
c. Systems that transmit alarm via recorder or digital voices shall be
prohibited. No fire alarm system shall be programmed to directly
dial 911 or other emergency and/or nonemergency number of the
City Fire Department.
(2) Registration and permits:
a. All new automatic fire alarm systems, and modification to existing
systems, shall be reviewed by the City Fire Department prior to
installation or modification.
1. A minimum of two sets of detailed plans and specifications
shall be submitted to the City Fire Department before any
automatic fire alarm system is installed or altered.
2. A minimum of one set of approved plans and specifications
shall be on the job at all times.
3. A plan review fee of $50 shall be submitted with the detailed
plans. A fee of $25 per hour will be charged for witness testing
of the system.
4. All fire alarm systems shall be inspected by and tested in the
presence of the City Fire Department Fire Prevention Bureau
before it is placed in service. An appointment for acceptance
and testing shall be made five days prior to the final testing.
Sec. 30-119 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 30-120
1:204
5. The authority having jurisdiction shall be authority to
disconnect primary power and seal the panel a minimum of 24
hours prior to the acceptance test. If seal is broken or opened
the final acceptance test will not be done that day and
additional charges will be incurred.
b. All fire alarm systems shall be registered with the City Fire
Department Fire Prevention Bureau on a form provided. A list of at
least three key holders including home, work and pager telephone
numbers shall be submitted on supplied forms prior to acceptance.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner/occupant to update this
registration whenever changes occur.
(3) Knox box entry system:
a. All new and existing occupancies having automatic fire alarm
systems shall have approved Knox Box systems installed in a
location approved by the City Fire Department.
b. The Knox Box shall contain all keys for all locked areas of the
building as required by the City Fire Department. Keys shall
include, but not be limited to, all areas of the building, automatic
fire alarm systems, pull station re-setting tools, all elevators and
elevator machine rooms and sprinkler systems riser rooms.
c. The City Fire Department shall be notified immediately of changes
of locks and/or keys for the building to allow for the placement of
new keys in the Knox Box.
(4) Zoning of fire alarm systems: Shall be, per NFPA 72, 1-5-7.
(5) Additional specific system requirements:
a. All fire alarm control panels shall be capable of silencing the audio
notification signal without re-setting the panel. The silencing
switch shall be a single switch requiring no keys, access codes or
special knowledge. The re-set switch shall be a single switch
requiring no keys, access codes or special knowledge. A key may be
used to actuate a remote annunciator panel to silence a system.
b. All wiring should conform to the most recent requirements of NFPA
72 (National Fire Alarm Code) and the National Electrical Code.
c. All smoke detectors should have indicting lights that illuminate
when the detector activates. When smoke detectors are installed in
any location not visible from the floor area, remote indicating lights
shall be provided in a location approved by the City Fire
Department.
d. The installation of safety guards over alarm initiating devices may
be required when such devices are subject to damage or frequent
malicious activation.
Sec. 30-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-120
1:205
Sec. 30-121. Penalties. [Ord. No. 00-7, § I, 5-8-2000]
e. All sprinkler system control valves and associated control functions
shall be equipped with electric supervision including pump power,
pump run and room temperature etc. Supervised functions shall
transmit a separate and distinct supervisory alarm. Said alarm
should automatically restore when the supervised function is
restored to the normal position and indicates restoration at the
remote alarm monitoring station.
f. Alarm system indicating panels shall be placed so that firefighting
personnel do not have to pass through or into the structure any
further than the main entrance to view or operate the alarm panel.
(6) Vacant buildings. The alarm system shall remain in operation at all
times.
(7) Maintenance and repair of systems. All building owners and/or
occupants shall maintain their automatic fire alarm systems in good
operating condition at all times.
a. Every automatic fire alarm system shall be inspected annually or
more frequently if required by NFPA 72, by a licensed fire alarm
contractor. Systems shall be cleaned when necessary. Proof of such
inspection shall be filed with the City Fire Department Fire
Prevention Bureau with 15 days of the inspection.
b. If a system malfunctions or otherwise needs repair, the building
owner and/or occupant shall see that said repairs are performed by
a licensed fire alarm contractor or electrician within 24 hours of
discovery.
c. Automatic fire alarm systems that transmit more than two false
alarms in a twenty-four-hour period or more three false alarms in a
seven-day period may be taken out of service by the City Fire
Department. Automatic fire alarm systems taken out of service
necessitates the establishment of a human fire watch, 24 hours per
day until the system is repaired and the entire system is functional.
(a) False alarms, administrative charges:
(1) The owner or occupant shall be charged for fire protection system
malfunctions and/or false alarms generating true fire alarm
condition in excess of three per calendar year at the following
rates:
Fourth false alarm $300
Fifth and all subsequent false alarms
(each)
$500
(2) The owner or occupant shall be charged for fire protection system
trouble or supervisory alarms in excess of five per calendar year,
Sec. 30-120 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 30-121
1:206
Sec. 30-122. Annual fire prevention inspection fees. [Ord. No.
04-01, § I, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 04-37, § I, 12-13-2004; Ord. No.
05-03, § I, 2-14-2005; 11-27-2017 by Ord. No. 17-17]
that results from any reason other than system testing,
maintenance, electrical service, telephone line, or weather
malfunction at the rate of $300 per alarm.
(3) No person shall deliberately or maliciously turn in an alarm of fire
when in fact that person knows that no fire exists. No person shall
activate any automatic fire alarm system or installed fire protection
system for purpose other than emergency, maintenance, drills or
prescribed testing. A fine of $500 shall be charged for false alarms
and/or up to 30 days' imprisonment.
(4) This subsection is intended to impose a strict liability on the
person, business, corporation or other entity responsible for alarm
connections to alarm receiving firm to which the Fire Department
has responded and shall be applied regardless of the cause of the
false alarm except those situations as defined in Section
30-121(a)(2). Failure to pay such administrative charge(s) in and of
itself shall constitute a violation of this section.
(b) System resetting:
(1) No person other than a fire official, shall cause a fire alarm system
to be reset once an alarm has been activated. This section will not
apply to alarms generated for testing or fire drills when the Fire
Department has been notified of the testing or drill.
(2) Alarm system audio warning devices may be silenced by the
building owner/occupant, but only after a thorough search of the
building has been conducted and it is determined that no fire or
other emergency exists.
(a) An annual fire prevention inspection fee is established for the City.
(b) An annual fire prevention inspection fee shall be charged to the
property owner for the required inspections of each building, structure
and premises as specified in the fire prevention inspection fee schedule.
(c) Fire prevention inspection fees shall be established by the City Council
by resolution as amended from time to time.
(d) Inspection fees shall be charged to the property owner. Any fees unpaid
by November 1 of each year shall be entered upon the tax roll as a
special charge against the property and all proceedings in relation to
the collection, return, and sale of the property for delinquent real estate
taxes shall apply to the inspection fee.
Sec. 30-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 30-122
1:207
Chapter 34
HISTORICAL PRESERVATION
Sec. 30-122 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 30-122
1:208
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 34-1. Purpose and intent of chapter. [Ord. No. 96-2, § I,
1-22-1996]
In accordance with the authority granted by W.S.A. § 62.23(7)(em), it is
declared a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of historic structures, sites, and districts that
represent and define the City's cultural, social, economic, political and
architectural history is a public necessity and is required in the interest
of health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people. Furthermore, the
purpose of this section is to:
Sec. 34-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 96-2, § II, 1-22-1996]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALTERATION — Any act or process which changes the exterior features of
a property or an improvement which has been designated for preservation
pursuant to the provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The certificate of approval issued
by the Historic Preservation Commission approving alteration, construction
or demolition of a designated historic structure or historic site.
COMMISSION — The Historic Preservation Commission established under
Article II with the power and duties granted under this chapter.
CONSTRUCTION — Any act or process which requires a building permit.
DEMOLITION — Any act or process which destroys or removes, in whole
or in part, an improvement which has been designated for preservation
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter
demolition requires a permit.
(1) Foster civic awareness and pride in the notable accomplishments of the
past.
(2) Educate the public as to the need and value of a City historic
preservation program and its enhancements of the quality of life.
(3) Stabilize and improve the property values.
(4) Enhance the visual and aesthetic character of the City.
(5) Protect the City's special architectural history and character for its
residents and guests.
(6) Serve as a support and stimulus to business, industry and tourism
thereby strengthening the economy of the City.
Sec. 34-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 34-2
1:209
EXTERIOR FEATURES — The architectural style, the general design and
arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or improvement, and
natural features.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area designated by the City Council on
recommendation of the Historic Preservation Commission that contains
two or more historic structures or sites and which has been designated a
historic district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
HISTORIC SITE — Any parcel of land of national, state or local historic,
geological or archeological significance due to a substantial value in tracing
the history or prehistory of man or upon which a historic event has occurred
and which has been nominated and accepted as a historic site pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any improvement which has a special character,
historic interest, significance or value as part of the developmental heritage
or cultural characteristics of the City, state or nation, and which had been
nominated and accepted by the owner as a historic structure pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
IMPROVEMENT — Any building, structure, place, work of art or other
object, (such as parking facility fence, gate, wall, etc.) constituting a
physical betterment of real property or any part of such betterment (such
as light fixtures, signs, sidewalk, street furniture, etc.).
NATIONAL AND/OR STATE HISTORICAL REGISTER PROPERTY — Is any
property that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places in the state
or the state register of historic places.
RESCISSION — To rescind, reverse or annul prior historic designation.
Sec. 34-3. Maintenance. [Ord. No. 96-2, § VI, 1-22-1996]
(a) The owner of a historic structure or site shall be encouraged to keep in
good repair all of the exterior portions of such, and all interior portions
which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior
portions of such to fall into a state of disrepair as follows:
(1) The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports.
(2) The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members.
(3) The deterioration of external chimneys.
(4) The deterioration or crumbling of exterior plaster or mortar.
(5) The ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof and
foundation, including broken windows or doors.
(6) The peeling of paint, rotting holes and other forms of decay.
(7) The deterioration of surrounding environment, e.g., fences, gates,
sidewalks, steps, signs, accessory structures and landscaping.
Sec. 34-2 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 34-3
1:210
Sec. 34-4. Conditions dangerous to life, health or property. [Ord.
No. 96-2, § VIII A., 1-22-1996]
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the making of necessary
repairs, alteration or demolition of any historic structures, any improvement
on a historic site or in a historic district pursuant to order of any
government agency or pursuant to any court judgment for the purpose
of remedying emergency conditions determined to be dangerous to life,
health or property. In such cases, approval from the Commission shall not
be necessary.
Sec. 34-5. through Sec. 34-30. (Reserved)
(8) The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the
creation of any hazardous or unsafe conditions.
(9) All interior portions which may cause the exterior to deteriorate or
become damaged or to otherwise fall into a state of disrepair.
(b) The purpose of this section is to encourage the prevention of
deterioration or damage by vandalism or natural causes that may
require subsequent demolition or reduced marketability of a building or
a structure that is designated a historical structure or site.
Sec. 34-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 34-5
1:211

ARTICLE II
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
Sec. 34-31. Creation and establishment; composition. [Ord. No.
96-2, § III A., 1-22-1996; amended 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-25]
The Historic Preservation Commission of the municipal government of the
City is hereby created and established. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall consist of seven members all of whom shall be citizens
and residents of the City. The following persons, if available in the
community shall be considered desirable for membership: An attorney, a
registered architect, an educator, a historian or person active in historic or
architectural preservation, an artist, licensed real estate broker, and local
businessperson. In addition, the Commission shall include one member of
the City Council. Each member shall have, to the highest extent practicable,
a known interest and concern for historic preservation. Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City
Council by majority vote.
Sec. 34-32. Terms; vacancies; removal; compensation. [Ord. No.
96-2, § III B., 1-22-1996]
Of the initial members so appointed to the Commission, two shall serve
a term of one year; two shall serve a term of two years and two shall
serve a term of three years. Thereafter, the terms of each member shall
be for three years. The Alderperson member shall serve a one-year term
and may be reappointed. Vacancies caused by resignation otherwise shall
be filled by appointment for the period of the unexpired term. A member
may be removed from the Commission by the Mayor with the approval
of a majority of the City Council. Members of the Commission shall serve
without compensation.
Sec. 34-33. Election of officers; rules; records; meetings; quorum.
[Ord. No. 96-2, § III C., 1-22-1996; amended 12-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-25]
(a) Meeting. The Commission shall meet a minimum of four times per year.
Additional meetings may be called by the Chairman or by action of the
members at a duly called meeting. All meetings shall be held at the City
Hall unless otherwise designated by the Chairman.
(b) Rules of order. The Chairperson shall call the meeting to order, shall
preserve order and decorum, shall decide all questions of order, and
shall conduct the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with
Robert's Rules of Order, unless otherwise provided by statute or by the
rules stated herein.
(c) Quorum. A majority of the membership of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Sec. 34-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 34-33
1:213
Sec. 34-34. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 96-2, § IV, 1-22-1996]
(d) Organization. The members of the Historic Preservation Commission
shall elect a Chairman from amongst its members. The Commission
may elect other officers necessary or appropriate to aid in the efficient
running of the Commission.
(e) Agenda. The Chairperson is responsible for the preparation of the
agenda and shall provide a digital or electronic copy of such agenda to
the City Clerk for posting and distribution to other Commission
members and the public at least 48 hours prior to such meeting.
Informational material for items identified on the agenda shall also be
provided with the agenda when practical.
(f) Commission action. Unless otherwise stated herein, the Historic
Preservation Commission is advisory in its capacity and shall make
recommendations to the City Council.
(g) Submittal of minutes. The Acting Secretary shall submit in a timely
fashion a digital copy of the meeting minutes to the City Clerk for
posting and distribution. If action by the City Council is desired, such
action shall be so noted in the minutes.
(a) Recommendation of designation of historic districts. The Commission
shall have the duty to recommend to the City Council designation of
historic districts. Such recommendations shall be in accordance with
Section 34-61.
(b) Nomination of properties as historic sites and structures. The
Commission may nominate properties as historic sites or structures.
Such nomination shall be in accordance with Section 34-62.
(c) Authorizing certificates of appropriateness. The Commission may
authorize certificates of appropriateness. Such authorization shall be in
accordance with Article IV of this chapter.
(d) Additional duties. The Commission:
(1) Shall work for the continuing education of the public about the
historic heritage of the City and the historic structures, sites, and
districts designated under the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Shall function as a resource, providing information and suggestions
concerning ways in which modifications of historic structures can
be made in keeping with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) May make use of the state historical preservation guidelines to
facilitate the review of proposals received in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(4) May prepare or cause to be prepared a historic preservation
master plan in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 34-33 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 34-34
1:214
Sec. 34-35. through Sec. 34-60. (Reserved)
(5) Shall develop a historic district plan in accordance with provisions
of Article IV of this chapter.
(6) Shall provide assistance to residents in their efforts to obtain for
their property historic designation on local, state and national lists
of historic structures.
(7) Shall maintain a listing of historic structures, sites, and districts,
and shall make copies available to the City Council, state and
federal review agencies, and the public.
(8) May prepare, or cause to be prepared, appropriate markers or
signs to be placed upon historic structures, sites, and districts.
(9) Shall cooperate with the state preservation officer and the state
historic preservation review board in attempting to include
properties that have been accepted as historic structures under
this chapter as historic sites, structures or districts in the state
register of historic places and the National Register of Historic
Places.
(10) May solicit and receive revenue for the purpose of historic
preservation in the City. Such revenue shall be placed in a special
City fund for such purpose.
(11) Shall research, maintain and distribute to the public information
concerning tax and other financial incentives available for historic
preservation.
(12) The Commission shall encourage financial institutions to offer
favorable loans for rehabilitation or restoration of historic
properties. The Commission shall advise and assist property
owners in obtaining information on special financing programs.
Sec. 34-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 34-35
1:215

ARTICLE III
DISTRICTS, STRUCTURES AND SITES
Sec. 34-61. Procedures for historic district designations. [Ord. No.
96-2, § V, 1-22-1996]
Procedures for the designation of historic districts are as follows:
Sec. 34-62. Procedures for historic structure or site nomination.
[Ord. No. 96-2, § V B., 1-22-1996; Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 2-12-2007]
Nomination procedures for historic structures or sites shall be as follows:
(1) Submission of recommended area to Planning Commission. The
Commission may upon its own initiative submit to the Planning
Commission for public hearing and recommendation to the City
Council, areas to be designated as historical districts.
(2) Public hearing; recommendations to City Council. The Planning
Commission, upon receipt of the proposed designation of historical
districts, shall hold a public hearing on the proposed district and
pursuant to the criteria in Section 34-63, and shall make their
recommendations to the City Council within 60 days.
(3) Notice of hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be published as a Class 1
notice under W.S.A. § 985.06(2) pursuant to W.S.A. § 62.11(4). In cases
of designation of historic districts, notice of the time, place and purpose
of the public hearing shall be sent by the Commission to the
Alderpersons of the Aldermanic District or Districts in which the
historic district is located.
(4) Notification of owners of record. In the matter of the designation of
historic district, the City Council, upon review of the recommendation
from the Planning Commission, shall notify the owners of record, who
are owners of property, in whole or in part, situated within 100 feet of
the boundaries of the property affected or within the boundaries of the
proposed historic district. For the purpose of this chapter owners of
record are those listed in the office of the City Assessor.
(5) Effect on properties. Properties within a historic district are not
affected by any requirements of this chapter unless such properties are
nominated and accepted as historical sites or structures by the owners
as established in Section 34-62.
(1) Nominations made to property owners; acceptance or rejection.
Historic structure or site nominations shall be made directly to the
property owner by certified mail with notification to the Planning
Commission. No action will be taken until such time as the nomination
is either accepted or rejected.
(2) (Reserved)
Sec. 34-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 34-62
1:217
Sec. 34-63. Designation and nomination criteria for district
designations and property nominations. [Ord. No. 96-2, § V C.,
1-22-1996]
Historic district designation and property nominations may be
recommended using the following criteria:
Sec. 34-64. Rescission procedures. [Ord. No. 96-2, § V D.,
1-22-1996]
Rescission procedures are as follows:
(3) Application by owner. Property owners who feel that their property may
qualify as historical structures or sites under this chapter may apply to
the Commission in writing for nominations as a historical structure or
site. Acceptance by the Commission of any such application will be
made by the Commission pursuant to its rules and the criteria
established and set forth in Section 34-63.
(4) Commission nominations. Commission nominations shall be referred to
the Planning Commission for public hearing and recommendation to the
City Council.
(5) Acceptance of nomination; plaque. When the nomination of a historic
structure or site has been accepted, the Commission, in cooperation
with the property owner, may cause to be prepared and erected on such
property, a suitable plaque provided by the City.
(1) Reflects the cultural, political, economic or social history of the
community, state or nation;
(2) Is identified with historic personages or important events in national,
state or local history;
(3) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or
specimen inherently valuable for a study of a period's style, method of
construction, or of indigenous materials or craftsmanship;
(4) Is representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer or
architect who influenced his age; or
(5) Has yielded, or may be likely to yield information important to
prehistory or history.
(1) The Commission may recommend that any designation of a historic
district or accepted nomination of a historic site or structure should be
rescinded.
(2) Criteria to be considered for rescission may include, but are not limited
to, an application that demonstrates that the owner wishes to sell but is
unable to find a buyer willing to preserve such historic structure or site.
Sec. 34-62 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 34-64
1:218
Sec. 34-65. Development of historic district plan. [Ord. No. 96-2,
§ VIII, 1-22-1996]
(3) Rescission recommendations are to be made to the Planning
Commission and the City Council pursuant to Section 34-61(2), (3), (4).
(a) Plan analyses and objectives. Each historic district plan approved by
the Historic Preservation Commission shall include a cultural and
architectural analysis supporting the historic significance of the area,
the specific guidelines for development and a statement of preservation
objectives.
(b) Design criteria. Design criteria to be considered in the development of
historic district plans are as follows:
(1) The gross volume and height of any new structure shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and environment with which it is
visually related.
(2) In the street elevation of a building, the proportion between the
building and environment with which it is visually related shall be
considered.
(3) The proportions and relationships between doors and windows in
the street facade should be compatible with the buildings and
environment with which it is visually related.
(4) The rhythm of solids to voids, created by openings in facade, should
be compatible with buildings and environment with which it is
visually related.
(5) The existing rhythm created by existing building masses and
spaces between them should be preserved.
(6) The materials, texture, colors and patterns used in the final facade
should be compatible with the buildings and environment with
which it is visually related.
(7) The design of the roof should be visually compatible with the
buildings and environment with which it is visually related.
(8) The landscape plan should be sensitive to the individual building,
its occupants and their needs and be compatible with the buildings
and environment with which it is visually related.
(9) The street facade should blend with other buildings via directional
expression. When adjacent buildings have a horizontal or vertical
expression, this expression should be carried over and reflected.
(10) Architectural elements should be incorporated as necessary to
relate the new with the old and to preserve and enhance the
inherent characteristics of the area.
Sec. 34-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 34-66
1:219
Sec. 34-66. through Sec. 34-90. (Reserved)
Sec. 34-66 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 34-66
1:220
ARTICLE IV
CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS
Sec. 34-91. Procedures. [Ord. No. 96-2, § VII A., 1-22-1996; Ord. No.
07-02, § 1, 2-12-2007]
An owner, lessee, or person in charge who applies for a permit to alter,
construct or demolish a nominated and accepted historic structure, site, or
national or state historic registry structure must first receive a certificate
of appropriateness from the Commission prior to being issued a building
permit by the City Building Inspector, pursuant to the following procedures:
(1) Application. Applications for certificate of appropriateness shall be
submitted to the Commission in combination with requested standard
review information and material such as drawings, plans, elevations, or
descriptions of proposed work that is necessary for Commission review
and recommendation.
(2) Application and review information deadline. The application and
requested review information must be submitted no less than 10 days
prior to the Commission's regularly scheduled monthly meeting.
(3) Review of application. Review of the application for certificate of
appropriateness will be held at the Commission's monthly meeting.
(4) Grant; issuance. If after review, the Commission grants a certificate of
appropriateness to the applicant, a written certificate shall be issued
and mailed to the applicant within three business days.
(5) Certificate not to relieve applicant from other permit and approval
requirements. Issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall not
relieve the applicant from obtaining other permits and approvals
required by the City. A building permit or other municipal permits shall
be invalid if it is obtained without the presentation of the certificate
required for the proposed work.
(6) Denial; written notice; alternatives for applicant. If after review, the
Commission denies the certificate of appropriateness, a written notice
of denial and reasons for denial shall be mailed to the applicant within
three business days. The Commission may assist the applicant by
recommending acceptable alternatives that would qualify for a
certificate of appropriateness.
(7) Ordinary maintenance and repairs. Ordinary maintenance and repairs
may be undertaken without a certificate of appropriateness, provided
that the work involves repairs to existing features of a historic structure
or a site or the replacement of elements of a structure with pieces
identical in appearance and provided that the work does not change the
exterior appearance of the structure or site and does not require the
issuance of a building permit.
Sec. 34-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 34-91
1:221
Sec. 34-92. Criteria and standards for approval. [Ord. No. 96-2,
§ VII B., 1-22-1996]
(8) Appeals of denials. Upon denial of a certificate of appropriateness
property owners may choose to appeal the denial of such certificate of
appropriateness through the procedures set forth in Section 34-93.
(a) Upon filing of any application for a certificate of appropriateness with
the Commission, the Commission shall approve the application if the
following criteria are met:
(1) For nominated and accepted historic structures or sites, the
proposed changes would not destroy or adversely affect any
exterior feature of the structure or site, visible to a street.
(2) For the construction of a new improvement upon a historic site or
within a historic district, the exterior of such improvement, visible
from a street, would harmonize with the external appearances of
neighboring improvements.
(3) The historic building or structure is not of such architectural or
historical significance that its demolition would be detrimental to
the public interest and/or contrary to the general welfare of the
people of the City and the state.
(4) For the demolition of a deteriorated building or structure, any
economic hardship or difficulty claimed by the owner would not be
self-created or be the result of any failure to maintain the property
in good repair.
(b) In addition to the criteria of Subsection (a) of this section, the
Commission may consider and give decisive weight to any of the
following standards:
(1) The use of the property shall require minimal change in the
defining characteristics of the building and its site and
environment.
(2) The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alterations of
features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
(3) Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historic
development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural
elements from other buildings, shall be avoided.
(4) Properties change over time. Those changes which have acquired
historic significance in their own right shall be retained and
preserved.
Sec. 34-91 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 34-92
1:222
Sec. 34-93. Appeals. [Ord. No. 96-2, § VII C, 1-22-1996]
(5) Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or
example of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be
preserved.
(6) Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced whenever practicable. Where the severity of deterioration
requires replacement of distinctive features, the new feature shall
match the old design, color, texture and other visual qualities and
where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall
be substantiated by documentary, physical or pictorial evidence.
(7) Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface
cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the
gentlest means possible.
(8) Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be
protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed,
mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
(9) Additions, exterior alterations or related new construction shall not
destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new
work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible
with the massing, size, scale and architectural features to protect
the historic integrity of the property and its environment. However,
for restoration, reconstruction or exterior alteration of structures
of unusual or uncommon design and of materials and/or textures
that cannot be reproduced without great difficulty and/or expense,
appropriate alternative design, materials and/or texture may be
authorized.
(10)New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such manner that if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
(a) If 30 days after the Commission denies a certificate of appropriateness,
no satisfactory resolution has been reached between the Commission
and the applicant, the applicant may, within 30 days thereafter, appeal
to the City Council from the Commission's decision by written request,
specifying the grounds for the appeal.
(b) After a public hearing the City Council may reverse or modify the
decision of the Commission if after balancing the interests of the public
and the preservation of the subject property and interest of the owner,
the City Council finds that owing to unique conditions pertaining to the
specific piece of property, failure to grant the certificate of
appropriateness will cause serious hardship to the owner. Any such
decision will be by majority of Council members present.
Sec. 34-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 34-93
1:223
Chapter 38
HUMAN RELATIONS
Sec. 34-93 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 34-93
1:224
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 38-1. through Sec. 38-30. (Reserved)
Sec. 38-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 38-1
1:225

ARTICLE II
HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
Sec. 38-31. Fair housing act adopted.
(a) The Wisconsin Fair and Open Housing Act, W.S.A., § 101.22, and all
subsequent amendments are adopted by reference in this section as if
fully set out.
(b) The officials and employees of the city shall assist in the orderly
prevention and removal of all discrimination in housing within the city
by implementing the authority and enforcement procedures set forth in
W.S.A., § 101.22.
(c) The clerk shall maintain forms for complaints to be filed under W.S.A.,
§ 101.22 and shall assist any person alleging a violation in the city to file
a complaint with the state department of industry, labor and human
relations for enforcement of W.S.A., § 101.22.
Sec. 38-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 38-31
1:227
Chapter 39
IMPACT FEES
Sec. 39-1. Creation of impact fee. [Ord. No. 04-17, § I, 4-26-2004]
This chapter is intended to impose an impact fee on development for the
sewer utility, water utility, fire department and parks. The impact fee is
intended to regulate the effect of new development on City infrastructure
and services, the demand for which is generated by new development or any
improvements made to existing development. The purpose of this chapter
is to regulate the use and development of land so as to assure that new
development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures
necessary to provide essential facilities in the City.
Sec. 39-2. Authority. [Ord. No. 04-17, § I, 4-26-2004]
The City Council has the authority to adopt this chapter pursuant to W.S.A.
§ 66.0617.
Sec. 39-3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 04-17, § I, 4-26-2004]
As applied in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be used:
BUILDING PERMIT — Any permit required for new construction and
additions pursuant to Chapter 14 of the Municipal Code.
CAPITAL BUDGET — A plan for capital expenditures, including
commitments, to be incurred during the budget year.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM (CIP) — A plan for capital
expenditures, including commitments, to be incurred during the budget
year and four years into the future.
CITY — The City of Lake Geneva, Walworth County, Wisconsin.
CITY COUNCIL — The Common Council of the City of Lake Geneva.
CITY FACILITIES — Any or all of the facilities as stated in the City impact
fee needs assessment and feasibility report dated January 26, 2004.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
property, the use of any principal structure or land, or any other activity
that requires the issuance of a building permit.
IMPACT FEE — Generally means a cash contribution imposed on a
developer by the City, but could include contributions of land or interests in
land or any other items of value.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT — The local use of land involving both
residential and nonresidential development.
NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any local use of land for primarily
industrial or commercial purposes, or which does not fall within the
definition of residential development.
Sec. 38-31 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 39-3
1:228
PARKS FACILITIES — Any or all of the facilities as stated in the City park
and open space plan dated April 1999 as updated, and/or any ancillary item
associated with said plan.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT UNIT (REU) — A (single-family residential and
individual unit within a multifamily residential building) multiplier to be
applied to the meter size calculation of a nonresidential unit to arrive at a
net impact fee.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — A dwelling which is a group of rooms, providing or
intended to provide living quarters for not more than one family. Included
are single-family residential dwellings and individual units within a
multifamily residential building. A residential unit is one residential
equivalent unit.
Sec. 39-4. Applicability of impact fee. [Ord. No. 04-17, § I,
4-26-2004; amended 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-21]
This chapter shall be uniformly applicable to residential and nonresidential
development which occurs within the City and the Impact Fee Zone. The
Impact Fee Zone shall be as included in the Impact Fee Needs Assessment
and Feasibility Reports dated January 26, 2004, and September 2005.
Sec. 39-5. Impact fee. [Ord. No. 04-17, § I, 4-26-2004; Ord. No.
05-37, § I, 10-24-2005; amended 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-21]
(a) Any person who, after the effective date of this chapter, seeks to create,
subdivide, and/or otherwise develop a residential unit within the impact
fee area as defined on Exhibit B of the Impact Fee Needs Assessment
and Feasibility Reports dated January 26, 2004, and September, 2005 is
hereby required to pay per residential unit an impact fee equal to one
REU segregated as follows:
(1) Wastewater treatment facility, All zoning classifications: $1,865.
(2) Water utility, all zoning classifications: $1,690.
(b) Any person who, after the effective date of this chapter, seeks to create,
subdivide, and/or otherwise develop a nonresidential unit is hereby
required to pay per nonresidential unit an impact fee for one REU times
a multiplier based upon meter size segregated as follows:
REU Meter Size
1.00 5/8 IR 3/4-inch disk
1.60 1-inch disk
2.80 1.5-inch disk
4.80 2-inch disk
6.40 2-inch turbo
14.00 3-inch turbo
40.00 4-inch turbo
Sec. 39-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 39-5
1:229
Sec. 39-6. Payment of fee. [Ord. No. 04-17, § I, 4-26-2004; Ord. No.
05-37, § II, 10-24-2005; amended 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-21]
Sec. 39-7. Segregation and use. [Ord. No. 04-17, § I, 4-26-2004]
REU Meter Size
80.00 6-inch turbo
100.00 8-inch turbine
152.00 10-inch turbine
649.60 12-inch turbine
(c) Any person who, after the effective date of this chapter, seeks to
remodel or upgrade an existing residential or nonresidential unit
resulting in an upgrade in water meter size, shall pay an impact fee
equal to the difference between REU of the existing meter and new
meter times the current impact fee.
(a) The impact fee for residential and nonresidential units shall be assessed
and become due upon the following schedule:
(1) Wastewater utility: prior to issuance of building permit.
(2) Water utility: prior to issuance of building permit.
(b) The impact fee for existing remodeled or upgraded residential and
nonresidential units resulting in an upgrade in water meter size shall be
assessed and become due prior to issuance of a water meter. City park
and recreation facilities segregated fee shall not be applied to existing
remodeled or upgraded residential and nonresidential units.
(c) Pursuant to agreement between the City and any party, said fee may be
imposed upon such other mechanism that may be defined in said
agreement.
(a) All fees collected under this chapter, shall be placed in a segregated,
interest-bearing account and shall be accounted for separately from
other funds of the City. The fees and any interest on the fees shall be
spent only in accordance with this chapter.
(b) In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for
advanced provision of capital facilities for which the impact fee may be
expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds
or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are
of the type described in Paragraph (a) above.
(c) At least once each fiscal year, the City Administrator shall present to the
City Council a proposed capital improvement program assigning funds,
including any accrued interest to fund improvements for the
improvement of City facilities funds, including any accrued interest, not
assigned in any fiscal year shall be retained in the same impact fee trust
Sec. 39-5 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 39-7
1:230
Sec. 39-8. Refund of fees paid. [Ord. No. 04-17, § I, 4-26-2004]
Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter
immediately following 20 years from the date the impact fee was paid shall,
upon application of the then current owner, be returned to such landowner
with interest at the rate of 2% per annum, provided that the landowner
submits an application for a refund to the City Clerk within 180 days of the
expiration of the twenty-year period.
In the event that the City Engineer determines that the reasonable time
frame for build of a particular piece of infrastructure will exceed the twentyyear
test stated above, the City shall have the right to maintain funds for
expenditure greater than a twenty-year period.
Sec. 39-9. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 04-17, § I, 4-26-2004]
The following shall be exempted from payment of the impact fee:
Sec. 39-10. Appeal. [Ord. No. 04-17, § I, 4-26-2004]
Any property owner aggrieved by the amount, collection or use of fees
collected for that property may appeal the determination to the City Council
by making a written request to the City Clerk for review of the
determination to the Council. The request shall detail the owner's complaint
about the amount, collection or use of the fees and provide the name and
address of the owner complaining. The Clerk shall give the owner seven
days written notice by certified mail at the address provided of when the
matter will be reviewed by the City Council. The owner shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to address the Council following which the Clerk
shall give the owner written notification by mail to the address provided of
the Council's decision on the appeal.
Chapter 42
MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS
fund until the next fiscal year, except as provided by the refund
provisions of this chapter.
(1) Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no additional
residential units or sewer connections are requested and where the use
is not changed.
(2) The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or
structure of the same size where number of dwelling units and/or
number of sewer connections remains unchanged.
Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of
application for creation or subdivision of the lot. Any claim not so made
shall be deemed waived.
Sec. 39-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 39-10
1:231

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 42-1. Adoption of applicable provisions on mobile homes and
mobile home parks from state statutes. [Code 1992, § 12.14(1)]
The provisions of W.S.A. § 66.058 are adopted by reference in this section
as if fully set out.
Sec. 42-2. Parking fee. [Code 1992, § 12.14(2); amended 5-29-2012
by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
There is hereby imposed on each occupied, nonexempt mobile home located
in the City a monthly parking fee as determined in accordance with W.S.A.
§ 66.058.6 Such fees shall be paid to the Treasurer on or before the 10th day
of the month following the month for which such fees are due.
Sec. 42-3. Location outside mobile home park. [Code 1992,
§ 12.14(5)]
Sec. 42-4. Parking outside mobile home park; permit issuance
conditions. [Code 1992, § 12.14(6)]
The parking of any occupied mobile home outside an approved mobile home
park is prohibited unless the trailer be parked to the rear of a premises and
a permit therefor obtained from the building inspector. The parking of more
than one occupied trailer on any premises, except an approved mobile home
park, is prohibited. A permit for one such trailer, as provided in this section,
may be issued upon compliance with the following conditions:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall park any
mobile home on any street, alley, highway or other public place or on
any private property within the City. However, when approved by the
Council, a person may locate an occupied mobile home on private
property when such mobile home is located at least 500 feet from
another dwelling and when such mobile home has available adequate
water and sewer service approved by the City Health Officer.
(b) Emergency or temporary stopping or parking shall be permitted on any
street, alley or highway for not longer than 12 hours, subject to any
further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by this Code.
(1) No permit to park an occupied mobile home outside an approved mobile
home park shall be approved for a period of greater than 30 days in any
one year and with the requirement that there shall have been filed with
the application for permit the written consent of the property owner or
lessee of the premises that the occupancy or occupants of such mobile
6. Editor's Note: W.S.A. § 66.058 was renumbered as W.S.A. § 66.0435(1) to (8) by 1999 Act
150, §§ 158 to 160, effective 1-1-2001.
Sec. 42-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 42-4
1:233
Sec. 42-5. Alteration of mobile home. [Code 1992, § 12.14(7)]
Any action toward the removal of wheels, except for temporary purposes of
repair or any other action to attach a mobile home to the ground by means
of posts, piers or a foundation or to construct any addition thereto, shall
also subject the mobile home to the requirements of the building code and
the plumbing, electrical and zoning regulations of the City as a site-built
dwelling.
Sec. 42-6. Building regulations, mobile home parks. [Code 1992,
§ 12.14(8)]
All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any mobile home
park licensed under this section shall be in accordance with all ordinances
of the City and state laws and regulations pertaining to such work.
Sec. 42-7. through Sec. 42-30. (Reserved)
home have access to the sanitary facilities of the property proximate to
the mobile home 24 hours a day.
(2) Except in the case of an approved mobile home park, no permit shall be
issued for an occupied mobile home unless the period of such
occupancy is definitely stated in the application for permit and
approved by the Council.
(3) No mobile home shall be used for living quarters upon any street, alley
or public property within the City.
(4) No person shall make an electrical connection for a mobile home to any
building or other source of electricity without a permit and approval of
the Building Inspector.
(5) No person shall deposit garbage, wastewater or combustible materials
on the premises where an occupied mobile home is parked or on
adjoining premises. Garbage, rubbish and other waste materials shall
be placed in suitable metal containers for collection by designated
garbage and trash collectors and at times designated by such
collectors. Wastewater shall be kept in suitable metal containers and all
other sanitary requirements for mobile home wastes shall be observed
as set forth for the sanitary regulation of mobile homes in mobile home
parks.
(6) The Building Inspector shall issue a permit upon payment of the fee
required by Section 18-56 and the filing of an application complying
with the provisions of this chapter. Each permit card shall be posted on
the mobile home for which it is issued.
Sec. 42-4 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 42-7
1:234
ARTICLE II
LICENSE
Sec. 42-31. Required; application; fee; expiration. [Code 1992,
§ 12.14(3)]
No person shall establish or operate upon property owned or controlled
by him within the City a mobile home park without having first secured a
license therefor from the City Clerk. The application for such license shall
be accompanied by the fee required by Section 18-56 and all necessary
zoning approvals. Such license shall expire one year from the date of
issuance. All mobile home parks in the City shall comply with the provisions
of Chapter HSS 177, Wis. Adm. Code.
Sec. 42-32. Licensees' reports; remission of fees; deposits. [Code
1992, § 12.14(4)]
Sec. 42-33. Revocation and suspension. [Code 1992, § 12.14(9)]
The Council may revoke any license or permit issued pursuant to the terms
of this chapter if after due investigation and hearing before the Council it
determines that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this
(a) Licensees of mobile home parks and owners of land on which are
parked any occupied, nonexempt mobile homes shall furnish
information to the City Clerk and City Assessor on such homes added to
their park or land within five days after arrival of such home, on forms
furnished by the City Clerk in accordance with W.S.A. § 66.058(3)(c)
and (e).
(b) Occupants or owners of nonexempt mobile homes parked outside of a
mobile home park shall remit such fees directly to the Treasurer as
provided in Section 42-2. The licensee of a mobile home park shall
collect such fees from each occupied, nonexempt mobile home therein
and remit such fees to the Treasurer as provided in Section 42-2.
[Amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No.
14-08]
(c) Owners of nonexempt, occupied mobile homes, upon receipt of notice
from the Clerk of their liability for the monthly parking permit fee, shall
remit to the Clerk a cash deposit in an amount set from time to time by
the Council to guarantee payment of such fees when due to the
Treasurer. The licensee of a mobile home park shall collect such cash
deposits from each occupied, nonexempt mobile home therein and
remit such deposits to the Clerk. Upon receipt of a notice from the
owner or licensee that the nonexempt, occupied mobile home has been
or is about to be removed from the City, the Clerk shall direct the
Treasurer to apply such cash deposit to reduce any monthly parking
permit fees for which the owner is liable and refund the balance, if any,
to the owner. [Amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014
by Ord. No. 14-08]
Sec. 42-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 42-33
1:235
chapter or that any mobile home or mobile home park is being maintained
in an unsanitary or unsafe manner or is a nuisance.
Sec. 42-33 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 42-33
1:236
Chapter 46
NUISANCES
Sec. 42-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 42-33
1:237

ARTICLE I
GENERAL REGULATIONS
Sec. 46-1. Adoption of applicable nuisance provisions of state
statutes.
The applicable provisions of W.S.A. Ch. 823, nuisances, and all subsequent
amendments, are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set out.
Sec. 46-2. Abandoned vehicles. [Code 1992, § 7.14(2)—(5)]
(a) Removal and impoundment. Any vehicle abandoned in violation of this
article shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of under
Subsection (b) of this section, except if the Police Chief or his
representative determines the cost of towing and storage charges for
the impoundment would exceed the value of the vehicle, the vehicle
may be junked or sold by the City prior to expiration of the
impoundment period upon a determination by the Police Chief or his
representative that the vehicle is not stolen or otherwise wanted for
evidence or other reason.
(b) Disposal. Disposal of abandoned vehicles shall take place as follows:
(1) Value more than $100. If the Police Chief or his representative
determines that the value of the abandoned vehicle exceeds $100,
he shall notify the owner and lien holders of record by certified mail
that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned and impounded by
the City and may be reclaimed within 10 days upon payment of
accrued towing, storage and notice charges, and if not so
reclaimed, shall be sold. If an abandoned vehicle determined to
exceed $100 in value is not reclaimed within the period and under
the conditions provided in Subsection (b)(1) of this section, it may
be sold by sealed bid at auction or, if no satisfactory bid is received,
at private sale. After deducting the expense of impoundment and
sale, the balance of the proceeds, if any, shall be paid into the City
Treasury.
(2) Value less than $100. Any abandoned vehicle which is determined
by the Police Chief or his representative to have a value of less than
$100 may be disposed of by direct sale to a licensed salvage dealer,
upon a determination that the vehicle is not reported stolen.
(c) Owner responsible for impoundment and sale costs. The owner of any
abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is responsible for the
abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle.
Costs not recovered for the sale of the vehicle may be recovered in a
civil action by the city against the owner.
(d) Notice of sale or disposition. Within five days after the sale or disposal
of a vehicle as provided in Subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section, the
Police Chief or his representative shall advise the State Department of
Sec. 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 46-2
1:239
Sec. 46-3. Blighted buildings and premises. [Ord. No. 98-8, § I,
8-10-1998]
Premises existing within the city which are blighted because of faulty
design or construction, failure to maintain them in a proper state of repair,
improper management or due to the accumulation thereon of junk or other
unsightly debris, which includes, but is not limited to, the outdoor storage of
inoperable or unlicensed automobiles, trucks, buses or tractors, automobile
parts, machinery or machinery parts, refrigerators, furnaces, washing
machines, stoves, dryers, wood, bricks, cement blocks or other building
materials or other items determined by the Building Inspector, structurally
unsound fences and other items which depreciate property values and
jeopardize or are detrimental to the health, safety, morals or welfare of the
people of the City.
Sec. 46-4. Loud and unnecessary noise. [Added 3-25-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-08]
Transportation, Division of Motor Vehicles, of such sale or disposition
on a form supplied by the Division. A copy of such form shall also be
given to the purchaser of the vehicle, and a copy shall be retained by
the City.
(a) Legislative intent.
(1) The making, creation or maintenance of such raucous or unusually
loud noises which are prolonged and unnatural in their time, place
and use affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the
City of Lake Geneva; and
(2) The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and
prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a
matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is
further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter
contained and enacted are in pursuit of and for the purpose of
securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience,
safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the City of
Lake Geneva and its inhabitants.
(b) Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud
and unnecessary noise.
(c) Types of loud and unnecessary noises. The following acts are declared
to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this
section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street
or public place in the City of Lake Geneva for longer than three
Sec. 46-2 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 46-4
1:240
seconds in any period of one minute or less, except as a danger
warning; the creation of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound
by means of any signaling device and the sounding of any plainly
audible device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or
electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by
engine exhaust and the use of any signaling device when traffic is
for any reason held up.
(2) Radios, music or audio systems, machines or devices, speakers,
amplifiers and similar devices. The use of, operation or permitting
to be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, music or audio system, machine or device, speakers,
amplifiers and similar devices for the producing or reproducing of
sound in a loud and unnecessary manner. The operation of any
radio, stereo or other similar instrument, music system, machine or
device in a manner as to be heard outside a seventy-five-foot radius
of the source from which it is projected shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section, except for those activities
allowed by permit issued by the City. [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-10]
(d) Penalty. As a penalty for violation of this section, the defendant shall
pay a forfeiture in the amount set forth in the bond schedule as
established by the City Council from time to time.
Sec. 46-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 46-4
1:241

ARTICLE II
Chronic Nuisances
[Added 5-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13-16]
Sec. 46-4.1. Definitions.
The following terms shall be defined as follows in this article:
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator for
the City of Lake Geneva or his or her designee.
CHIEF — The Chief of Police or his or her designee.
ENFORCEMENT ACTION — Arrest, the issuance of a citation, or the
issuance of a written warning, or the issuance of an order to correct.
MCCLG — Municipal Code of the City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin.
NUISANCE ACTIVITY — Any of the following activities, behaviors or
conduct occurring upon a premises:
POLICE NUISANCE ACTIVITY — -
a. An act of harassment, as defined in W.S.A. § 947.013.
b. Disorderly conduct, as defined in W.S.A. § 947.01.
Battery, substantial battery, or aggravated battery, as defined in
W.S.A. § 940.19.
c.
d. Lewd and lascivious behavior, as defined in W.S.A. § 944.20.
e. Prostitution, as defined in W.S.A. § 944.30.
f. Theft, as defined in W.S.A. § 943.20.
g. Receiving stolen property, as defined in W.S.A. § 943.34.
h. Arson, as defined in W.S.A. § 943.02.
Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or
related offenses, as defined in W.S.A. Ch. 961.
i.
j. Gambling, as defined in W.S.A. § 945.02.
k. Trespassing, as defined in W.S.A. §§ 943.13 and 943.14.
l. Obstructing or resisting an officer, as defined in W.S.A. § 946.41.
m. Disorderly houses, as defined in W.S.A. § 944.34.
n. Gambling place as defined in W.S.A. § 945.01(4).
Drug houses and criminal gang houses, as defined in W.S.A.
§ 823.113.
o.
p. Curfew violations, as defined in MCCLG Section 50-81.
(1)
Sec. 46-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 46-4.1
1:243
OWNER — The owner of the premises and his or her agents.
PREMISES — An individual dwelling unit; any property or premises used for
residential purposes, whether or not owner-occupied; an individual business
or commercial property; and associate common areas thereof
Sec. 46-5. Notice.
Truancy, contributing to truancy, as defined in MCCLG Sections
50-56 and 50-59.
q.
Purchase or possession of cigarette or tobacco products by
children, as defined in MCCLG Section 50-41.
r.
s. Damage to property defined in W.S.A. § 943.01.
t. Weapons offenses, as defined in MCCLG Section 50-3 and 50-4.
u. Animal violations of any kind, as defined in MCCLG Chapter 10.
v. Fireworks, as defined in MCCLG Section 30-116.
w. Underage alcohol activities, as defined in MCCLG Section 90-60(c).
Any conspiracy to commit, as defined in W.S.A. § 939.31, or attempt
to commit, as defined in W.S.A. § 939.32, any of the criminal
activities, behaviors, or conduct enumerated above.
x.
CODE NUISANCE ACTIVITY — -
a. Housing code violations, as defined in MCCLG Chapter 14.
Abandoned, unlicensed or nonoperable vehicle violations, as
defined in MCCLG Section 74-214.
b.
c. Nuisance violations, as defined in MCCLG Chapter 46.
Zoning violations, provided that they are nuisance related and in
a residential setting, as defined in City of Lake Geneva Zoning
Ordinance Sections 98-701 through 98-730.
d.
(2)
(a) Whenever the Chief determines that four or more police nuisance
activities resulting in enforcement action have occurred at a premises
on separate days during a twelve-month period, only the Chief may
notify the premises owner and tenant in writing. In reaching this
determination, the Chief shall not count nuisance activities resulting in
enforcement actions that were reported by the owner of the premises.
Only the Chief may initiate and implement the procedure and
enforcement for police nuisance activities under this article.
(b) Whenever the Building Inspector determines that four or more code
nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action have occurred at a
premises on separate days during a twelve-month period, only the
Building Inspector may notify the premises owner and tenant in writing.
In reaching this determination, the Building Inspector shall not count
Sec. 46-4.1 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 46-5
1:244
Sec. 46-6. Abatement plan.
Any owner receiving such notice shall meet with the City official, Chief
or Building Inspector, who issued the notice, or with the applicable City
official's designee, within five days of receipt of such notice. The Chief
or Building Inspector, as applicable, and owner shall review the problems
occurring upon the premises and/or property. Within 10 days of this
meeting, the owner shall submit to the Chief or Building Inspector, as
applicable, or the applicable City official's designee, a detailed written
abatement plan designed to forthwith and effectively end all the nuisance
activity upon the premises. The plan shall also specify a name, address, and
telephone number of a person living within 60 miles of the premises who
can be contacted in the event of further police, fire, or inspection activities
and/or contact.
Sec. 46-7. Additional nuisance activity.
Whenever the Chief or Building Inspector, as applicable, determines that:
additional nuisance activity and/or enforcement action has/have occurred
upon a premises for which the written notice has been issued under this
article; and this additional nuisance activity and/or enforcement action has/
have occurred more than 15 days after the written notice was served;
and reasonable effort has not been made by the owner of the premises
to abate the nuisance activity; then the Chief or Building Inspector, as
nuisance activities resulting in enforcement actions that were reported
by the owner of the premises. Only the Building Inspector may initiate
and implement the procedure and enforcement for code nuisance
activities under this article.
(c) The Chief and Building Inspector may jointly agree to initiate,
implement and enforce this article in the event that an aggregate of
four or more combined police nuisance activities and code nuisance
activities, in any combination thereof, resulting in enforcement action
have occurred at a premises on separate days during a twelve-month
period.
(d) The notice shall contain the street address, including unit number if
applicable, or legal description sufficient to identify the premises, a
description of the nuisance activities and enforcement actions that have
occurred at the premises, a statement indicating that the cost of future
enforcement may be assessed as a special charge against the premises,
and a notice as to the appeal rights of the owner.
(e) The written notice shall be delivered to the owner of the premises by
one of the following methods in descending order of preference:
personal service, certified mail, first class mail, posting and/or
publication, such other means as provided by law for service of process
in a civil action, in that order, as the Chief or Building Inspector, as
applicable, may determine appropriate under the particular facts and
circumstances.
Sec. 46-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 46-7
1:245
applicable, may calculate all of the costs, fees and expenses arising from
and/or pertaining to any and all such police and related City responses and
enforcement, including, but not limited to, actual burdened labor, overtime,
materials, vehicle use, and related administrative time and efforts for this
and any subsequent nuisance activities and enforcement actions upon, for
and/or pertaining to the premises. The Chief or Building Inspector, as
applicable, shall then cause all such costs, fees and expenses to be charged
against the owner of the premises and the premises itself, and if unpaid,
charged, assessed, levied and collected by the City as a special charge
against the premises/property.
Sec. 46-8. Appeals.
(a) Appeal by affected property owner. An affected owner of the premises
may appeal the Police Chief's or Building Inspector's, as applicable,
determination and invoiced special charges arising from and imposed
for the police and related costs, fees and expenses set forth in this
article in the manner set forth in this subsection.
(b) The appeal shall be in writing, filed with the City Clerk, stating with
specificity the grounds for the appeal and the relief requested. The
appeal shall be filed 90 days of the invoice from the City Clerk.
(c) The appeal shall be considered only if filed prior to the time that any
unpaid special charges imposed against the premises/property under
this article are turned over by the Treasurer onto the tax roll.
(d) Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall not apply to such an appeal
nor shall any other provision of state law or City ordinance to the
contrary. The appellate procedure set forth herein shall govern and be
exclusive.
(e) Upon receipt of the written appeal, the Clerk shall set the matter for a
public hearing for a regularly scheduled meeting of the Common
Council not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days after the filing of
the written appeal.
(f) The Clerk shall provide written notice to the appellant and to the Chief
of Police or Building Inspector, as applicable, of such Common Council
meeting hearing date, time and place.
(g) The parties may agree to continuances and stipulations as to procedure
and substance, but in no event shall the hearing be continued beyond
the time set forth in Subsection (c).
(h) The hearing shall be open to the public, recorded by a sound recording
device and the recording preserved for seven years by the City Clerk. A
party may request a court reporter but the requesting party shall pay
all costs of the court reporter in advance, regardless of the
determination of the appeal.
Sec. 46-7 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 46-8
1:246
Sec. 46-9. Violations and penalties; remedies; injunctive and other
relief.
In addition to the special charges and penalties for the individual offenses
described above, the following penalties, remedies and other relief are
cumulative and not exclusive, may be jointly and severally sought and/or
employed by the City for violations under this article, and may be ordered
and/or imposed, as applicable, by the courts:
(i) The appellant and the Chief of Police or Building Inspector, as
applicable, may each present witnesses who testify upon oath after
being duly sworn-in by the City Clerk, the Assistant City Clerk or any
other person authorized by law to administer oaths. [Amended
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(j) After the hearing, the Common Council in open session shall deliberate
and then make a determination by recorded motion, second and vote
with a majority of Council members voting governing.
(k) The Treasurer shall adjust all invoices, tax and related City records in
accord with the Council's determination. [Amended 11-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-08]
(a) First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article
or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall forfeit and pay to
the City not less than $100 nor more than $500, together with the costs
of prosecution.
(b) Subsequent offenses. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
article or any regulation, rule, or order made hereunder within 24
months after committing a previous violation shall forfeit and pay to the
City not less than $300 nor more than $900, together with the costs of
prosecution.
(c) Each and every day that a violation occurs, continues and/or remains
present constitutes a separate offense.
(d) The City, in addition to the above monetary penalty(ies) and special
charges, may from time to time seek and obtain, and the court may
order, temporary and/or permanent injunctive relief, abatement, and
such other legal and/or equitable relief, remedies, judgments, and/or
orders of the court against any person(s) and/or property(ies) as the
court may, from time to time, deem necessary, appropriate and/or
desirable to effectuate the intent of this article and the public good,
peace, order, welfare, and/or safety.
(e) In addition to the above penalties, relief and remedies, the Common
Council may refuse to issue or not renew any license or permit to the
owner of the premises and/or the premises, after conducting a public
hearing thereon.
Sec. 46-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 46-9
1:247
(f) It shall be the responsibility of the convicted person(s) to immediately
abate each and every violation upon the premises property as
expeditiously as possible, unless otherwise directed by the City or the
court.
(g) This chapter is cumulative in its legal affect and is not in lieu of any and
all other legal and equitable remedies under City ordinances, state
statutes, state administrative codes, and common law, including, but
not limited to, forfeiture of the property to the City under this article
and/or the applicable state statutes.
Sec. 46-9 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 46-9
1:248
ARTICLE III
Abandoned Personal Property
[Adopted 6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 15-06]
Sec. 46-10. Disposal.
(a) Abandoned personal property which has been in the possession of the
City Police Department for a period of more than 30 days may be
disposed of by the City Police Department by public auction, private
sale, or other means of disposal deemed to be in the best interest of the
City as determined by the City of Lake Geneva Police and Fire
Commission.
(b) Any disposition of abandoned personal property not completed by
public sale shall require the City of Lake Geneva to maintain an
inventory of said property, recording the date and method of disposal,
the consideration received for the property, and the name and address
of the person taking possession of the property. This inventory shall be
kept as a public record for a period of seven years from the date of
disposal of said property.
Sec. 46-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 46-10
1:249
Chapter 50
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 46-10 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 46-10
1:250
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 50-1. Adoption of state misdemeanors by reference.
Sec. 50-2. Penalty for violation of chapter. [Code 1992, § 9.50]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person found to be in
violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation or order
made under this chapter, upon conviction, shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in Section 1-12.
Sec. 50-3. Discharge of weapons. [Code 1992, § 9.02]
Sec. 50-4. Restrictions on firearms and weapons. [Code 1992,
§ 9.03(2); amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-30]
(a) The nonfelony offenses and violations of the State Criminal Code,
W.S.A., ch. 939, excluding the punishments for such provisions, and as
may be subsequently amended in the future, are adopted by reference
in this section as if fully set out.
(b) Violations of the statutes adopted by reference occurring in the City
shall constitute violations of this section and shall be punished by a
forfeiture as provided in Section 1-12.
(a) Guns, revolvers, firearms and air guns. No person shall discharge any
gun, revolver or other firearm or air gun within the City except for the
lawful protection of life or property, the suppression of crime or by an
officer on official duty, and except also when done pursuant to and in
accordance with an expressed permit from the Chief of Police.
(b) Slingshot, bow and arrow and other contrivances. No person shall
throw or discharge any missile by means of the weapon or appliance
commonly known as a slingshot, bow and arrow or any similar
contrivance within the City except in lawful defense of person or
property.
(a) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FIREARMS — A weapon that acts by force of gunpowder.
LAW ENFORCEMENT — Any person employed by the State of
Wisconsin or any political subdivision of this state, for the purpose
of detecting and preventing crime and enforcing laws or ordinances
and who is authorized to make arrests for violations of the laws or
ordinances he or she is employed to enforce.
WEAPON — A firearm, an electronic weapon as defined in § 941.295,
Wis. Stats., a knife, a billy club, spring gun, air gun (whether a missile
is expelled by air, gas, or chemical), electric weapon, or paint ball gun.
Sec. 50-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-4
1:251
Sec. 50-5. Tampering with public records and notices. [Code 1992,
§ 9.15]
No person shall intentionally damage, alter, remove or conceal any public
notice, posted as authorized by law, before the expiration of the time for
which the notice was posted.
Sec. 50-6. Theft of library material; overdue material. [Code 1992,
§ 9.26]
(b) No person, except a law enforcement officer or member of the military
in the line of duty or a person acting within the terms of a license issued
to carry a concealed weapon as defined in Wisconsin Statutes, shall
have any weapon in his or her possession or under his or her control
unless it is both unloaded and locked or enclosed within a carrying case
or other suitable container.
(c) In addition to the provisions of § 175.60, Wis. Stats., enumerating
places where the carrying of a weapon or firearm is prohibited,
including exceptions thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person other
than law enforcement or member of the military in the line of duty to
enter any City-owned structures at which signage meeting the
requirements of § 943.13(2)(bm) Wis. Stats., is posted.
(d) Signs meeting the requirements of § 943.13(2)(bm) Wis. Stats., shall be
posted in prominent places near all entrances of such buildings
regarding such restrictions.
(e) Any person who enters or remains on any aforementioned premises
contrary to such signage shall be considered a trespasser subject to
forfeitures for trespassing as set by the City Council by resolution from
time to time.
(a) No person shall take and carry away, transfer, conceal or retain
possession of any library material without the consent of a library
official, agent or employee and with the intent to deprive the library of
possession of the material.
(b) The concealment of library material beyond the last station for
borrowing library material in a library is evidence of intent to deprive
the library of possession of the material. The discovery of library
material which has not been borrowed in accordance with the library's
procedures or taken with consent of a library official, agent or employee
and which is concealed upon the person or among the belongings of the
person or concealed by a person upon the person or among the
belongings of another is evidence of intentional concealment on the
part of the person so concealing the material.
(c) Overdue library materials are subject to fines and/or suspension of the
borrower's driver's license.
Sec. 50-4 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 50-7
1:252
Sec. 50-7. False identification. [Code 1992, § 9.31]
No person shall make, alter or present to any person any document, card or
other thing which misrepresents that person's age or identity.
Sec. 50-8. Removal of barriers. [Code 1992, § 9.33]
No unauthorized person shall remove, take down, alter the position of,
damage, destroy, pass over or beyond any barrier erected within the City by
order or approval of the Street Superintendent, Police or City Council.
Sec. 50-9. Advertising display utilizing vehicles. [Code 1992, § 9.28]
Sec. 50-10. Trash on streets. [Code 1992, § 8.07]
No person shall place, throw, deposit or leave any trash, debris or any
materials or foreign substances in or upon any street, gutter, sidewalk, alley
or public grounds in the City.
Sec. 50-11. Unlawful obstruction of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public buildings and loitering prohibited. [Ord. No. 98-3, § I,
3-9-1998]
(a) No person shall drive or park any vehicle on any City street or alleyway
for the primary purpose of displaying advertising. The expression
"primary purpose" is that which is first in intention; which is
fundamental. It is the principle or fixed intention with which an act or
course of conduct is undertaken. Facts to be considered in determining
the primary purpose include, but are not limited to, those listed in this
subsection. The absence or existence of one or more of these
considerations is not necessarily controlling in the determination of the
primary purpose.
(1) The length of time a vehicle is parked in a particular parking space.
(2) The uses of the vehicle other than as an advertising display
medium.
(3) The amount of surface space of the vehicle used to display
advertising.
(4) Whether structural modifications were made to the vehicle to
facilitate advertising.
(b) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit street parades and
advertising incidentally displayed where such parade has first been
authorized by the City pursuant to this Code, nor shall this section be
deemed to prohibit parades sponsored by the City or its agencies
including, but not limited to, Christmas and homecoming parades, nor
shall this section be deemed to prohibit advertising when authorized by
a validly issued street use permit. [Amended 2-13-2012 by Ord. No.
12-03]
Sec. 50-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-11
1:253
(a) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:
(1) LOITER — To sit, stand, loaf, lounge, wander or stroll in an aimless
manner or to stop, pause or remain in an area for no lawful
purpose.
(2) NUISANCE — Unnecessary conduct which may tend to intimidate,
threaten or otherwise disturb another in or about any public street,
alley, sidewalk, bridge or public ground and which is threatening to
the public's health, safety or welfare.
(3) OBSTRUCT — To interfere with the unobstructed travel by any
means, including but not limited to standing on the part of the walk
that is fit for travel, or placing any object or vehicle whatsoever on
such sidewalk.
(4) SIDEWALK — Any public sidewalk. The term shall not include
sidewalks or walkways on private property in shopping centers,
apartment complexes, office building sites or any other private
property.
(b) Obstructing streets and alleys. Except as otherwise provided, no person
shall obstruct, loiter, cause a nuisance or engage in any sport or
exercise on any public street or alley, sidewalk, bridge or public ground
within the City in such a manner as to:
(1) Prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic thereon;
(2) Prevent or hinder free ingress or egress to or from any place of
business or amusement, church, public hall or meeting place; or
(3) Cause a nuisance by congregating and hindering the free passage
of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(c) Obstructing sidewalk prohibited. No person shall block any sidewalk or
bridge by obstructing the same so that it is difficult for a pedestrian to
travel along the sidewalk without leaving the sidewalk and walking on
adjacent property or on the street.
(d) Public property loitering prohibited.
(1) No person shall loiter in or about any public street, alley, public
sidewalk, street crossing, bridge, public parking lot or other place
of assembly or public use in a manner which threatens public
peace, order, or the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(2) Upon being requested to move by any public officer or other person
in authority, the person shall move or provide an explanation for
their presence. Failure to immediately comply with such request
shall be a violation of this section.
Sec. 50-11 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 50-11
1:254
Sec. 50-12. through Sec. 50-40. (Reserved)
(e) Private property loitering prohibited.
(1) No person shall loiter in or about any private premises or adjacent
doorways or entrances or upon private property held out for public
use, including, but not limited to, business or industry parking lots
or shopping malls without invitation from the owner or occupant or
by any person in authority at such places.
(2) Upon being requested to move by any such person in authority or
by any police officer, a person shall immediately comply with such
request by leaving the premises or area thereof, or providing a
lawful explanation for their presence.
(f) Prowling prohibited. No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time
or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of person or property
in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the
person takes flight upon appearance of a police or peace officer, refuses
to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or move
in any other stealth manner.
Sec. 50-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-12
1:255

ARTICLE II
MINORS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 50-41. Purchase or possession of tobacco products. [Amended
2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-01]
Sec. 50-42. through Sec. 50-55. (Reserved)
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CIGARETTE — Has the meaning given in W.S.A. § 139.30(1m).
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Has the meaning given in W.S.A.
§ 30.50(45).
NICOTINE PRODUCTS — Has the meaning given in W.S.A.
§ 134.66(1)(f).
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Has the meaning given in W.S.A.
§ 139.75(12).
(b) Prohibited. Except as provided in Subsection (C) of this section, no
person under 18 years of age may do any of the following:
(1) Buy or attempt to buy any cigarette, nicotine product, or tobacco
product.
(2) Falsely represent his age for the purpose of receiving any cigarette,
nicotine product, or tobacco product.
(3) Possess any cigarette, nicotine product, or tobacco product.
(c) Exceptions. A person under 18 years of age may purchase or possess
cigarettes, nicotine products, or tobacco products for the sole purpose
of resale in the course of employment during his working hours if
employed by a retailer licensed under W.S.A. § 134.65(1).
(d) Seizure. A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette, nicotine
product, or tobacco product involved in any violation of Subsection (b)
of this section committed in his presence.
Sec. 50-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-42
1:257

DIVISION 2
TRUANCY
Sec. 50-56. Truancy prohibited. [Ord. No. 99-7, § I, 3-26-1999]
Sec. 50-57. Habitual truancy prohibited. [Ord. No. 99-7, § I,
3-26-1999]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any child to be a truant.
(b) In this section, "truant" shall mean a pupil who is absent from school
without an acceptable excuse under W.S.A. §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), for
part or all of any day on which school is held during a school semester.
(c) If the court finds that a person under the age of 18 has violated the
provisions of this section, the court may enter a order for one or more of
the following dispositions:
(1) An order for the person to attend school.
(2) A forfeiture of not more than $50 plus costs for the first violation, or
a forfeiture of not more than $100 plus costs for any second or
subsequent violation committed within 12 months of a previous
violation, subject to W.S.A. § 938.37 and subject to a maximum
cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than $500 for all
violations committed during a school semester. All or part of the
forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the person, the
parents or guardian of the person, or both.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any child to be a habitual truant.
(b) In this section, "habitual truant" shall mean a pupil who is absent from
school without acceptable excuse under Sections 118.15 and 118.16(4)
for part or all of five or more days on which school is held during a
school semester.
(c) If the court finds that a person under the age of 18 has violated the
provisions of this section, the court may enter an order for one or more
of the following dispositions:
(1) Suspension of the person's operating privilege, as defined in W.S.A.
§ 340.01(40), for not less than 30 days, nor more than one year.
(2) Order the person to participate in counseling or a supervised work
program or other community service work as described in W.S.A.
§ 938.34(5g). The costs of any such counseling, supervised work
program, or other community service work may be assessed
against the person, the parents, or guardian of the person, or both.
Pursuant to W.S.A. § 118.163(2)(b), any county department of
human services or social services, community agency, public
agency or nonprofit charitable organization administering a
supervised work program or other community service work to
Sec. 50-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-57
1:259
Sec. 50-58. School attendance required. [Ord. No. 99-7, § I,
3-26-1999]
which a person is assigned pursuant to an order under this
paragraph acting in good faith has immunity from any civil liability
in excess of $25,000 for any act or omission by or impacting on that
person.
(3) Order the person to remain at home, except during hours in which
the person is attending religious worship or a school program,
including travel time required to get to and from the school
program or place of worship. The order may permit a person to
leave his or her home if the person is accompanied by a parent or
guardian.
(4) Order the person to attend an educational program as described in
W.S.A. § 938.34(7d).
(5) Order the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations to
revoke the person's work permit.
(6) Order the person to be placed in a teen program, as described in
W.S.A. § 938.342(1g)(f).
(7) Order the person to attend school.
(8) Order a forfeiture of not more than $500 plus costs, subject to
W.S.A. § 938.37 (prohibiting costs against children under the age of
14). All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against
the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both.
(9) Order any other reasonable conditions or restrictions consistent
with this subsection, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to
or remaining on specified premises and restrictions on associating
with other children or adults.
(10) Order the person placed under formal or informal supervision, as
described in W.S.A. § 938.34(2), for up to one year.
(11) Order the person's parent, guardian, or legal custodian to
participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's or legal
custodian's own expense or to attend school with the person, or
both.
(a) Any person who has a child under his control, which child is between
the ages of six and 18 years old and which child attends school within
the jurisdiction of the City municipal court is required by ordinance to
ensure that the child attends school according to the provisions of
W.S.A., § 118.15.
(b) A person adjudged to have violated this section shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $50, nor more than $500.
Sec. 50-57 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 50-59
1:260
Sec. 50-59. Contributing to truancy prohibited. [Ord. No. 99-7, § I,
3-26-1999]
Sec. 50-60. through Sec. 50-79. (Reserved)
(a) Any person 17 years of age or older is prohibited from performing any
act or omission, which knowingly encourages or contributes to a
persons truancy.
(b) A person adjudged to have violated this section shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $50, nor more than $500.
Sec. 50-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-60
1:261

DIVISION 3
CURFEW
Sec. 50-80. Curfew hours for minors. [Ord. No. 04-18, § 1,
4-26-2004]
Sec. 50-81. Offenses. [Ord. No. 04-18, § 1, 4-26-2004]
Sec. 50-82. Defenses. [Ord. No. 04-18, § 1, 4-26-2004]
(a) Curfew hours for minor persons under 16 years of age shall be from
10:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m.
(b) Curfew hours for minor persons 16 and 17 years of age shall be:
(1) 10:30 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday until 4:00 a.m. of the following day; and
(2) 12:00 a.m. (midnight) to 4:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday.
(a) A minor commits an offense if he/she remains in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he/she knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any
public place or the premises of any establishment within the City during
curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he/she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises
of establishment during curfew hours.
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 50-81 that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain
to the Police Department about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the City, a civic
organizations or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour
Sec. 50-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-82
1:263
Sec. 50-83. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 04-18, § 1, 4-26-2004]
Before taking any enforcement action with in this section, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public
place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred
and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
Section 50-82 is present.
Sec. 50-84. Additional costs upon arrest. [Ord. No. 97-2, § 1(3)(c),
1-27-1997]
In order to defray the costs of detention for a minor under this division, an
additional cost of $35 per hour or part hour for any minor held for over two
hours from the time of arrest shall be assessed. Such costs may be satisfied
by public service performed by the parent or guardian and minor at the rate
of $5 per hour for each individual.
Sec. 50-85. through Sec. 50-100. (Reserved)
or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the City, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Mature Minors Act, as amended.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 50-81(c) that the owner,
operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notify the Police
Department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Sec. 50-82 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 50-85
1:264
DIVISION 4
GANG ACTIVITY
Sec. 50-101. Definitions. [Ord. No. 94-11, § 9.41(1.a), (1.b),
5-23-1994]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CRIMINAL GANG — Any ongoing organization, association or group of
three or more persons, whether formal or informal, that has as one of its
primary activities, the commission of one or more unlawful acts. The term
"unlawful acts" include violations of the provisions of this chapter or any
one or more criminal acts that would be criminal if the actor were an adult.
Criminal gangs also have common names or common identifying signs or
symbols and have members individually or collectively who engage in or
who have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity.
CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY — The commission or attempt to commit, or
solicitation to commit, a violation of any one or more of the ordinances of
this chapter for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with, any
criminal gang.
Sec. 50-102. Prohibited acts.
The following acts shall be deemed unlawful if:
Sec. 50-103. Penalty for violation of division. [Ord. No. 94-11,
§ 9.41(5), 5-23-1994]
The penalty for violation of this division is as provided in Section 1-12.
Sec. 50-104. through Sec. 50-120. (Reserved)
(1) Any person engages in criminal gang activity.
(2) Any person solicits or attempt to solicit a person who has not attained
the age of 18 years, to commit or attempt to commit any violation of the
provisions of this division.
(3) Any person solicits or attempt to solicit a person who has not attained
the age of 18 years, to participate in criminal gang activity.
(4) Any person solicits or attempt to solicit a person who has not attained
the age of 18 years, to join a criminal gang.
Sec. 50-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-104
1:265

ARTICLE III
SMOKING
Sec. 50-121. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 9.39(1); amended
10-11-2010 by Ord. No. 10-12]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY — Any building or school grounds used
principally for educational purposes in which a school is located or a course
of instruction or training program is offered that has been approved or
licensed by a state agency or board.
ENCLOSED INDOOR AREA — All space between a floor and a ceiling
that is bounded by walls, doors, or windows, whether open or closed,
covering more than 50% of the combined surface area of the vertical planes
constituting the perimeter of the area. A wall includes any retractable
divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or
permanent. A 0.011 gauge screen with an 18 by 16 mesh count is not a wall.
SCHOOL GROUNDS — Any property abutting, adjacent to or used in
connection with any educational facility and owned by or leased by the
school district.
SMOKING — Carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other lighted
smoking equipment.
Sec. 50-122. Adoption of standards. [Code 1992, § 9.39(2); Ord. No.
94-2, § I, 1-24-1994; amended 10-11-2010 by Ord. No. 10-12]
The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect
to indoor smoking contained in § 101.123 of the Wisconsin Statutes, known
as the "Clean Indoor Air Act," exclusive of any provisions therein relating
to the penalties to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such
statutes, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this section
as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited
by § 101.123, Wis. Stats., and incorporated herein by reference is required
or prohibited by this section.
Sec. 50-123. Penalty for violation of article. [Code 1992, § 9.39(4);
amended 10-11-2010 by Ord. No. 10-12]
The penalty for violation of § 101.123(2), Wis. Stats., relating to an
individual smoking in a prohibited area, shall be a forfeiture of $25 for the
first violation and $50 for each violation thereafter. The penalty for violation
of § 101.123(2m), Wis. Stats., relating to responsibility of persons in charge
allowing smoking in violation of law, shall be a forfeiture of $50 for the first
violation and $100 for each violation thereafter.
Sec. 50-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-124
1:267
Sec. 50-124. Three-step process. [Code 1992, § 9.39(3)]
School authorities shall follow the three-step process, as set forth in the
school policy "Smoke Free Environment" prior to any referral to the City
Police Department. This three-step process shall be followed for students,
employees and the general public. A written report from school authorities
outlining the procedures taken with respect to compliance with the threestep
process shall accompany any referral to the City Police Department.
Sec. 50-125. Severability. [Added 10-11-2010 by Ord. No. 10-12]
The several sections of this article are declared to be severable. If any
section shall be declared by decision of a Court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of other portions of the
article.
Sec. 50-124 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 50-125
1:268
ARTICLE IV
SY[NATdHdeEdT2IC-1 C4H-2E0M11ICBAyLO CrAd.N NNoA. B1I1N-0O4I]DS
Sec. 50-126. Definitions; sales, use and possession.
(a) Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DELIVER — Has the same meaning given in § 961.01(6), Wis. Stats.,
with respect to a controlled substance or controlled substance analog.
DISTRIBUTE — Has the same meaning given in § 961.01(9), Wis. Stats.,
with respect to a controlled substance or controlled substance analog.
(b) Prohibited sales, use and possession. It shall be illegal for any person to
possess, sell, publicly display for sale or attempt to sell, give, deliver,
distribute, or barter any one or more of the following chemicals
whether under the common street or trade names of "Spice," "K2,"
"Genie," "Yucatan Fire," "Blaze," "Red X Dawn," "Zohia," "fake," or
"new" marijuana, or by any other name, label or description:
(1) (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6dimethyl-3(2methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a, 7, 10, 10 atetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-Fol, some trade or other
names: HU-210;
(2) 1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole, some trade or other names:
JWH-018/spice;
(3) 1-Butyl-3-(1-naphythoyl) indole, some trade or other names:
JWH-073;
(4) 1-(3{trifluoromethylphenyl}) piperazine, some trade or other
names: TFMPP;
(5) 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol (CP 47,497);
(6) Salvia divinorum or salvinorum A: all parts of the plant presently
classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not,
the seeds thereof; any extract from any part of such plant, and
every compound manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or
preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts;
(7) Synthetic equivalents of the substances contained in the plant
cannabis, and/or in the resinous extractives of cannabis and/or
synthetic substances, derivatives, and their isomers with similar
chemical structure and pharmacological activity, and/or any
substance which claims such properties even if in actuality they do
not;
(8) Compounds of these structures, regardless of numerical
designation of atomic positions, are similarly prohibited, since
nomenclature of these substances is not internationally
standardized; and/or
Sec. 50-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-126
1:269
Sec. 50-127. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as follows:
Sec. 50-128. through Sec. 50-199. (Reserved)
(9) Any similar structural analogs, such as, including, but not limited to
the synthetic cannabinoids that fall into and/or are part of one or
more of the seven major structural groups:
a. Naphthoylindoles (e.g. JWH-018, JWH-073 and JWH-398).
b. Naphthylmethylindoles.
c. Naphthoylpyrroles.
d. Naphthylmethylindenes.
e. Phenylacetylindoles (i.e. benzoylindoles, e. JWH-250).
f. Cyclohexylphenols (e.g. CP 47,497 and homologues of CP
47,497).
g. Classical cannabinoids (e.g. Hu-210).
(c) Exception. The prohibitions set forth herein do not apply to any person
who commits an act described in this section pursuant to the direction
or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or
prescribe such act.
(d) Penalties. Any adult person violating this section shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $100, nor more than $500.
(a) Any person who shall sell, publicly display for sale or attempt to sell,
give, deliver, distribute, or barter any one or more of the chemicals as
prohibited in Section 50-126(b) above shall, upon conviction, be subject
to a forfeiture of not less than $500 and not more than $1,000, together
with the cost of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. The City may also seek
equitable relief to gain compliance.
(b) Any person who shall possess any one or more of the chemicals as
prohibited in Section 50-126(b) above shall, upon conviction, be subject
to a forfeiture of not less than $400 and not more than $1,000, together
with the cost of prosecution for each violation.
Sec. 50-126 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 50-128
1:270
ARTICLE V
[AdoptedCH1-I1L2D- 2S0A1F5EBTyY OZrOdN. ENSo. 14-13]
Sec. 50-200. Purpose.
(a) The City Council finds and declares that sex offenders are a serious
threat to public safety and there is a need to protect children where
they congregate or play in public places in addition to the protections
afforded by state law near schools and day-care facilities. The City finds
and declares that, in addition to schools and day-care facilities, children
congregate or play in a number of other public places, including public
parks and other facilities for children.
(b) The City Council is aware that sex offenders have dramatically higher
recidivism rates than any other type of violent felon, and according to
1997 and 2003 reports by the United States Department of Justice, sex
offenders are the least likely to be cured and the most likely to reoffend
and prey on the most innocent members of our society, and more than 2/
3 of the victims of rape and sexual assault are under the age of 18; and
(c) The City Council knows that the United States Supreme Court has
recognized that the risk of recidivism posed by sexual offenders is
"frightening and high" and "when convicted sex offenders re-enter
society, they are much more likely than any other type of offender to be
re-arrested for a new rape or sexual assault," Smith v. Doe, 538 U.S. 84,
123 S.Ct. 1140 155 L.Ed. 2d 164 (2003) and McKune v. Lile, 536 U.S.
24, 34, 122 S.Ct. 2017, 153 L.Ed. 2d 47 (2002) citing U.S. Department
of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sex Offenses and Offenders, 27
(1997): U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics,
Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1983, page 6 (1997).
(d) The City Council has reviewed the decision of the United States Court
of Appeals for the 8th Circuit in Doe v. Miller, 405 F.3d 700, 716 (8th
Circuit 2005), providing in part: "The record does not support a
conclusion that the Iowa General Assembly and the Governor acted
biased merely on negative attitudes toward, fear of, or a bare desire to
harm a politically unpopular group. [Citation omitted] Sex offenders
have a high rate of recidivism, and the parties presented expert
testimony that reducing opportunity and temptation is important to
minimizing the risk for individuals to reoffend. Even experts in the field
could not predict with confidence whether a particular sex offender will
reoffend, whether an offender convicted of an offense against a
teenager will be among those who crossover to offend against a
younger child, or the degree to which regular proximity to a place
where children are located, enhances the risk for individuals to
reoffend against children. One expert in the district court opined that it
is just common sense that limiting the frequency of contact between sex
offenders and areas where children are located is likely to reduce the
risk of an offense. [Citation omitted] The policymakers of Iowa are
entitled to employ such common sense, and we are not persuaded that
Sec. 50-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-200
1:271
Sec. 50-201. Definitions.
As used in this article and unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CRIME AGAINST CHILDREN — Any of the following offenses set forth
within the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, or the laws of this or any
other state or the federal government, having like elements necessary for
conviction, respectively:
the means selected to pursue the State's legitimate interest are without
rational basis."
(e) This article is a regulatory measure aimed at protecting the health and
safety of children in the City of Lake Geneva from the risk that
convicted sex offenders may reoffend in locations close to their
residences. It is the intent of this article not to impose a criminal
penalty but rather to serve the City's compelling interest to promote,
protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
City by creating areas around locations where children regularly
congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders
and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or
permanent residence; and by creating child safety zones where children
regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein access by
certain sexual offenders and sexual predators to such zones shall be
restricted or excluded.
(1) Section 940.225(1), First degree sexual assault;
(2) Section 940.225(2), Second degree sexual assault;
(3) Section 940.225(3), Third degree sexual assault;
(4) Section 940.22(2), Sexual exploitation by therapist;
Section 940.30, False imprisonment; victim was minor and not the
offender's child;
(5)
Section 940.31, Kidnapping; victim was minor and not the offender's
child;
(6)
(7) Section 944.10, Sexual intercourse with a child (prior statute);
(8) Section 944.06, Incest;
(9) Section 944.11, Indecent behavior with a child (prior statute);
(10)Section 944.12 Enticing Child for Immoral Purposes (prior statute);
Section 948.02(1) and (2), First and second degree sexual assault of a
child;
(11)
Section 948.025, Engaging in repeated acts of sexual asault of the same
child;
(12)
Sec. 50-200 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 50-201
1:272
OFFENDER — A person who has been convicted of or has been found
delinquent of or has been found not guilty by reason of disease or mental
defect of a sexually violent offense and/or a crime against children.
RESIDENCE (RESIDE) — The place where a person sleeps, which may
include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
SEXUALLY VIOLENT OFFENSE — Shall have the meaning as set forth in
Section 980.01 (6), Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time.
Sec. 50-202. Creation; residency restrictions.
(13)Section 948.05, Sexual exploitation of a child;
(14)Section 948.055, Causing a child to view or listen to sexual activity;
(15)Section 948.06, Incest with a child;
(16)Section 948.07, Child enticement;
(17)Section 948.075, Use of a computer to facilitate a child sex crime;
(18)Section 948.08, Soliciting a child for prostitution;
Section 948.095, Sexual assault of a student by school instructional
staff;
(19)
Section 948.11(2)(a) or (am), Exposing child to harmful material; felony
section;
(20)
(21)Section 948.12, Possession of child pornography;
(22)Section 948.30, Abduction of another's child;
Section 971.17, Not guilty by reason of mental disease; of an included
offense;
(23)
(24)Section 975.06, Sex crimes law commitment.
(a) A child safety zone is hereby created in the following locations, and an
offender shall not reside within 2,000 feet of real property that supports
or upon which there exists any of the following uses:
(1) Any facility for children;
(2) A public park, parkway, parkland, park facility;
(3) A public swimming pool;
(4) A public library;
(5) A public beach;
(6) A recreational trail;
(7) A public playground;
Sec. 50-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-202
1:273
Sec. 50-203. Loitering.
(8) A school for children;
(9) Athletic fields used by children;
(10) A day-care center;
(11) Venetian Festival held annually in August of each year and
sponsored by the Lake Geneva Jaycees.
(12) Any specialized school for children, including, but not limited to, a
gymnastics academy, dance academy or music school; or
(13) Aquatic facilities open to the public.
(b) Measurement of distance. The distance shall be measured from the
closest boundary line of the real property supporting the residence of
an offender to the closest boundary line of the real property that
supports or upon which there exists any of the uses enumerated in
Subsection (a) of this section.
(c) Residency restriction exceptions. An offender residing within 2,000 feet
of real property that supports or upon which there exists any of the uses
enumerated in Subsection (a) of this section does not commit a violation
of this article if any of the following apply:
(1) The offender is required to serve a sentence or is otherwise
involuntarily required to reside in a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or
other correctional institution or mental facility.
(2) The offender has established a residence prior to the effective date
of the ordinance codified in this article.
(3) The use enumerated in Subsection (a) of this section began after
the offender established a residence.
(4) The offender is a minor or ward under guardianship.
(d) In addition to and notwithstanding the foregoing, but subject to
Subsection (c) of this section, no offender, who has been convicted of a
sexually violent offense and/or crime against children, shall be
permitted to reside in the City of Lake Geneva and no supervised
release of such Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 980 sexually violent person
shall be established in the City of Lake Geneva unless such offender was
domiciled in the City of Lake Geneva at the time of the offense resulting
in the offender's most recent conviction for committing the sexually
violent offense and/or crime against children.
(a) It is unlawful for any person defined as an offender pursuant to Section
50-201 to loiter or prowl in the locations enumerated in Section
50-202(a) in a place, at a time, or a manner not usual for law-abiding
Sec. 50-202 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 50-203
1:274
Sec. 50-204. Exceptions to loitering.
The previous section shall not apply where the actor was accompanied by
his/her parent, guardian or other adult person having his/her care, custody
or control, or where that actor was exercising first amendment rights
protected by the United States Constitution or Wisconsin Constitution,
including freedom of speech, the free exercise of religion and the right of
assembly.
Sec. 50-205. Violations and penalties.
Sec. 50-206. Severability.
The provisions of this article shall be deemed severable and it is expressly
declared that the City Council would have passed the other provisions of
this article irrespective of whether or not one or more provisions may be
declared invalid. If any provisions of this article or the application to any
person or circumstance are held invalid, the remainder of this article or the
application of such other provisions to other persons or circumstances shall
not be affected.
individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of
persons or property in the vicinity.
(b) Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight
upon appearance of a peace officer, refuses to identify himself/herself
or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself/herself or any object. Unless
flight by the actor or other circumstances make it impracticable, a
peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section,
afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would
otherwise be warranted by requesting him/her to identify himself/
herself and explain his/her presence and conduct at the locations
enumerated in Section 50-202(a). No person shall be convicted of an
offense under this section if the peace officer did not comply with the
preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given
by the actor was true and, if believed by the peace officer at the time,
would have dispelled the alarm.
(a) A person who violates provisions of Section 50-202 shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $500 and no more than $1,000 for each
violation. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. The City may also seek equitable relief, including injunctions,
to gain compliance.
(b) Any person violating Section 50-203 of this article shall forfeit not less
than $1,000 and no more than $2,000 for each violation.
Sec. 50-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 50-206
1:275
Chapter 53
PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets, sidewalks and other public places —
See Ch. 62.
Sec. 53-1. Permit required. [Ord. No. 03-05, § I, 4-28-2003]
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or conduct any parade or
public assembly unless a permit is issued by the City Clerk, which shall be
issued only after investigation and recommendation of the Chief of Police.
Sec. 53-2. Application for permit. [Ord. No. 03-05, § I, 4-28-2003]
(a) A person seeking a parade or public assembly permit shall file an
application with the City Clerk on forms provided, and the application
shall be signed by the applicant under oath. All applications shall be
promptly forwarded to the Chief of Police for investigation. If the
parade or public assembly permit is granted, the City Clerk shall issue
the permit forthwith.
(b) An application for a parade or public assembly permit shall be filed with
the City Clerk at least seven business days in advance of the date of the
proposed parade or public assembly. The Chief of Police or City Mayor
may waive the time limit of any proposed parade or public assembly if
after due consideration of the date, time and place of the parade or
public assembly, the anticipated number of participants, and the City
services required in connection with the event, the Chief of Police
recommends to the City Clerk that the waiver will not diminish public
safety.
(c) The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall set for the
following information:
(1) The name, address and daytime telephone number, pager/cell
phone number if applicable, and facsimile number of the person
seeking to conduct such parade or public assembly.
(2) If the parade or public assembly is proposed to be conducted by an
organization, the name, address and daytime telephone number of
the headquarters of the organization, and the authorized and
responsible heads of the organizations.
(3) The name, address and daytime telephone number of the person
who will be in charge (chairperson) of the parade or public
assembly.
Sec. 50-206 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 53-2
1:276
Sec. 53-3. Fees. [Ord. No. 03-05, § I, 4-28-2003; amended 10-9-2017
by Ord. No. 17-14]
The Common Council may establish a nonrefundable fee by resolution to
cover administrative costs of processing the permit which shall be paid
by the applicant when the application is filed. If the application is for the
use of any City property or for any City services, the applicant shall pay
prior to the issuance of a permit any required charges in accordance with
a schedule of service costs approved by the Common Council by resolution.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all fees, except the nonrefundable fee to
cover the administrative cost of processing the permit, will be waived for
the Memorial Day parade, the Fourth of July Parade, the Badger High
School Homecoming Parade, and the Christmas Parade.
Sec. 53-4. Investigation prior to issuance. [Ord. No. 03-05, § I,
4-28-2003]
(4) The requested date of the parade or public assembly and the hours
that it will commence and terminate.
(5) The requested route to be traveled, including the starting point and
the termination point.
(6) The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which will constitute such parade or public assembly and the type
of animals and description of the vehicles and the basis on which
this estimate is made.
(a) The Chief of Police shall investigate the facts set out in the application
and shall recommend to the City Clerk to issue a permit when he/she
finds that:
(1) The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrians or
vehicular traffic contiguous to its route or location;
(2) The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not require the
diversion of so great a number of City police officers to properly
police the line of movement and the areas contiguous as to prevent
normal police protection of the City;
(3) The concentration of persons, animals, vehicles at public assembly
points of the parade or public assembly will not unduly interfere
with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to,
areas contiguous to such public assembly areas;
(4) The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not prevent or
interfere with the operation of any public service within the City
which may be necessary to provide while the parade or public
assembly is in progress;
(5) The event is not being conducted for an unlawful purpose;
Sec. 53-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 53-4
1:277
(6) The parade or public assembly is scheduled to move from its point
of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without
unreasonable delays in route;
(7) Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will
be made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas;
(8) There are sufficient parking places near the site of the parade or
public assembly to accommodate the number of vehicles
reasonably expected;
(9) The proposed activity will not interfere with the use of the
requested area by another party to whom a valid permit has been
issued for the same area or route;
(10)No other event is scheduled elsewhere in the City where the police
resources required for that event are so great that the deployment
of police services for the proposed parade or public assembly would
have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety
of persons and property;
(11) The application contains sufficient information about the proposed
route and crowd estimate to enable the Police Chief to evaluate the
proposed event under this section.
(b) In investigating the application, the Chief of Police may recommend the
conduct of a parade or public assembly on a date, at time, at a location,
or over a route different from that named by the applicant. This
alternate permit shall to extent practicable authorize an event that will
have comparable public visibility and a similar route, location and date
to that of the proposed event. An applicant desiring to accept an
alternative parade or public assembly permit shall within two business
days after notice of the Chief of Police's alternative recommendation,
file a written notice of acceptance with the City Clerk. An alternative
parade or public assembly permit shall conform to the requirements
and shall have the effect of a parade or public assembly permit.
(c) The Chief of Police is empowered to limit the parade and public
assembly to the sidewalk or to one or more traffic lanes of the street
where it is determined that such limited area is capable of
accommodating the number of people anticipated based upon the
information submitted by the applicant and the experience of previous
comparable events. In the event that the number of persons in
attendance exceed anticipated levels, members of the Police
Department are authorized to make reasonable accommodation to
increase the portion of the public way made available in order to
preserve public health and safety.
(d) If the Chief of Police denies an application for failure to provide
sufficient information about the proposed route or crowd estimate, he
shall specify what additional information must be provided in a new or
amended application.
Sec. 53-4 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 53-5
1:278
Sec. 53-5. Notice of denial of application. [Ord. No. 03-05, § I,
4-28-2003]
The Chief of Police shall act promptly to investigate and issue a
recommendation within two business days after the filing of the application
for a parade or public assembly permit. If the Chief of Police recommends
denial, then the City Clerk shall disapprove the application. The City Clerk
shall notify the applicant by facsimile transmission or telephonically and
mail directed to the applicant within two business days after the Chief of
Police denial, along with a notice stating the Chief of Police's facts and
conclusions which are the basis for his/her denial of the permit.
Sec. 53-6. Appeal procedure. [Ord. No. 03-05, § I, 4-28-2003]
Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade or public
assembly permit to the Finance/License and Judicial Committee and City
Council. A hearing before the Finance/License and Judicial Committee shall
be held within three business days after the filing of appeal, and based
upon the evidence contained in the record, the Committee shall recommend
that the City Council either affirm or reverse the decision of the Chief of
Police. This City Council determination shall be subject to judicial review in
accordance with the laws of the state.
Sec. 53-7. Notice to City and other officials. [Ord. No. 03-05, § I,
4-28-2003]
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly permit, the
City Clerk shall send a copy thereof to the following:
Sec. 53-8. Contents of permit. [Ord. No. 03-05, § I, 4-28-2003]
Each parade or public assembly permit shall state the following
information:
(1) The Mayor.
(2) The Chief of Police.
(3) The City Attorney.
(4) The Fire Chief.
(5) Each Alderman. [Amended 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 08-18]
(6) The official newspaper.
(1) Starting and ending times.
(2) The portions of the streets that may be occupied by the parade or public
assembly.
(3) The maximum length of the parade or public assembly in miles or
fractions thereof.
Sec. 53-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 53-9
1:279
Sec. 53-9. Duties of permittee. [Ord. No. 03-05, § I, 4-28-2003]
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade or public
assembly chairperson shall carry the parade or public assembly permit
upon his/her person during the conduct of the parade or public assembly.
Sec. 53-10. Revocation of permit. [Ord. No. 03-05, § I, 4-28-2003]
The Chief of Police and/or City Clerk shall have the authority to revoke a
parade or public assembly permit instantly upon violation of the conditions
or standards for issuance as set forth in this chapter or, when a public
emergency arises where the police resources required for that emergency
are so great that deployment of police services for the parade or public
assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and
safety of persons or property.
Sec. 53-11. Public conduct during parades or public assemblies.
[Ord. No. 03-05, § I, 4-28-2003]
Sec. 53-12. Penalties. [Ord. No. 03-05, § I, 4-28-2003]
Any person violating the provisions of any section of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500 for each
violation, together with the costs of prosecution. In the event the defendant
defaults on payment thereof, the defendant's operating privileges shall be
suspended pursuant to W.S.A. §§ 343.30, 345.47, or by imprisonment in the
county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not in excess of the
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any
parade or public assembly without first having obtained a permit as
herein provided.
(b) Any person who knowingly interferes with any other person or
organizations lawfully conducting a parade or public assembly, or any
person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to
the penalties in Section 53-12.
(c) No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere
with any parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in a parade or public assembly.
(d) No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade or public assembly when such vehicles or persons
are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade or public
assembly. The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonable
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street
constituting a part of the route of parade or public assembly. The Chief
of Police shall post signs to that effect, and it shall be unlawful for any
persons to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof.
Sec. 53-9 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 53-12
1:280
number of days set forth in W.S.A. § 800.095(4). Each day's violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 54
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcohol beverages — See Ch. 6.
Streets, sidewalks and other public places —
See Ch. 62.
Lakes and beaches — See Ch. 90, Art. II.
Sec. 53-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 53-12
1:281

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 54-1. Duties of City officials. [Code 1992, § 19.03(18)]
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or hinder any City employee, official
or police officer from performing his official duties.
Sec. 54-2. Enforcement of chapter. [Code 1992, § 19.05(1);
amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14]
The Board of Park Commissioners and all deputies, whether regular or
special, of the City Police Department shall enforce this chapter.
Sec. 54-3. Penalty for violation of chapter. [Code 1992, § 19.05(2)]
Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects, omits or refuses to comply with
the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in
W.S.A., § 27.98.
Sec. 54-4. Park fund; expenditure of fund. [Code 1992, § 14.02(1),
(3)]
Sec. 54-5. through Sec. 54-30. (Reserved)
(a) A nonlapsing fund, to be known as the “Park Fund,” shall be used by the
City to purchase real property to be used exclusively for City parks, for
capital improvements to City parks and improvements on other
property under contract for use as a City park or recreational area.
(b) The park commission shall recommend the expenditures of any funds
from the Park Fund, and the expenditure of funds shall be subject to
approval of the City Council and as otherwise required by state
statutes.
Sec. 54-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 54-5
1:283

ARTICLE II
RULES OF CONDUCT AND BEHAVIOR
Sec. 54-31. Adopted. [Code 1992, § 19.01]
The provisions of this article shall constitute the rules and regulations
governing the conduct and behavior of visitors to City parks and
recreational areas.
Sec. 54-32. Posting. [Code 1992, § 19.03]
This article shall be posted (printed on heavy paper) in all City parks and
recreational areas.
Sec. 54-33. Areas regulated. [Code 1992, § 19.02]
The provisions of this article shall apply to all lands, structures and property
owned, leased or administered by the City for park and recreational
purposes.
Sec. 54-34. Enumeration. [Code 1992, § 19.03; Ord. No. 96-9, § I,
8-12-1996]
The following regulations shall apply to all City parks and recreational
areas:
(1) Sound amplifiers. No person shall without a permit from the Board of
Park Commissioners operate any sound truck, loudspeaker, motor or
any other mechanical device that produces undue or unnecessary
noises. [Amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14]
(2) Entertainment or demonstrations. No person shall hold or take part in
any musical, theatrical or other entertainment or any parade,
procession or demonstration of any kind in any City park or recreational
area without a permit from the Board of Park Commissioners.
[Amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14]
(3) Advertising or business activity. No person shall post unauthorized
signs on any lands, structures or property or solicit, transact or conduct
any business of any nature in or upon any City park or recreational area
without having first obtained the written consent of the Board of Park
Commissioners. [Amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14]
(4) Animals. No person shall suffer or permit his dog, cat or other pet or
domestic animal or fowl to run at large as defined by Section 10-67 of
this Code in or upon any City park or recreational area at any time,
except as specifically provided in Section 10-67. Violators will be
subject to the penalties set forth in Sections 10-68, 10-69, and 10-94 of
this Code. [Amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14; 9-24-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-21]
Sec. 54-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 54-34
1:285
(5) Fires. Fires shall be regulated as follows: [Amended 7-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-08]
a. Except as provided in Subsection (5)b of this section, no person
shall construct or otherwise cause a fire for any purpose within a
public park without first obtaining a permit, in writing, issued by
the Fire Chief. Such permit shall set forth the material to be
burned, the time and date of the proposed burning and the location
and site upon which the burning will take place.
b. Fires for cooking are only permitted in picnic areas in Seminary
Park and Donian Park, in the grills provided or in a suitable device
that contains the fire up off the ground. No fires are permitted on
the ground.
c. No person shall leave any fire unattended or throw away any
matches, cigarettes, cigars or pipe ashes at any time without first
extinguishing them.
(6) Refuse disposal. Refuse shall be disposed of as follows:
a. No person shall discard or leave any refuse or sewage, including
garbage, rubbish, bottles, tin cans, glass, debris or any other waste
material on the ground or in any building or installation or throw
the same into the water in or upon any City park or recreational
area, but shall dispose of the same in designated containers.
b. Charcoal residue shall be left in a grate or fireplace until cool or
placed in receptacles provided for such purposes.
(7) Operation of vehicles. Vehicles shall be operated according to the
following:
a. No person shall drive or ride any bicycle, motorcycle, motor
vehicle, motor-driven snow vehicle or a horse in any part of the City
parks or recreational areas except on regular drives designated
therefor.
b. No person shall operate any vehicle at a speed in excess of 10 miles
per hour.
(8) Parking of vehicles. No person shall park, stop or leave standing,
whether attended or unattended, any vehicle:
a. In any manner as to block, obstruct or limit the use of any road,
walk or trail.
b. Outside any area provided for such purposes of parking.
c. Contrary to posted notices.
(9) Prohibited areas. No person shall enter in any way any building,
installation or area that may be locked or closed to public use or
contrary to posted notices.
Sec. 54-34 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 54-34
1:286
Sec. 54-35. Business in parks. [Code 1992, § 12.11]
(10) Flowers. No person shall pick, cut, destroy, disturb or in any manner
harm any wild plants or flowers growing in any park or recreation area
of the City.
(11) Payment of fees. No person shall use any facilities, land or area for
which a fee has been established without the payment of such fee or
charge.
(12)Wildlife. No person shall take, catch, kill, trap, pursue or otherwise
disturb any wild animals or birds in any City park or recreation area,
except that trapping shall be permitted in the area of the White River
estuary between Main Street and the property boundary of the parcel
identified as Tax Key Number ZYUP00152 by permit and upon terms
and conditions set by the City Council by resolution. Notwithstanding
the provisions of Section 54-3, any violators of this subsection shall be
subject to a forfeiture of $500, the costs of prosecution, and/or
suspension of the violator’s driver’s license. [Amended 2-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
(13) Camping. No person shall camp in or on any land under the control of
the Board of Park Commissioners. Camping is defined as the use of a
tent, shelter, trailer, motor vehicle, tarpaulin, bed roll or sleeping bag
for temporary residence or sleeping purposes.
(14) Closing hours. Closing hours shall be as follows:
a. No person shall be in or on any park or recreational area of the City
from 10:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. daily.
b. Exceptions to closing hours shall be granted for special events
approved by the Council and to persons on established sidewalks
when en route to their residence or place of business.
(15) Golf. Golf practice shall be prohibited except in designated areas.
(16) Archery. Archery shall be prohibited except in designated areas.
(17) Riviera lawn. No person shall use the lawn located north of the Riviera
building and between the Riviera building and Wrigley Drive for
sunbathing, sleeping, lounging, picnicking or similar uses.
(a) Prohibited generally. Except as provided in this section, no person shall
conduct any business of any nature for private gain or offer for sale or
consideration any service of any kind or operate any business or
conduct any sales booth, stand or other contrivance, whether the same
be portable or stationary, for the sale of any merchandise, within or
upon any public parks, public grounds or docks or piers extending from
any public park or public grounds or from any public highway within
the City or upon the water of Geneva Lake.
Sec. 54-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 54-35
1:287
Sec. 54-36. Park rules for boards, bikes and blades. [Ord. No.
01-29, § I, 9-10-2001; Ord. No. 01-31, § I, 11-26-2001]
Sec. 54-37. Motorized vehicles prohibited on recreational trails.
[Ord. No. 03-06, § I, 5-27-2003]
Sec. 54-38. through Sec. 54-60. (Reserved)
(b) Exception; permit. The Council may, by special permit for the purpose
of accommodating the public in the parks, lake shore, piers, docks or
public highways, rent concessions to churches, religious, charitable or
benevolent organizations, the American Legion or such persons or
other organizations as the Council may deem fit to operate such
concessions under such terms and conditions as the Council may
provide or impose.
(a) Hours of operation:
(1) Not open when Eastview School is in session.
(2) Otherwise: 9:00 a.m. until sundown, unless surfaces are wet or
snow covered.
(b) Rules:
(1) Enter at your own risk.
(2) City and school district assume no liability.
(3) Behavior should display caring, courtesy, respect, responsibility
and honesty.
(4) Inappropriate language and behavior not permitted.
(5) All participants must wear a helmet, and other protective
equipment is recommended.
(6) Bike tires must be clean before entering fenced area.
(7) Smoking not permitted.
(8) Food and drink not allowed inside fenced area.
(9) Spectators not allowed inside fenced area.
(c) If you break the rules or enter fenced area when park is not open, you
will be banned from park including spectator area.
(a) No person shall drive or operate any motorized vehicle on any
designated recreational, bicycle and/or pedestrian trail.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not be applicable to persons of special needs
driving or operating motorized wheel chairs or scooters.
Sec. 54-35 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 54-38
1:288
ARTICLE III
BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS
Sec. 54-61. Composition. [Code 1992, § 1.33(1); Ord. No. 08-02,
3-10-2008; amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14]
There shall be nine members on the Board of Park Commissioners. One of
the members shall be the Mayor, one member shall be an Alderman, and the
rest shall be citizens of the City.
Sec. 54-62. Officers. [Code 1992, § 1.33(2); Ord. No. 08-02,
3-10-2008; amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14; 12-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-26]
The members of the Board of Park Commissioners shall elect a President
(Chairman) from amongst its citizen members. The Commissioners may
elect other officers necessary or appropriate to aid in the efficient running
of the Board.
Sec. 54-63. Appointment. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended
7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14]
The members shall be appointed to the Board of Park Commissioners by
the Mayor. The appointments shall be subject to approval of the Common
Council.
Sec. 54-64. Term. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
The members shall serve three-year terms. The terms of members shall be
staggered so as to have three members' terms expire each year.
Sec. 54-65. Vacancy. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008]
Any vacancy shall be filled through the appointment procedures described
above for the remainder of the term.
Sec. 54-66. Salary. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended 7-13-2009
by Ord. No. 09-14]
Members of the Board of Park Commissioners shall serve without
compensation.
Sec. 54-67. Quorum. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended
7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14]
A majority of the membership of the Board of Park Commissioners shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Sec. 54-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 54-68
1:289
Sec. 54-68. Board powers and duties. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008;
amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14]
The Board of Park Commissioners shall have the duties and powers set forth
below:
(1) Meeting. The Board of Park Commissioners shall meet at least
quarterly. The Board may meet as necessary, or as called by the
Chairman or as called by a majority of the Board. The Chairperson is
responsible for the preparation of the agenda and shall provide a digital
or electronic copy of such agenda to the City Clerk for posting and
distribution to other Board members and the public at least 48 hours
prior to such meeting. All meetings shall be at City Hall. The Acting
Secretary shall submit in a timely fashion a digital copy of the meeting
minutes to the City Clerk for posting and distribution. If action by the
City Council is desired, such action shall be so noted in the minutes.
[Amended 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-26]
(2) Duties. The Board of Park Commissioners shall serve as an advisory
board to the Common Council. The Board of Park Commissioners shall
advise the Council on all matters pertaining to parks, recreation, and
forestry. Areas of responsibility shall include but are not limited to:
[Amended 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-26]
a. Creation of subcommittees to effectively monitor and advise on
specific issues regarding parks, recreation, or forestry, including
the City Tree Board;
b. The management, improvement, and care of public parks,
parkways, boulevards, and pleasure drives of the City;
c. The development of policies, procedures, rules, and regulations
pertaining to the use of public parks, City-sponsored recreation
programs, and forestry;
d. The development of the annual operating and capital budgets for
parks, recreation, and forestry;
e. The development of a broad variety of recreational programs and
services to meet the needs and demands of the community;
f. The development of a master plan for the City's park system;
g. Advising the Council on issues of land acquisition, use of park
impact fees, and leasing and/or land sales or exchanges affecting
the City's park system; and
h. Advising the Council on levels of staffing required by the City's
park system.
(3) Tree Board. The Board of Park Commissioners shall create and appoint
members of a Tree Board who shall carry out provisions of Wisconsin
Statutes and Chapter 82 of the Municipal Code for the City of Lake
Sec. 54-68 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 54-68
1:290
Sec. 54-69. Financial reports. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended
7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14]
In accordance with W.S.A., § 27.10, the Board of Park Commissioners shall,
prior to October 1 of each year:
Geneva, Wisconsin, and such other duties as required to report to the
Board of Park Commissioners. [Amended 12-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-26]
(4) Powers. The Board of Park Commissioners shall, in accordance with the
state law established in W.S.A., § 27.08, exercise the powers granted it,
including:
a. Govern and maintain all public parks and other natural enjoyment
areas in the City; improve those areas; secure the quiet and orderly
enjoyment of the areas; and create rules and regulations to
facilitate the above purposes.
b. Acquire property, money, trusts, rights, and privileges through gift,
devise, bequest, or condemnation for the City parks.
Gifts shall only be accepted after the Board of Park Commissioners
has recommended the gift to the Common Council and the
Common Council has approved acceptance by a resolution.
c. Buy or lease lands in the name of the areas under the control of the
Board of Park Commissioners, in accordance with W.S.A.,
§ 27.08(2)(c).
d. Change or improve all areas under the Board's control.
(1) Make an estimate of the expenditures by the Board of Park
Commissioners during the coming calendar year including:
a. All necessary incidental expenses.
b. The amount necessary for the purchase of land for parks,
parkways, boulevards, and pleasure drives.
c. Transmit the report to Common Council.
(2) The Board of Park Commissioners shall transmit to Common Council
prior to March 1 of each year a report including:
a. All transactions for the preceding year;
b. An itemized account of all receipts and expenditures;
c. A list of employees; and
d. An inventory of property in the charge of the Board of Park
Commissioners.
Sec. 54-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 54-70
1:291
Sec. 54-70. Care of funds. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended
7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08;
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
All moneys appropriated for park services or received through other means
for the areas governed by the Board of Park Commissioners shall be paid
over to the Treasurer to be disbursed by orders of the Treasurer.
Sec. 54-71. Special assessments. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008;
amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14]
The Board of Park Commissioners shall follow the report, notice, and
hearing requirements outlined in W.S.A., § 27.10(4) for any and all special
assessments.
Sec. 54-70 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 54-71
1:292
Chapter 58
SOLID WASTE
Sec. 54-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 54-71
1:293

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 58-1. Purpose of chapter. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I, 12-12-1994]
The purpose of this chapter is to promote recycling, composting, and
resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling
program, as provided in W.S.A., § 159.11, and Chapter NR 544, Wis. Adm.
Code. The City also provides through this chapter a reliable, weekly, daycertain
solid waste collection system.
Sec. 58-2. Statutory authority of chapter. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I,
12-12-1994]
This chapter is adopted as authorized under W.S.A., § 159.09(3)(b).
Sec. 58-3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(16.09), 12-12-1994]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPROVED GARBAGE CONTAINER — Garbage can, plastic bag, cart, or
throwaway container of not more than 45 gallons.
APPROVED RECYCLING CONTAINER — A recycling container approved by
the City.
COMMERCIAL CLASS — All business enterprises, offices, manufacturing,
sales, industry and multifamily dwellings of five or more units.
CONTAINER BOARD — Corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
DUMPSTER — A metal container commonly used to collect refuse in
multifamily dwellings and commercial establishments.
FOAM POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING — Packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
GARBAGE — All kinds of organic refuse resulting from the preparation of
food and all decayed or spoiled food products from any source whatever.
GLASS — Glass bottles, jars and containers and does not include window
glass, drinking glasses, Pyrex, light bulbs or other noncontainer glass.
HAULER — The refuse (solid waste) service contracted with by the City
or contracted for directly by residential or commercial customers, which
(1) Is designed for serving food or beverages.
Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
(2)
Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
(3)
Sec. 58-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 58-3
1:295
collects and removes from the City all refuse to a properly licensed landfill
or incinerator. All such haulers must abide by preparation standards for
recyclable materials. No hauler shall remove refuse which does not comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
HAZARDOUS WASTE OR SUBSTANCE — Those wastes or substances
defined in Chapter NR 181, Wis. Adm. Code, or as defined in W.S.A.,
§ 144.62.
HDPE — High-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 2.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Automotive and related batteries that are
comprised of lead plates with an acid electrolyte and does not include
nickel cadmium batteries, dry cell batteries or batteries used in calculators,
watches, hearing aids or similar devices.
LDPE — Low-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 4.
MAGAZINES — Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
MAJOR APPLIANCES — A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven,
refrigerator, stove, water heater, furnaces, boilers, dehumidifiers or any
other items commonly referred to as "white goods."
METAL CANS — Any tin-coated steel cans, bimetal cans and aluminum cans
used for food and other nonhazardous materials, but excluding aerosol cans
and cans that held paint, paint-related products, pesticides or other toxic or
hazardous substances.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS — A property containing five or more
residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
NEWSPAPER OR NEWSPRINT — A common and inexpensive machine
finished paper made chiefly from wood pulp and used mostly for
newspapers. All newsprint shall be recycled.
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES — Commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. This
term does not include multiple-family dwellings.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This
term does not include industrial process waste.
OTHER RESINS OR MULTIPLE RESINS — Plastic resins labeled by the SPI
Code No. 7.
PETE — Polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI Code No. 1.
PLASTIC CONTAINER — An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can,
jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a
product that is the subject of a retail sale.
POSTCONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in W.S.A.,
Sec. 58-3 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 58-3
1:296
§ 144.61(5), waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in W.S.A.,
§ 144.44(7)(a)1.
PP — Polypropylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 5.
PS — Polystyrene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 6.
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride, labeled by SPI Code No. 3.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — All identified materials meeting preparation
standards and shall include the following: tin; aluminum; major appliances;
newsprint; cardboard; office paper, waste oil; unbroken brown, green and
clear container glass; rigid plastic containers, including those made of
PETE, HDPE PVC, LDPE, PP, and PS and other resins or multiple resins;
waste tires; lead acid batteries; other metals; and any other material
recognized by the state as recyclable. Such materials shall be recycled in
accordance with W.S.A., § 159.07 et seq., and this Code.
REFUSE — All nonrecyclable inorganic matter, such as garbage, furniture,
china, crockery, cloth, wood, ashes and other items of a similar nature. It
does not include leaves, grass, trees, tree limbs, earth, stone, manure or
material obtained from demolishing or remodeling of buildings and other
property whenever such materials exceeds one container per collection in
quantity.
REGULAR COMMERCIAL COLLECTION — The collection of refuse from
multiple-family residences of five dwelling units or more or from
commercial establishments as stored in City-approved dumpsters placed in
an approved location for service on a once-a-week basis. Commercial class
customers shall contract separately with any refuse hauler for service.
REGULAR RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION — The collection of combined
refuse from one-, two-, three-, and four-family dwelling units in approved
containers on a once-a-week basis. Each single-family dwelling unit shall
be limited to four garbage cans for municipal collection without additional
charges.
RESIDENTIAL CLASS — All dwelling units and multifamily buildings of less
than five units.
SOLID WASTE — As specified in W.S.A., § 144.01(15).
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — As specified in W.S.A., § 144.43(5).
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process which
is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of solid waste. The term "treatment" includes incineration.
UNUSUAL, HEAVY, BULKY OR HAZARDOUS ITEMS — Items which cannot
fit into a standard thirty-two gallon garbage container or which exceeds
four feet in length or 70 pounds or which contains hazardous waste. Items
exceeding this standard may be picked up at the discretion of the contract
hauler. This definition does not include white goods, i.e., stoves, water
heaters or appliances. All such materials must be placed at the curbside for
pickup.
Sec. 58-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 58-3
1:297
WASTE TIRE — A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact
root balls.
Sec. 58-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions. [Ord. No. 94-22,
§ I(16.03), 12-12-1994]
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply.
Sec. 58-5. Interpretation of chapter. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(16.04),
12-12-1994]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the state statutes.
Where any terms or requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or
conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply.
Where a provision of this chapter is required by state statutes, or by a
standard in Chapter NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the ordinance
provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the state
statutes and the Chapter NR 544 standards in effect on the date of the
adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (January 1,
1995), or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this
chapter.
Sec. 58-6. Applicability of chapter. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(16.06),
12-12-1994]
The requirements of this chapter apply to all persons within the City.
Sec. 58-7. Penalty for violation of chapter. [Ord. No. 94-22,
§ I(16.21), 12-12-1994]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person found in violation
of any provision of this chapter or any order, rule or regulation made under
this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 1-12.
Sec. 58-8. Administration and enforcement of chapter. [Ord. No.
94-22, § I(16.07), (16.20), 12-12-1994]
(a) Enforcement. The City Business Administrator or the supervising
department and all police officers shall give attention throughout the
Sec. 58-3 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 58-8
1:298
Sec. 58-9. Supervision of collection services. [Ord. No. 94-22,
§ I(10), 12-12-1994]
Supervision of garbage collection services shall be through the City
Business Administrator and the City department he designates, subject to
the provisions of this chapter and such additional rules and regulations as
may be made from time to time by the City Council.
Sec. 58-10. Littering. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(16.19), 12-12-1994]
No person shall deposit, throw, scatter or place any garbage or other refuse
on or within any public street, alley, park, sidewalk or other public place or
within any private property or premises, whether owned, kept or controlled
by such person or not, except in the manner provided in this chapter or as
directed by the police department for the health, safety and welfare of the
City.
Sec. 58-11. Commercial establishments. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(11),
12-12-1994]
Commercial establishments and apartment or multiple-family facilities of
five units or more shall contract directly with haulers for recycling and
solid waste collection and disposal services at the expense of such
establishments.
Sec. 58-12. Effective date. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(16.08), 12-12-1994]
The provisions of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived took
effect on January 1, 1995.
Sec. 58-13. through Sec. 58-40. (Reserved)
City to any case of violation of this chapter, promptly report the same
and take action to correct the violation.
(b) Administration. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by
City Business Administrator.
Sec. 58-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 58-13
1:299

ARTICLE II
COLLECTION
Sec. 58-41. Container specifications. [Code 1992, § 15.11(2)]
Every occupant of any dwelling, boardinghouse, restaurant or any place
of business having garbage to dispose of who does not otherwise provide
disposal of garbage in a sanitary manner shall provide one or more metal,
plastic or rubber containers sufficient to receive all garbage that may
accumulate between the times of collection. Each container, except when
otherwise permitted by the Building Inspector, shall be watertight, of a
capacity not less than five nor more than 25 gallons, with a verminproof,
flytight and watertight cover and shall be provided with a bail or handles.
Cans shall be so placed that they may be readily accessible for removing
or emptying the cans, and no other receptacle shall be used for garbage.
All garbage accumulated between the times of collection shall be placed in
such garbage containers which shall be kept covered and shall be cleaned
by the owners at least once a week and shall be kept in a sanitary condition.
All garbage shall be well drained and completely wrapped in paper before
being placed in containers, unless the Building Inspector shall otherwise
provide by regulations.
Sec. 58-42. Owner's responsibilities; costs upon failure; lien. [Code
1992, § 15.11(3)]
Sec. 58-43. Description of refuse collection services. [Ord. No.
94-22, § I(16.10), 12-12-1994]
(a) The owner of any residence, flat, rooming house or boardinghouse shall
be jointly responsible for the sanitary condition of the premises with
any tenant or renter thereof and when any tenant or renter fails or
refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the City may, after
giving 48 hours' notice, remove or have removed all such unsanitary or
deleterious material. The cost of such removal shall be charged against
the property from which such material has been removed.
(b) If the cost of removing such material is not paid by the following
October 1, the City Clerk shall spread such cost on the tax roll as a
special charge against the property affected to be collected in the
manner of all other special charges and assessments.
(a) Contractor to furnish necessary equipment. The contractor shall
furnish material, equipment, tools, trucks and labor sufficient at all
times to carry out the duties which he undertakes to perform and to
accomplish such duties in a good and workmanlike manner.
(b) Approval of equipment. All collection equipment shall be as approved
by the City Business Administrator or the supervising department, and
garbage collection trucks must be completely enclosed and kept clean
and sanitary.
Sec. 58-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 58-43
1:301
Sec. 58-44. Solid waste container requirements. [Ord. No. 94-22,
§ I(16.11), 12-12-1994]
(c) Appearance of employees and trucks. The contractor shall require that
all employees and trucks shall present as neat an appearance as
possible considering the type of work involved. The contractor agrees
that his employees shall at all times conduct their duties with politeness
and shall act in a well-mannered manner.
(d) Routes and schedules. The contractor shall provide the City with
schedules of collection routes and keep such information current at all
times.
(e) Bankruptcy. If the contractor is adjudged bankrupt, either voluntary or
involuntary, then the City may terminate, effective on the day and at the
time the bankruptcy is filed.
(f) Assignment. No assignment of the agreement for refuse collection or
any right occurring under the agreement shall be made, in whole or
part, by the contractor without the express written consent of the City.
In the event of any assignment, the assignee shall assume the liability of
the contractor.
(g) Default or breach of contract. In the event of any default or breach of
the refuse collection contract by the contractor, the City in its sole
discretion may withhold subsequent monthly installments until such
time as the parties resolve or have resolved for them any controversy
arising therefrom and the acts of the City of so withholding shall not
constitute a waiver, breach, repudiation, election, bar, estoppel,
ratification or the like. Its right to do so shall be in addition to any other
remedy it may have, legal, equitable or otherwise, and the contractor
shall not be relieved of performing further hereunder, but shall
continue to be obligated to so perform.
(a) Garbage cans. Garbage cans may be made of steel, aluminum or plastic.
The maximum size of cans is 45 gallons, and the maximum weight of
each can when full is 70 pounds. All cans must have handles and lids
and in no case shall any surfaces of the container have sharp,
dangerous or noxious surfaces which may be harmful to the collectors
or others.
(b) Throwaway containers. Throwaway containers shall mean plastic or
water-resistant paper bags, boxes, cartons, cans, crates and baskets
which shall be secured in such a manner that the contents thereof shall
not be blown or scattered about, become frozen to the ground or
become a nuisance to the neighbors or the area. Such containers may
hold refuse.
(c) Dumpsters. Dumpsters, commonly used by nonresidential facilities and
multiple-family properties, must have lids which are hinged and must
be free of holes which would allow leakage. All dumpsters used in the
Sec. 58-43 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 58-44
1:302
Sec. 58-45. Solid waste collection rules. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(16.12),
12-12-1994]
Solid waste collection rules are as follows:
refuse service must meet specifications set by the City Business
Administrator or the department supervising refuse services.
Dumpsters which are found to be leaking may be ordered to be replaced
by the City.
(d) Desirable area for dumpsters. An outside area shall be provided to
accommodate dumpsters and so placed that desirable screening can be
used to create an aesthetically acceptable refuse storage area. Plans or
drawings for a proposed area of this type shall be presented to the City
Building Inspector for approval before construction takes place. The
City shall establish separately from this chapter a policy statement
containing the standards for design of proper screening material. New
construction must submit plans as part of their primary building
construction plans.
(1) Garbage containers. All solid waste and garbage generated by
residential class facilities or properties shall be well-drained, dry or
wrapped in paper and deposited in an approved container of not more
than 45 gallons. All approved containers shall be kept closed with a
tight-fitting cover, except when being filled or emptied, and shall be
vermin and flyproof and kept in a sanitary condition. Garbage cans,
carts and dumpsters shall be placed so they can at all times be readily
accessible for removing or emptying.
(2) Garbage pickup days. Garbage pickup days shall be Monday through
Friday on a regular schedule approved by the City. Where holidays
interfere with regular pickup days, the pickup shall be rescheduled for
the next following workday. Persons unsure of their pickup day should
contact City Hall.
(3) Time of collection. Residents shall move their garbage containers from
their storage point to a collection point in time for prompt collection by
6:00 a.m. on the designated collection day and return their containers
to storage points from any curbside collection point by 8:00 p.m. on the
day of collection. Residents shall be responsible for the removal of
snow, ice and other impediments which would restrict easy access to
the containers located at the collection points. Materials shall not be
placed at the roadside more than 12 hours prior to pickup. Scheduled
pickup shall begin at 6:00 a.m.
(4) Storage point. All garbage containers and throwaway containers shall
be stored every day, except the day of collection, at any location on
private property convenient to the resident which is enclosed, stored in
the dwelling/garage or located behind or on the side of the resident's
dwelling/garage and which is so located so as not to create a nuisance
to the neighbors or the area.
Sec. 58-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 58-45
1:303
(5) Collection point. The collection point shall be as follows:
a. For properties with street access only, garbage cans and
throwaway containers shall be placed for regular collections by
6:00 a.m. on the collection day at a point between the curb and the
public sidewalk, near or on the driveway approach or service walk,
affording easy access to the collectors.
b. For properties with alley access, garbage cans and throwaway
containers shall be placed for regular collection by 6:00 a.m. on the
collection day at a point immediately adjacent to the alley right-ofway.
(6) Nonacceptable materials. Unacceptable materials include, but are not
limited to, grass clippings; building contractors' demolition material;
clean fill; broken concrete; logs; tree limbs; leaves; sod; turf; solvents;
caustics; acids; hazardous waste or substances; and other unusual,
heavy, bulky or hazardous items impossible or difficult to handle by one
person because of dimension, weight or potential harm, which the
City's contracted refuse service will not pick up. Building contractors,
landscapers and arborists are responsible for removal of any debris
resulting from their work, including all trees, limbs and leaves. Removal
of such materials must be contracted for separately.
(7) Collector may reject. The City Business Administrator or his designee,
City employees or contracted agents of the City may refuse to collect
any garbage or refuse improperly prepared or deposited for pickup as
provided by this section.
(8) Exceptions to day certain service. Exceptions to day certain service are
as follows:
a. Holidays. When a holiday falls on the resident's appointed
collection day, the collection shall be made on the next working day
following the holiday.
b. Weather. When a collection day falls during a declared snow
emergency, collection shall be made on the next working day after
the emergency ends. Extreme cold or excessive rain may also be
cause for temporarily halting refuse pickup.
(9) Exceptions to curbside pickup. Exceptions to curbside pickup are as
follows:
a. An exception to the curbside pickup service for reason of inability
to move approved containers because of the physical
characteristics of a lot from the point of storage to the point of
collection may be made by the City Business Administrator or
supervising department upon application of a resident.
b. An exception to the responsibility for moving a cart to the point of
collection for reason of incapability of all members of a household
Sec. 58-45 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 58-45
1:304
Sec. 58-46. Special collections. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(16.17),
12-12-1994]
shall be granted by the City Business Administrator or the
supervising department, upon application by any resident who
shall be able to demonstrate such incapability, provided that the
City Business Administrator or the supervising department may
require verification of such incapability by the applicant's personal
physician.
(a) Pickup of tree limbs, branches and brush. All tree limbs, cut trees,
branches and brush will be picked up on a day specified by the City. The
City will also make special collections of such material upon request.
(b) Requests. Requests for special collections shall be made in the form of a
telephone call or in writing to the City. The City Business Administrator
or the supervising department shall determine if any charge for
services is required, based upon the amount of time required or
difficulty of providing the special pickup.
(c) Fees. Special collection fees shall be set by the Council from time to
time, payable upon order for collection and shall include 15 minutes of
City crew operation or the rate charged by an independent contractor.
"City crew" is hereby defined as two Public Works Department
employees and the use of equipment. Additional time required shall be
billed to the resident on a time-consumed basis at the rate set by the
Council from time to time per additional and succeeding fifteen-minute
period or the rate charged by an independent contractor. Special
collection fees shall be charged to the property owner. Said fees are
special charges pursuant W.S.A. to § 66.0627. Any fees unpaid by
October 1 of each year shall be entered upon the tax roll as a special
charge against the property, and all proceedings in relation to the
collection, return, and sale of property for delinquent real estate taxes
shall apply to the special collection fee. Any property owner or resident
of said property owner who places yard waste on the roadside on days
not specified by the City and who does not make a request for special
collections will receive a forty-eight-hour notice to remove or have
removed such yard waste. Upon failure to remove or have such yard
waste removed, the City will remove the yard waste and charge the
special collection fees as set forth above. [Amended 6-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-20; 8-13-2012 by Ord. No. 12-16]
(d) Cutting and bundling of trees, branches or shrubs. Trees, branches or
shrubs with a diameter over three inches shall be cut in lengths of eight
feet and stacked at roadside for removal. Small branches, limbs and
brush shall be cut to a length not exceeding eight feet and shall be
bundled with string or rope. Bundles should not exceed 18 inches in
diameter. Tree trimmings may also be deposited at the City composting
center in the area provided for this purpose.
Sec. 58-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 58-46
1:305
Sec. 58-47. through Sec. 58-70. (Reserved)
(e) Demolition material, major appliances, lead acid batteries, waste tires
and waste oil. Pickup of resident-generated, as opposed to contractorgenerated,
loose demolition or remodeling material, major appliances,
lead acid batteries, waste tires and waste oil must be arranged directly
by the resident with the refuse hauler.
(f) Leaves. The City will provide regular pickup of leaves at the curbside
each fall season. Scheduling of the leaf pickup will be announced by the
City each year just prior to the beginning of service. Leaves shall be left
open on the terrace area adjacent to the street and not bagged.
(g) Grass clippings. The City does not provide pickup of grass clippings and
encourages residents to return their grass clippings to their lawns
which adds nutrients necessary for healthy growth. A municipal dropoff
site for grass clippings is provided for those that wish to collect their
clippings. The City shall provide annual notice of the availability and
procedures to follow for use of the drop-off site.
Sec. 58-46 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 58-47
1:306
ARTICLE III
RECYCLING
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 58-71. Scavenging. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(3), 12-12-1994]
Persons shall not pilfer recyclables or disturb recyclables once those
materials are placed for collection or deposited at a recycling center. All
recyclable materials placed for collection pursuant to this article shall
thereupon become the property of the City, the City's authorized agent
or a private collector/hauler whom persons in the City have contracted
to perform functions pursuant to the recycling plan approved by the City.
Only persons authorized by the City or the generator of waste shall collect
or handle recyclable materials once those materials have been placed
appropriately for collection. Any and each collection by authorized persons
in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense,
punishable as provided in Section 58-7.
Sec. 58-72. Disposal of separated recyclables; prohibited acts. [Ord.
No. 94-22, § I(4), 12-12-1994]
No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid
waste treatment facility any of the materials specified in Section 58-86(1)
through (15) which have been separated for recycling, except waste tires
may be burned with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
Sec. 58-73. through Sec. 58-85. (Reserved)
Sec. 58-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 58-73
1:307

DIVISION 2
SEPARATION, PREPARATION AND COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE
MATERIALS
Sec. 58-86. Separation of materials. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(16.13),
12-12-1994]
Occupants of single-family and two to four unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall separate the
following materials from post-consumer waste:
Sec. 58-87. Exceptions to Section 58-86. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(16.14),
12-12-1994]
The separation requirements of Section 58-86 do not apply to the following:
(1) Lead acid batteries;
(2) Major appliances;
(3) Waste oil;
(4) Yard waste;
(5) Aluminum containers;
(6) Bimetal containers;
(7) Corrugated paper or other container board;
(8) Foam polystyrene packaging;
(9) Glass containers;
(10) Magazines;
(11) Newspaper and newsprint;
(12) Office paper;
(13) Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and
other resins or multiple resins;
(14) Steel containers; and
(15)Waste tires.
(1) Occupants of single-family and two to four unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties that send
their post-consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the state
department of natural resources that recovers the materials specified in
Section 58-86 from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically
feasible.
Sec. 58-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 58-87
1:309
Sec. 58-88. Care of separated materials. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(16.15),
12-12-1994]
Sec. 58-89. Preparation and collection. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(16.16),
12-12-1994]
Except as otherwise directed by the City Council, occupants of single-family
and two to four unit residences shall do the following for the preparation
and collection of the separated materials specified in Section 58-86(5)
through (15):
(2) Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a licensed facility
if less than 30% of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid
waste burned as supplemental fuel.
(3) A recyclable material specified in Section 58-86(1) through (15) for
which a variance has been granted by the State Department of Natural
Resources under W.S.A., § 159.11(2m) or NR § 544.14, Wis. Adm. Code.
(a) To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated
in accordance with Section 58-86 shall be clean and kept free of
contaminants such as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other
nonrecyclable materials including, but not limited to, household
hazardous waste, medical waste, and agricultural chemical containers.
Recyclable materials shall be stored in a manner which protects them
from wind, rain, and other inclement weather conditions.
(b) Recycling bin. Recyclable materials should be placed in the bin
provided by the City or the contract hauler for such purposes and set at
the curbside for pickup on the regularly scheduled day of service.
(1) Newspaper, newsprint, magazines, office paper and cardboard shall be
prepared by bundling or placing them in paper sacks so that material
will not blow away or become scattered when placed out for recycling.
String should be used for bundling.
(2) Glass containers, such as window glass, drinking glasses, ceramics and
similar materials shall be empty, clean and free of metal caps, rings and
other contaminants.
(3) Aluminum, bimetal, steel and other metal cans shall be empty and clean
with paper or plastic labels removed.
(4) Rigid plastic containers shall not be tied together and shall be empty,
clean, flattened and have caps removed.
(5) Foam polystyrene packaging shall be clean and bagged or boxed so that
the material is not scattered when placed at the curb for recycling.
(6) Furthermore, additional preparation standards may be provided by
notice to generators of waste and collectors/haulers or by amendment
Sec. 58-87 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 58-89
1:310
Sec. 58-90. Responsibilities of owners or agents of multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential properties. [Ord. No. 94-22, § I(16.18),
12-12-1994]
to this subsection when other materials become recyclable dependent
upon available economic markets.
(a) Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings and
nonresidential facilities and properties shall do all of the following to
recycle the materials specified in Section 58-86(1) through (15):
1. Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
2. Notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the properties about the established recycling
program.
3. Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
4. Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and
recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in
order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or
sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or
company, including a name, address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in Subsection (a) of this section do not apply
to the owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings and
nonresidential facilities and properties if the post-consumer waste
generated within the dwelling or properties is treated at a processing
facility licensed by the state department of natural resources that
receives for recycling the materials specified in Section 58-86(1)
through (15) from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically
feasible.
Sec. 58-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 58-90
1:311
Chapter 62
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
Sec. 58-90 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 58-90
1:312
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 62-1. Penalty for violation of chapter. [Code 1992, § 8.20]
Except as otherwise specifically provided, any person who violates any
provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted under this
chapter, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 1-12.
Sec. 62-2. Street and sidewalk grades. [Code 1992, § 8.01]
Sec. 62-3. Dedication of private streets. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-34]
Sec. 62-4. through Sec. 62-30. (Reserved)
(a) Establishment. The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be
established and described by the Council and shall be recorded by the
City Clerk in his office.
(b) Required. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade is
established.
(c) Altering. No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or
public ground, or any part thereof, unless authorized or instructed to do
so by the Council.
(a) The following map and list shows private streets currently located
within the City limits of the City of Lake Geneva:7
(b) Notwithstanding the subdivision design standards set forth in Sec.
66-96 of the Municipal Code, the above-designated streets may be
dedicated and the City of Lake Geneva will accept any such dedication,
provided that the street is improved to the following specifications:
(1) Minimum width of 16 feet.
(2) Thirty-inch mountable curb and gutter on both sides.
(3) Eight-inch compact stone base.
(4) Four-inch asphalt surface applied in two lifts.
(5) Forty-foot minimum right-of-way dedication.
7. Editor’s Note: The Private Roads Map is included at the end of this chapter.
Sec. 62-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-4
1:313

ARTICLE II
EXCAVATIONS
Sec. 62-31. Permit required. [Code 1992, § 8.02(1)]
No person shall excavate in any street, alley or public ground without a
permit therefor from the Department of Public Works.
Sec. 62-32. Bond. [Code 1992, § 8.02(2)]
Before a permit may be issued for excavating in any public street, way or
alley, the person applying for such permit shall execute to the City and
deposit with the City Clerk a corporate surety approved by the City in the
sum set from time to time by the Building Inspector or a cash bond in the
sum set from time to time by the Building Inspector, conditioned that he
will perform faithfully all work with due care and skill and in accordance
with the laws, rules, regulations and provisions of the construction manual
applicable thereto. The bond shall state that the person will indemnify
and save harmless the City and the owner of the premises against all
damages, costs, expenses, outlays and claims arising out of unskillfulness
or negligence on his part in connection with such excavating. Such bond
shall remain in force and shall be executed for one year, except on such
expiration it shall remain in force as to all penalties, claims and demands
that may have accrued thereunder prior to such expiration.
Sec. 62-33. Protection of the public. [Code 1992, § 8.02(3)]
No permit shall be issued if the method of construction or the location of
the work to be performed will impair the public safety and convenience.
The permit holder shall erect such barriers, warning lights and signs as
will adequately inform the traveling public of the nature and location of the
work being performed.
Sec. 62-34. Repair of street openings. [Code 1992, § 8.02(4)]
The person to whom a permit is issued under this article shall complete
the work involved as soon as possible and shall immediately repair all
pavements, gutters and sidewalks in as good a condition as before the
opening and as may be directed by the City.
Sec. 62-35. Street closings. [Code 1992, § 8.12]
No person shall close any street or portion thereof for excavation, repair
or construction of the street, gutters, sewers, water mains or for any other
reason without obtaining a permit from the City. They shall notify the Police
Chief, the Fire Chief and the Director of Public Works and utilities at least
24 hours prior to the time at which the street or any portion of the street
would be closed.
Sec. 62-36. Breaking of curbs. [Code 1992, § 8.13]
Sec. 62-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-36
1:315
Sec. 62-37. Installation of utilities. [Code 1992, § 8.10]
Sec. 62-38. Fees.
Fees for work on City property shall be as adopted from time to time by the
Public Works Committee and presented in the construction manual.
Sec. 62-39. through Sec. 62-65. (Reserved)
(a) Permit required. No person shall break or remove any curb within the
City without a permit therefor from the City.
(b) Application; permit. The application for such permit shall be executed
by the applicant stating the exact location where he intends to break or
remove the curb and the reason for the need to do so.
(a) Prior to curb and gutter installation. All utilities shall be installed on
any City street prior to the installation of curb and gutter.
(b) Notification of property owners to install utilities; failure of owner; City
to perform; costs. Upon the adoption of an ordinance authorizing the
installation of curbs and gutters on any street, the City Clerk shall
notify the property owners who abut upon such street that utilities shall
be put in within 30 days. If such property owners do not install such
utilities at their own expense, the City shall cause the same to be done
and the costs shall be added to the tax rolls of such abutting property.
Sec. 62-36 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-39
1:316
ARTICLE III
OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
Sec. 62-66. Prohibited generally. [Code 1992, § 8.03(1)]
Sec. 62-67. Exceptions. [Code 1992, § 8.03(2)]
The prohibitions of Section 62-66 shall not apply to the following:
(a) No person shall carry on any trade or business, nor encroach upon or
obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or land
dedicated to public use, or any part thereof, or permit such
encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public
way adjoining the premises of which he is the owner or occupant,
except as provided in Section 62-67.
(b) The placing of any vehicle on any street, sidewalk or alley so as to
obstruct the public use thereof; the servicing in any manner of any
vehicle with gasoline or oil or any other manner while such vehicle is
standing, in whole or in part, upon any street, sidewalk or alley, except
filling stations authorized by the Council to service vehicles on the
street outside the curb, shall also be deemed violations of this article.
(1) Awnings, canopies and other permissible rooflike structures of which
the hardware or firm portions do not extend at any point lower than
seven feet above the sidewalk, street or alley, or of which the flexible
cloth curtain or valance portions do not extend at any point lower than
six feet, eight inches above the sidewalk, street or alley.
(2) Public utility encroachments authorized by the City.
(3) Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded which
do not extend more than three feet on a sidewalk, provided such goods,
wares, etc., do not remain thereon for more than three hours.
(4) Building materials when placed upon the street, alley or sidewalk, upon
conditions prescribed by the City which may require such materials to
be protected by barricades or appropriate lights. Parking metered
areas require a permit from the Police Department.
(5) The delivery of fuel and other supplies for the occupant of any building
on any business street by the backing of a truck or delivery vehicle on
the first six feet of the sidewalk measured in from the curb, under the
supervision of the Police Department between 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
on any day of the week, except Saturday and Sunday.
(6) Restaurants issued sidewalk cafe permits by the City Clerk for
restaurant tables subject to the following conditions: [Added
1-23-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02; 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
a. "Restaurant" means an establishment defined in § 254.61(5) Wis.
Stats.
Sec. 62-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-67
1:317
b. The use of sidewalks for restaurant tables shall only be permitted
incidental to the operation of a restaurant which is contiguous to
the sidewalk and within the side property lines of the contiguous
restaurant under the following conditions:
1. The restaurant tables and seats shall not be located closer than
two feet from the curb of the street as measured by the closest
edge of the table or seat with an occupant seated therein to the
street.
2. Bollards shall be strategically located at either end, and along
the street edge of the outdoor restaurant seating area. Said
bollards shall be temporary and not affixed to the sidewalks.
From November 1 to April 30 said bollards, tables, and seats
shall be removed each night when the restaurant closes.
3. All permittees shall ensure that all tables, chairs and bollards
are properly secured during closing hours. Permittees shall be
responsible for damage caused by their unsecured tables,
chairs and bollards, regardless of fault. Damage caused by
improperly secured tables, chairs and bollards on more than
one occasion may be grounds for revocation of the permit.
4. The restaurant applicant is able to meet all other existing
requirements for the issuance of a permit to place restaurant
tables on the public sidewalk.
5. Signs or other equipment shall not be attached to public
amenities such as light poles, trees, planters, benches, street
signs, etc.
6. All forms of heating devices are prohibited within the sidewalk
cafe area.
7. All furnishings such as, but not limited to, bollards, umbrellas,
tables, and chairs shall not include signage, logos, or text.
8. Primary (red, blue, and yellow) colors and fluorescent day glow
and/or neon colors shall not be permitted. Where such colors
constitute a component of a standardized corporate theme or
identity, muted versions of such colors shall be used.
9. A minimum of one table shall be handicap/wheelchair
accessible.
c. The application for the permit shall first be reviewed by the
Director of Public Works and the Police Department, and no permit
shall be issued unless a report is made by the Director of Public
Works and the Police Chief that the proposed use will not
unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
1. A detailed, scaled plan of the proposed sidewalk cafe is
required with the application.
Sec. 62-67 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-67
1:318
d. In no event shall the uses permitted by this exception reduce the
open portion of any sidewalk to less than five feet.
e. Alcohol may be served at or consumed at restaurant tables located
on the sidewalk under the following conditions:
1. Bollards shall be connected in such a manner that the area
where the restaurant tables are located appears as an enclosed
area.
2. The holder of sidewalk cafe permit has properly included the
sidewalk area under a properly issued alcohol beverage
license. Service of alcoholic beverages in sidewalk cafes shall
stop no later than 11:00 p.m. with all alcohol removed or
consumed by 11:30 p.m. and the sidewalk cafe closing no later
than 12:00 midnight.
3. Signage shall be displayed indicating that alcohol beverages
may not be carried outside of the enclosed seating area.
4. Food service shall be required to be available at all times the
sidewalk cafe is serving alcohol.
f. No permit shall be issued pursuant to this exception, unless the
applicant furnishes to the City Clerk evidence of public liability
insurance naming the City as a party insured insuring the City
against liability resulting from the uses permitted herein. The
coverage shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000.
g. Persons issued permits pursuant to this article shall maintain the
sidewalk area in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition.
h. The annual permit fee for a sidewalk cafe permit shall be based
upon the number of seats seated at a table. The number of seats at
any table will be limited by the application and the permit fee paid.
The fee per seat shall be set by resolution.
i. The permit fee issued hereunder is a privilege and not a right. A
restaurant shall not permit tables and chairs to be placed on the
sidewalk without a permit. A permit is valid from July 1 to June 30
of the following year. The permit may be revoked at any time for
any reason in the sole discretion of the City, and the City is not
obligated to return the permit fee will refund prorata a portion of
any fee.
1. The permittee must submit an amended application and scaled
plan and receive approval from the Director of Public Works
and the Police Department prior to changing the layout or
adding seats to the sidewalk cafe area.
(7) Penalties and enforcement. A person or business that violates the
provisions of Section 62-67 shall be subject to a forfeiture as
established by resolution of the City Council from time to time. Each
Sec. 62-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-67
1:319
day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The Code
Enforcement Officer or Building Inspector shall have authority to
enforce the provisions of this section. The City may also seek equitable
relief, including injunctions, to gain compliance. [Added 6-27-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-06]
(8) Businesses whose primary sales are confectionary goods and frozen
creamery goods (ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen custard, and other
frozen dairy products) and who are issued a permit by the City of Lake
Geneva Department of Public Works under the following conditions:
[Added 11-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
a. The Department of Public works has the sole discretion to grant or
deny any permit for any obstructions on the City sidewalks and
rights-of-way.
b. A precise plan showing the items to be placed on the sidewalk shall
be provided by the applicant.
c. The applicant shall provide public liability insurance in an amount
not less than $1,000,000 per incident and which shall name the
City of Lake Geneva as an additional insured insuring and
indemnifying the City of Lake Geneva for any deaths, injuries, or
property damage resulting from uses authorized by the permit
herein.
d. The placement and removal of any obstructions authorized herein
shall be on a schedule established by the Department which
schedule shall be at the sole discretion of the City of Lake Geneva
Department of Public Works.
e. An application fee shall be established by resolution by the City
Council from time to time.
f. Enforcement shall be as provided in Subsection (7).
(9) Sidewalk furnishings: benches and planters within public rights-of-way.
Sidewalk furnishings such as benches and plant containers may be
placed within a public right-of-way with satisfaction of and continuous
compliance with the following requirements: [Added 6-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-08]
a. General permitted locations. The provisions of this subsection are
limited to rights-of-way adjacent to properties within the
Neighborhood Office, Neighborhood Business, General Business,
and Central Business Zoning Districts.
b. Specific placement and clear path requirements. Sidewalk
furnishings such as benches and plant containers may be placed by
an owner on a sidewalk within 32 inches of the owner’s building. In
no instance shall the distance between the sidewalk furnishing and
Sec. 62-67 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-67
1:320
Sec. 62-68. through Sec. 62-95. (Reserved)
the edge of the sidewalk adjacent to the owner’s building be less
than 60 inches (hereinafter defined as "clear path").
c. In those instances that a clear path of 60 inches cannot be provided
because of a permanent obstruction, the pedestrian passageway
may be reduced to four feet (48 inches) for a distance not to exceed
five feet upon review and approval of the City Public Works
Director.
d. No sidewalk furnishings shall be allowed to be placed on the
sidewalk right-of-way until the owner provides the City Clerk with
evidence of public liability insurance naming the City of Lake
Geneva as an additional insured for any liability resulting from the
placement of the sidewalk furnishing in the City sidewalk right of
way. The owner hereby agrees to indemnify and hold the City
harmless from any actions that may arise from the placement of
sidewalk furnishings in the City sidewalk right-of-way pursuant to
this subsection. The minimum required insurance coverage shall be
in an amount not less than $1,000,000.
e. Signage and colors are restricted. No signage, logo, or text is
permitted on any sidewalk furnishings except a twenty-four-inchwide-
by-thirty-six-inch-tall chalk sandwich board. Fluorescent dayglow
colors are not permitted on any sidewalk furnishings. Where
colors constitute a component of a standardized corporate color
theme or identity association with the abutting parcel, muted
versions of such colors shall be used.
Sec. 62-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-68
1:321

ARTICLE IV
SIDEWALKS
Sec. 62-96. Construction and repair. [Code 1992, § 8.11; Ord. No.
95-18, § 8.11, 9-11-1995]
(a) Regulated. No person, whether owner, builder or contractor, shall build
any new sidewalk or rebuild, repair or renew or cause to be rebuilt,
repaired or renewed any existing sidewalk contrary to the provisions of
this section.
(b) State law adopted. In addition to the provisions of this section, W.S.A.,
§§ 66.615 and 66.616, and Americans With Disabilities Act Accessibility
Guidelines (ADAAG) 14.0, public rights-of-way, relating to the
construction and repair of sidewalks and curb ramps, so far as
applicable to the City, is adopted by reference.
(c) Sidewalk requirements. The City Council may, from time to time,
require that sidewalks be laid, and this requirement may vary from
street to street as conditions and circumstances require, and may order
by resolution sidewalks to be laid in the manner provided in this article.
Unless otherwise ordered by the Council, the width of all sidewalks
shall not be narrower than those now constructed or laid, except as
otherwise provided in the construction manual as provided herein.
(d) Permit required. No person shall build any sidewalk within the City
without first obtaining a permit from the City. Application for such
permit shall be to the Department of Public Works on a form provided
by the City and shall contain a full statement of the materials to be used
in construction and the width thereof and shall also request the line and
grade for the construction of such walk be furnished by the City.
(e) Sidewalk standards. All sidewalks shall be constructed to standard
specifications established by the City and as stated in the State of
Wisconsin Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
plus Supplemental Specifications, Section 602. Unless otherwise
permitted, sidewalks shall be not less than four feet in width and
constructed of concrete not less than four inches thick except where
crossing a driveway, where a six-inch minimum thickness is required.
Cross slopes on sidewalks shall, in general, be 2%, or as allowed by
ADAAG.
(f) Protection to the public. The public shall be afforded protection during
construction or repair of sidewalks as follows:
1. City may repair. Any sidewalk which is unsafe, defective or
insufficient shall be repaired or removed and replaced with a
sidewalk in accordance with the standard fixed by this section, and
the City Council may by resolution, order such sidewalk so repaired
or removed and replaced.
Sec. 62-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-96
1:323
Sec. 62-97. through Sec. 62-125. (Reserved)
2. Procedure where City makes repairs. The City shall make repairs
as follows:
a. Notice. A copy of the resolution or order directing such laying,
removal, replacement or repair shall be served upon the owner
of each lot or parcel of land in front of which such work shall
have been ordered by the City after personally delivering the
resolution or order to the owners or his agent or, if such owner
or agent cannot be found, by publishing the resolution or order
in the official newspaper.
b. Failure to obey notice. Whenever any such owner shall neglect,
for 20 days after such service, to lay, remove, replace or repair
any such sidewalk, the City may cause such work to be done at
the expense of such owner. All work for the construction of
sidewalks shall be let by contract to the lowest responsible
bidder unless otherwise provided by the Council pursuant to
W.S.A., § 62.15(1).
c. Costs assessed. The City shall keep an accurate account of the
expenses of laying, removing and repairing sidewalks in front
of each lot or parcel of land whether the work is done by
contract or otherwise, and shall annually prepare a statement
of the expense so incurred in front of each lot or parcel of land,
the expense to be on file with the City Clerk. The amount
therein charged to each lot or parcel of land shall be entered
by the Clerk on the tax roll as a special tax against the lot or
parcel of land, and the amount shall be collected in all respects
as other taxes upon real estate.
Sec. 62-96 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-97
1:324
ARTICLE V
MOVING BUILDINGS
Sec. 62-126. Permit required. [Code 1992, § 8.04(1)]
No person shall move any building within the City without a permit from
the Department of Public Works, the notice of application for such permit to
be made 30 days in advance and to designate the streets and alleys along
which the building is intended to be moved. Such permit shall state the date
upon which such work will commence, a description of the building and its
location, the place to which such building is intended to be moved, the name
of the owner of such building, the name of the person who will perform
the work and the names of the streets and alloys along which the building
may be moved. Insurance protection against damage to City facilities will
be required.
Sec. 62-127. Notice to utilities. [Code 1992, § 8.04(2)]
Upon receipt of the notice under Section 62-126, the Department of Public
Works shall immediately notify any public utility whose lines or poles may
be interfered with of the application. Such utility shall take any steps
necessary to permit the building to be moved without damage to its lines
and poles.
Sec. 62-128. Deposit required. [Code 1992, § 8.04(3)]
The applicant shall at the time of application deposit with the City Clerk
the amount set from time to time by the Council to cover the costs to the
utilities of any work necessary to permit the moving of the building and the
costs of damages to property resulting from such moving. Upon completion
of the moving, the City shall inspect the route and report to the City Clerk
any damages, and the estimated amount thereof, caused to the streets and
any public or private property. Upon payment of the utilities' expenses and
settlement of all damage claims, the City Clerk shall release the balance
of the deposit remaining. The applicant shall be liable for any costs and
damages exceeding the deposit.
Sec. 62-129. through Sec. 62-185. (Reserved)
Sec. 62-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-129
1:325

ARTICLE VI
UNIFORM NUMBERING SYSTEM FOR STRUCTURES
Sec. 62-186. Established. [Code 1992, § 8.15(1)]
There is established a uniform system of numbering houses and buildings
fronting on all streets, avenues and public ways in the City, and all houses
and buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
Sec. 62-187. Penalty for violation of article. [Code 1992, § 8.15]
If the owner or occupant of any building required to be numbered by this
article shall neglect for more than 30 days to attach and maintain the proper
number of such building, the Building Inspector may cause to be served
upon him the notice requiring such owner or occupant to properly number
the building. If he neglects to do so for 10 days after the serving of such
notice, he shall be deemed to have violated this article. Penalty for violation
shall be in accordance with Section 1-12.
Sec. 62-188. Baseline. [Code 1992, § 8.15(2)]
The lakeshore and its extension shall constitute the baseline for numbering
along all streets running north and south, and Curtis Street shall constitute
the baseline for numbering all streets running east and west.
Sec. 62-189. Number designation. [Code 1992, § 8.15(3)]
(a) The numbering for each street shall begin at the baseline. The numbers
in the first block shall be from 100 to 199, the second block 200 to 299,
the third block 300 to 399, etc. There shall be assigned 100 numbers to
each block, square or space that would be one block or square, if
streets or grid lines each way were so extended as to intersect each
other. One number shall be assigned to each 15 feet or 20 feet of
frontage, whichever is more applicable.
(b) All lots and houses on the south and west side of all streets shall be
numbered with even numbers, and all lots and houses on the north and
east side of all streets shall be numbered with odd numbers, each
commencing with the 100 assigned to that block and shall increase
from the baseline one number for each 15 feet or 20 feet of frontage or
fraction thereof. Where any building has more than one door serving
separate occupants, a separate number shall be assigned to each door
serving a separate occupant, provided the building is 25 feet or more in
width. If the building is not 25 feet or more in width and the entrances
are not that far apart, the next consecutive number shall be used.
Buildings fronting on two or more streets shall have a number fronting
on the street to which the number is assigned.
Sec. 62-186 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-189
1:327
Sec. 62-190. Numbers to be placed on houses and buildings. [Code
1992, § 8.15(4)]
Sec. 62-191. Suffix. [Code 1992, § 8.15(5)]
Sec. 62-192. Map. [Code 1992, § 8.15(6)]
For the purpose of facilitating correct numbering, a copy of the map
showing the proper number of all lots or houses fronting upon all streets,
avenues or highways shall be kept on file in the office of the Building
Inspector. This map shall be open to inspection by all persons during the
office hours of the Building Inspector.
(c) All streets or grid lines not extending through to the baseline shall be
assigned the same relative numbers as if the street or grid line had
extended to the baseline.
(a) The City has caused a survey to be made and there is hereby assigned
to each house and building located on any street, alley, highway or
avenue in such City a respective number under the uniform system
provided for in this article as shown on the map designated as the
"House Numbering Map." Within 60 days after the effective date of the
ordinance from which this section is derived, the owner, occupant or
agent shall place or cause to be placed upon each house or building
controlled by him the numbers assigned under the uniform system
provided for in this article.
(b) The cost of such numbers shall be paid for by the property owner, and
such numbers and holders shall be furnished by the owner.
(c) Numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the
side of the proper door of each building so the number can be plainly
seen 75 feet from the street. Whenever any building is situated more
than 75 feet from the street line, the number of such building shall be
conspicuously displayed on an appropriate post out to the sidewalk or
roadway so as to be easily discernible.
(a) Where only one number can be assigned to any house or building, the
owner, occupant or agent of such house or building who desires
distinctive numbers for the upper and lower portion of the house or
building or any part of such house or building fronting on any street,
shall use a numerical suffix such as the number 1, number 2, etc.
(b) Where only one number is assigned to a group of buildings, such as a
cluster development, the owner, occupant or agent of the group of
buildings desiring distinctive numbers for each building may use the
suffix "building 1," "building 2," etc. as may be required. Where
separate unit numbers are desired within a building within a group, the
suffix "building 1, unit 1," "building 1, unit 2," etc., may be used as
required.
Sec. 62-189 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-193
1:328
Sec. 62-193. Duty of Building Inspector. [Code 1992, § 8.15(7)]
The Building Inspector shall inform any party applying thereof of the
numbers belonging to or embraced within the limits of such lot or property
as provided in this article. In case of doubt as to the proper number to be
assigned to any lot or building, the Building Inspector shall determine the
number of each lot or building.
Sec. 62-194. Duty of owner. [Code 1992, § 8.15(8)]
Whenever any house, building or structure shall hereafter be erected or
located in the City, the owner shall procure the number so assigned upon
such building, as provided by this article. No building permit shall be issued
for any house, building or structure until the owner has procured from the
Building Inspector the official number of the premises.
Sec. 62-195. Duty of police officers. [Code 1992, § 8.15(9)]
All police officers of the City shall report any violation of this article.
Sec. 62-196. through Sec. 62-220. (Reserved)
Sec. 62-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-196
1:329

ARTICLE VII
SNOW AND ICE
Sec. 62-221. Deposit of snow in streets. [Code 1992, § 8.05]
No person shall cause to be deposited snow from his premises onto the
sidewalk abutting thereon or onto any street in the City without a permit
therefor from the Department of Public Works which may require payment
of a fee sufficient to reimburse the City for the cost of removing any snow
so deposited.
Sec. 62-222. Chemical deicers. [Code 1992, § 8.14]
Sec. 62-223. Removal; sidewalks to be kept clear. [Code 1992,
§ 8.05(1); Ord. No. 99-13, § I, 8-9-1999]
(a) Prohibited generally. Except as provided in Section 62-223, no person
shall place, or cause to be placed, any chemical deicer, including NaCL
and CaCL2 upon any public street, roadway, driveway or alleyway, or
upon any public parking lot or other facility for outdoor parking of
vehicles within the City limits except as provided in Subsection (b) of
this section.
(b) Exceptions. The City Street Department is authorized to use salt or salt/
sand mixtures as it deems necessary upon any public street, roadway,
driveway or alleyway, or upon any public parking lot or other facility for
outdoor parking of vehicles based upon the current weather conditions,
provided that there is no more than 600 pounds of salt applied per mile,
and provided further that the Mayor may grant temporary suspension
of such restriction upon showing that an emergency condition exists
which requires a greater amount of salt to be used and may issue
written or oral instructions to the Street Department to use more salt to
eliminate such emergency conditions. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-07; 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-12]
(a) The owner or occupant of any parcel or lot not located in the Central
Business District shall remove all snow and ice which may have fallen
or accumulated upon the entire width of the sidewalk in front of or
abutting to the premises which he owns or occupies no later than 24
hours after the snow and ice has ceased to fall or accumulate. The
owner or occupant of property in the Central Business District shall
remove all snow and ice which may have fallen or accumulated upon
the entire width of the sidewalk in front of or abutting to the premises
which he owns or occupies no later than 12 hours after snow and ice
has ceased to fall or accumulate. The owner or occupant of property
abutting sidewalks on two intersecting streets shall remove all snow
and ice from the sidewalks of both streets, including the portion of the
sidewalks bordering the crosswalk, including the entire width of the
curb ramp to the gutter line, at all times providing a clear path of travel
from the curb ramp to the street crosswalk. In the event snow and ice
Sec. 62-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-223
1:331
Sec. 62-224. through Sec. 62-240. (Reserved)
has so formed upon any sidewalk that it cannot be removed, the owner
or occupant shall keep the snow and ice effectively treated with sand,
salt or other suitable substance in such manner as to prevent the ice
from being dangerous, until such time as it can be removed, and then it
shall be promptly removed. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $20 nor more
than $30 for a first offense and not less than $30 nor more than $50
for any subsequent offense. Each twenty-four-hour period any violation
of this section continues shall cause a separate offense. [Amended
7-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-11]
(b) The Department of Public Works or Code Enforcement office may cause
sidewalks which have not been cleared of snow and ice to be cleared
upon default of the person whose duty it shall be to clear the sidewalks.
Such removal may be by City employees or independent contractors, or
both. The City shall keep an accurate account of the expenses and
report the expenses to the Finance Director/Treasurer, who shall
annually prepare a statement of the unpaid expense so incurred in front
of each lot or parcel of land and report the unpaid expense to the City
Clerk. The amount therein charged to each lot or parcel of land shall be,
by such Clerk, entered in the tax roll as a special charge against such
lot or parcel of land, and such special charge shall be collected in all
respects like other taxes upon real estate. Prosecution under
Subsection (a) of this section shall not bar the City from proceeding
under this subsection, nor shall proceeding under this subsection bar
prosecution under Subsection (a) of this section. [Amended
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08;
7-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-11]
(c) Actions for violations of Subsection (a) of this section shall be
commenced by citation as provided by W.S.A., § 66.119, or summons
and complaint or warrant as provided by W.S.A., § 66.12(1)(a).
Sec. 62-223 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-224
1:332
ARTICLE VIII
STREET USE PERMIT
Sec. 62-241. Purpose of article. [Code 1992, § 12.20(1)]
The streets of the City are primarily for the use of the public in the
ordinary course. However, under proper circumstances, the City Council
may grant a permit for street use, subject to reasonable regulation and
control. Therefore, this article is enacted pursuant to the general police
power granted to the City under state law to regulate and control the use
of streets pursuant to a street use permit to the end that the health, safety
and general welfare of the public and the good order of the City can be
protected and maintained.
Sec. 62-242. Penalty for violation of article. [Code 1992,
§ 12.20(10)]
Any person who shall do any of the following shall be subject to a forfeiture
of not less than $20, nor more than $500 for each violation:
Sec. 62-243. Application; contents. [Code 1992, § 12.20(2)]
A written application for a street use permit by persons or groups desiring
the permit shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk and shall
be filed with the City Clerk. The application shall set forth the following
information regarding the proposed street use:
(1) Hold, sponsor or be in charge of any activity for which a street use
permit is required without possession a valid street use permit;
(2) Violate any condition placed upon a street use permit; or
(3) Provide false or inaccurate information on a written application for a
street use permit.
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) If the proposed street use is to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorizing responsible
heads of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
responsible for conducting the proposed use of the street.
(4) The date and duration of time for which the requested use of the street
is proposed to occur.
(5) An accurate description of that portion of the street proposed to be
used.
(6) The number of persons for whom use of the proposed street area is
requested.
Sec. 62-241 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-243
1:333
Sec. 62-244. Applicant to be present when application considered.
[Code 1992, § 12.20(3)]
The person or representative of the group making application for a street
use permit shall be present when the City Council gives consideration to
the granting of such street use permit to provide any additional information
which is reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be granted.
Sec. 62-245. Issuance procedure; appeals. [Code 1992, § 12.20(4)]
Sec. 62-246. Deadline for applications. [Code 1992, § 12.20(5)]
Sec. 62-247. Special street use permits. [Code 1992, § 12.20(6)]
The City may authorize temporary obstructions of its streets within its
exclusive jurisdiction under the authority implied by W.S.A., §§ 62.11(5),
66.045, 66.046, 86.06 and 350.04.
Sec. 62-248. Petition. [Code 1992, § 12.20(7); amended 5-14-2012
by Ord. No. 12-11]
The application shall be accompanied by a petition designating the
proposed area of the street to be used and time for such proposed use.
(7) The proposed use, described in detail, for which the street use permit is
required.
(a) Upon receipt of a street use permit application, the City Clerk shall
immediately forward copies of the application to the license and judicial
committee who shall review the application with representatives of the
Police Department, Fire Department and Street Department.
(b) The license and judicial committee shall convene to consider the
application and give notice of the meeting to the applicant. They shall
make their recommendation in writing to the City Council, which will
then either approve or deny the application at its next regular meeting.
If the application is approved by the City Council, the City Clerk shall
issue the permit, including any special provisions or conditions imposed
by the City Council. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City
Council may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with
the City Clerk within 10 days of the decision of the City Council, stating
the basis upon which the appeal is taken. The City Council may by
majority vote reverse or modify its earlier decision.
(a) Applications to close streets which will require detours of traffic must
be submitted not less than 45 days prior to the date of the proposed
event.
(b) Applications to close streets for more than two days must be submitted
not less than two months prior to the date of the proposed event.
Sec. 62-243 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-248
1:334
Except a petition is not required for street use applications submitted for
the following annual parades and events: American Legion Memorial Day
Parade, Chamber of Commerce Fourth of July Parade, Oktoberfest and
Christmas Parade, and Badger High School Homecoming Parade. Each
petition shall be signed by not less than 51% of the residential dwelling
units and/or commercial units residing along that portion of the street
designated for the proposed use or whose property is denied access by
virtue of the granting of the permit. An authorized agent, owner or tenant
may sign on behalf of each unit. Only one signature for each unit will be
counted toward the 51%. Each dwelling unit or commercial unit will count
as one unit in arriving at the total number of units affected by the permit. An
individual must be of legal voting age (18) to sign a petition. Such petition
shall be verified and shall be submitted in substantially the following form:
PETITION FOR STREET USE PERMIT
We, the undersigned residents of the ________ hundred block of
________________ Street in the City of Lake Geneva hereby consent to the
________________ recreational use of this street between the hours of
________ and ________ on the ________ day of _________, 19________, for the
purpose of ________________ and do hereby petition the City Council of the
City of Lake Geneva to grant a street use permit for us to use the said
portion of said street for said purpose and do hereby agree to abide by such
conditions of such use as the City Council of the City of Lake Geneva shall
attach to the granting of the requested street use permit. We designate
________________ as the responsible person or persons who shall sign an
application for a street use permit on our behalf.
Sec. 62-249. Fees and insurance. [Code 1992, § 12.20(8)]
(a) An application for a street use permit shall be accompanied by a permit
fee as provided in Section 18-56. If the application is for more than two
days, a fee as provided in Section 18-56 shall accompany the
application. In addition, as a condition to approval of an application, the
applicant shall agree to pay within 20 days of billing those costs
incurred by the City by occasion of the event for cleaning and sanitation
services, delivery and use of City-owned property. Prior to approval of
the application, the City Clerk shall inform the applicant of the
estimated cost of the aforementioned goods and services as determined
by the Street Department. The applicant may be required to furnish a
performance bond prior to being granted the permit.
(b) The applicant for a street use permit shall agree to indemnify, defend
and hold the City and its employees and agents harmless against all
claims, liability, loss, damage or expense incurred by the City on
account of any injury to or death of any person or any damage to
property caused by or resulting from the activities for which the permit
is granted. As evidence of the applicant's ability to perform the
conditions of the permit, the applicant shall furnish a certificate of
comprehensive general liability insurance with the City, its employees
and agents as additional insured. The insurance shall include coverage
Sec. 62-248 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-249
1:335
Sec. 62-250. Termination. [Code 1992, § 12.20(9)]
A street use permit for an event in progress may be terminated by the City
Police Department if the health, safety and welfare of the public appears to
be endangered by activities generated as a result of the event or the event
is in violation of any of the conditions of the permits or regulations adopted
by the City Council's policy for street use permits. The Police Department
has the authority to revoke a permit or terminate an event in progress if the
event organizers fail to comply with any of the regulations in the street use
policy or conditions stated in the permit.
Sec. 62-251. Street banners. [Ord. No. 07-09, § 1, 8-27-2007]
for contractual liability with minimum limits of $500,000 per
occurrence for bodily injury and property damage limits of $250,000
per occurrence. The certificate of insurance shall provide a thirty-day
written notice to the City upon cancellation, nonrenewal or material
change in the policy.
(a) Overhead street banners extending across any public right-of-way
within the City are prohibited.
(b) Banners may be placed on all City-owned banner poles within the City
under the following conditions: [Amended 9-11-2017 by Ord. No.
17-13]
1. Approval for the placement of banners shall be granted by the City
Administrator. For new banners, sketches of the proposed banner
shall be submitted to the Administrator for approval prior to banner
production. For existing banners, one copy of the banner must be
submitted to the Administrator for approval.
2. Approval will be granted only for a banner which has as its sole
purpose the advertisement or promotion of a facility, function or
activity which, in the opinion of the Administrator, is directed to the
general public interest.
3. Permission for flying banners will be granted for a period of two
weeks. In the case of date-sensitive banners, banners will be
removed just after the event has occurred or at the end of the twoweek
authorized period, whichever occurs first. If no other
applications have been approved for the two-week time period
following the expiration of the two-week period and the advertised
event has not occurred, the applicant may apply for an additional
two-week extension for flying said banners, and pay the daily fee as
established by resolution by the City Council from time to time and
as described in Subsection (b)1d below. Said daily fee shall be paid
in advance prior to the granting of any extension.
a. Banners are to be of professional quality, aesthetically
pleasing, in good condition, and suitable for public viewing.
Sec. 62-249 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-251
1:336
Sec. 62-252. through Sec. 62-259. (Reserved)
b. Banner size, to fit the banner poles, must be approximately 67
inches by 30 1/2 inches.
c. City Street Department personnel will be responsible for
installation and removal of all banners approved for flying. The
City Street Department is not responsible for the storing of
banners after removal. Upon removal, banners must be
retrieved by their owners at the City Street Department at
1065 Carey Street, Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, within five
business days. Banners not retrieved within this time period
are subject to disposal by the City Street Department. No City
employee or any person acting on the part of the City shall be
responsible for any damage that might occur to banners.
Banner owners are responsible for maintenance and storage of
their banners.
d. There shall be a daily fee for flying the banner which shall be
set by resolution by the City Council from time to time. The
initial daily fee shall be $1 per day per pole.
(c) Issuance or denial of permit.
1. Applicant shall submit a completed application form along with the
full fee as stated on the banner application, with a sketch of the
proposed banner to the City Administrator for consideration.
2. Within 15 days the applicant will be notified of the City
Administrator's decision.
3. If the application is not approved, a refund check, less the
application processing fee as stated on the application, will be
mailed to the applicant.
Sec. 62-251 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-252
1:337

ARTICLE IX
Weight Limits
[Adopted 1-12-2015 by Ord. No. 14-10]
Sec. 62-260. Statutory limits for implements of husbandry.
Sec. 62-261. through Sec. 62-299. (Reserved)
(a) Section 348.15(9)(f)1, Wis. Stats., provides that there is no weight
limitation per wheel, axle, or group of axles for Category B implements
of husbandry as defined in § 340.01(24)(a)1b Wis. Stats., but does apply
gross weight as well as length limitations to these vehicles.
(b) Section 348.15(9)(f)2a, Wis. Stats., authorizes a municipality or county
to require compliance with axle weight limitations established under
§ 348.15(3)(g), Wis. Stats., for Category B implements of husbandry as
defined in § 340.01(24)(a)1b, Wis. Stats., on all highways within its
jurisdiction.
(c) Pursuant to § 348.15(9)(f)2a, Wis. Stats., all implements of husbandry in
the City of Lake Geneva (including Category B implements of
husbandry) may not exceed the statutory weight and length limits on
highways under the jurisdiction of the City of Lake Geneva unless a
permit for such has been granted by the Public Works Department
under authority granted by § 348.27(19), Wis. Stats. No fee shall be
charged for the permit application.
(d) Pursuant to § 348.27(19)(b)(4m)a and b, Wis. Stats., in the event an
application for a no-fee permit has been applied for a Category B
implement of husbandry, the City is required to provide an approved
alternate route which may include highways not under its jurisdiction if
prior approval has been given by the other jurisdiction for the alternate
route not under the City's jurisdiction for operation of Category B
implements of husbandry.
(e) Permits issued under this section are subject to all other spring
maximum weight postings or posted maximum weight allowances on
bridges.
(f) Failure of the operator of an overweight vehicle to have a permit in his
or her possession shall constitute a violation of this section, unless the
Department of Public Works has failed to timely respond to a permit
application as set forth in § 348.27(19)(b), Wis. Stats.
(g) Penalty for not having a permit in his or her possession shall be a
forfeiture in the amount of $100 plus costs for the first violation, and
$300 plus costs for each subsequent violation.
Sec. 62-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-261
1:339

ARTICLE X
RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY
[Adopted 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-07]
DIVISION 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 62-300. Findings; purpose; statutory authority.
(a) The City finds that the passage of the Telecommunications Act of 1996
has resulted in increased use of the public rights-of-way and increased
costs to the taxpayers of the City and that these costs are likely to
continue into the foreseeable future.
(b) The City finds that excavation and occupancy of the public rights-of-way
causes direct and indirect costs to be borne by the City and its
taxpayers, including but not limited to:
(1) Administrative costs associated with public right-of-way projects,
such as registration, permitting, inspection and supervision,
supplies and materials.
(2) Management costs associated with ongoing management activities
necessitated by public rights-of-way users.
(3) Repair costs to the roadway associated with the actual excavation
into the public right-of-way.
(4) Degradation costs, defined as depreciation caused to the roadway
in terms of decreased useful life, due to excavations into the public
rights-of-way.
(c) In response to the foregoing facts, the City hereby enacts this new
article relating to administration of and permits to excavate, obstruct
and/or occupy the public rights-of-way, together with an ordinance
making necessary revisions to other Code provisions. This article
imposes reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of
facilities currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at
some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of
state and federal agencies.
(d) The City's authority to enact this article is pursuant, but not limited to,
the following federal, state and local authority: 47 U.S.C. § 253(c);
§ 62.11(5), Wis. Stats.; § 66.0425, Wis. Stats.; § 66.0915, Wis. Stats.;
§ 86.16, Wis. Stats.; § 182.017, Wis. Stat; § 196.58(1), Wis. Stats;
§ 196.499(1), Wis. Stats., and §§ 98-206, Sections 62-31 through 62-38,
62-96, and 62-241 through 62-251 of the Municipal Code of the City of
Lake Geneva.
(e) The purpose of this article is to provide the City a legal framework
within which to regulate and manage the public right-of-way and to
provide for recovery of costs. This article provides for the health, safety
Sec. 62-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-300
1:341
Sec. 62-301. Definitions.
and welfare of the residents of the City as they use the rights-of-way
of the City, as well as to ensure the structural integrity of the public
rights-of-way. The City desires to minimize and anticipate the number
of excavations taking place thereon and to regulate the placement of
facilities within the rights-of-way to ensure that they remain available
for public services. The taxpayers of the City bear the financial burden
for the upkeep of the right-of-way. A primary cause for the early and
excessive deterioration of its rights-of-way is the frequent excavation by
persons who locate facilities therein.
(f) Under this article all persons who excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the
public rights-of-way will reimburse the City's administrative ongoing
management and degradation costs. Right-of-way users will bear a fair
share of the financial responsibility for the integrity of the public rightsof-
way.
(a) The following definitions apply in this article. References hereafter to
"sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this
article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.
(b) As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATIVE TELECOMMUNICATIONS UTILITY OTHER — Has the
meaning in § 196.01, Wis. Stats.
APPLICANT — Any person requesting permission to excavate, obstruct
and/or occupy a right-of-way.
CITY — The City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, a Wisconsin municipal
corporation.
DEGRADATION — The accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way,
caused by an excavation of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the
excavation did not occur.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works of the City.
DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR — Any person authorized by the
Department to carry out inspections related to the provisions of this
article.
EMERGENCY — A condition that:
EXCAVATE — To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a
significant loss of property; or
(1)
Requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore
service to a customer.
(2)
Sec. 62-300 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-301
1:342
FACILITIES — All equipment owned, operated, leased or subleased in
connection with the operation of a service or utility service, and shall
include but is not limited to poles, wires, pipes, cables, underground
conduits, ducts, manholes, vaults, fiber optic cables, lines and other
structures and appurtenances.
IN — When used in conjunction with "right-of-way," means over, above,
in, within, on or under a right-of-way.
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE — A local person or persons, or designee of
such person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service
and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within
the scope of this article.
OBSTRUCT — To place any object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free
and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
OCCUPY — To dwell or reside above, on, in, or below the boundaries of
the public right-of-way.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a permit to excavate or occupy a
right-of-way has been granted by the City under this article.
PERSON — Municipality, corporation, company, association, firm,
partnership, limited liability company, limited liability partnership and
individuals and their lessors, transferees and receivers.
PSC — The Public Service Commission of the State of Wisconsin.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Has the meaning provided in Sec. 196.01(5), Wis.
Stats.
REGISTRANT — Any person who has registered with the City to:
REPAIR — To perform construction work necessary to make the rightof-
way usable for travel, according to Department specifications, or to
return facilities to an operable condition.
REPAIR BOND — A performance bond, a letter of credit, or cash deposit
posted to ensure the availability of sufficient funds to assure that rightof-
way excavation repair work is completed in both a timely and quality
manner, per Department specifications.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface and space above and below a public
roadway, highway, street, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the
City has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel
purposes.
SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE — Includes municipal sewer and water
services and also includes, except as provided herein, but is not limited
to: (1) those services provided by a public utility as defined in
§ 196.01(5), Wis. Stats.; (2) telecommunications, pipeline, fire and
(1) Have its facilities located in any right-of-way; or
Use or seek to occupy or use the right-of-way or any facilities in the
right-of-way.
(2)
Sec. 62-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-301
1:343
Sec. 62-302. Administration.
The Department of Public Works (Department) is responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, and the permits and ordinances related
thereto.
Sec. 62-303. Registration required; exceptions.
alarm communications, water, electricity, light, heat, cooling energy,
or power services; (3) the services provided by a district heating or
cooling system; and (4) cable service as defined and regulated under
47 U.S.C. §§ 521 through 573. Wireless telecommunications service and
cellular mobile radio telecommunications (CMRS) services as defined
by Section 332(d) of the Federal Communications Act of 1996 [47 U.S.C.
§ 332(d)(1)] are excluded, unless these services have a presence in the
right-of-way.
SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION — An application made to excavate
or obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in or to extend a
permit that had already been issued.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER — Has the meaning in § 196.01,
Wis. Stats.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — Has the meaning in § 196.01,
Wis. Stats.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY USER — A person owning
or controlling a facility in the public right-of-way, or seeking to own or
control a facility in the public right-of-way that is used or is intended
to be used for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data
information. This includes telecommunications providers, utilities,
ATUs, and carriers.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering for sale or the
conveyance of voice, data or other information at any frequency over
any part of the electromagnetic spectrum, including the sale of service
for collection, storage, forwarding, switching and delivery incidental
to such communication and including the regulated sale of customer
premises equipment. Telecommunications service does not include
cable television service, wireless service or broadcast service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS UTILITY — Has the meaning in § 196.01,
Wis. Stats.
UNUSABLE FACILITIES — Facilities in the right-of-way which have
remained unused for one year and for which the registrant is unable to
provide proof that it has either a plan to begin using them within the
next 24 months or a potential purchaser or user of the facilities.
(a) Registration.
(1) Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use the
right-of-way or any facilities in the right-of-way, including by lease,
Sec. 62-301 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-303
1:344
Sec. 62-304. Registration Information.
sublease or assignment, or who has, or seeks to have facilities
located in any right-of-way shall register with the Department and
pay the fee set forth in Section 62-312. Registration will consist
of providing application information and paying a registration fee,
which shall be established by resolution of the City Council from
time to time. The registration fee shall be in an amount sufficient
to recover the costs incurred by the City for processing registrants.
This fee shall be computed as average labor costs, indirect costs,
and other costs associated with registration.
(2) This section shall not apply to those persons exclusively utilizing
facilities provided by another right-of-way user.
(b) Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or
any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being registered with
the Department.
(c) Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a City ordinance requiring persons to plant or maintain
the tree lawn in the area of the right-or-way between their property and
the street curb, construct sidewalks, install street signs or perform
other similar activities. Persons performing such activities shall not be
required to obtain any permits under this article.
(a) Information required. The information provided to the Department at
the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Each registrant's name, Diggers Hotline registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers.
(2) The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an
emergency shall be provided at the time of registration.
(3) All right-of-way users shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
City the financial capability to cover any liability which might arise
out of their presence in the right-of-way.
(4) If the person is a corporation, an LLC or LLP, a copy of any
certificate required to be filed under Wisconsin Statutes, as
recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.
(5) A copy of the person's certificate of authority from the Wisconsin
Public Service Commission or other applicable state or federal
agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such
certificate from said Commission or other state or federal agency.
Sec. 62-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-304
1:345
Sec. 62-305. (Reserved)
Sec. 62-306. Permit required.
No person shall excavate in any street, alley or public ground without a
permit therefor from the Department of Public Works.
Sec. 62-307. Bond.
Before a permit may be issued for excavating in any public street, way or
alley, the person applying for such permit shall execute to the City and
deposit with the City Clerk a corporate surety approved by the City in the
sum set from time to time by the Building Inspector or a cash bond in the
sum set from time to time by the Building Inspector, conditioned that he
will perform faithfully all work with due care and skill and in accordance
with the laws, rules, regulations and provisions of the construction manual
applicable thereto. The bond shall state that the person will indemnify
and save harmless the City and the owner of the premises against all
damages, costs, expenses, outlays and claims arising out of unskillfulness
or negligence on his part in connection with such excavating. Such bond
shall remain in force and shall be executed for one year, except on such
expiration it shall remain in force as to all penalties, claims and demands
that may have accrued thereunder prior to such expiration.
Sec. 62-308. Protection of public.
No permit shall be issued if the method of construction or the location of
the work to be performed will impair the public safety and convenience.
The permit holder shall erect such barriers, warning lights and signs as
will adequately inform the traveling public of the nature and location of the
work being performed.
Sec. 62-309. Repair of street openings.
The person to whom a permit is issued under this article shall complete
the work involved as soon as possible and shall immediately repair all
pavements, gutters and sidewalks in as good a condition as before the
opening and as may be directed by the City.
(6) Execution of an indemnification agreement in a form prescribed by
the Department, which is consistent with and shall not exceed the
obligations provided in Section 62-324 herein.
(b) Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed
above current at all times by providing to the Department information
as to changes within 15 working days following the date on which the
registrant has knowledge of any change.
DIVISION 2
EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIREMENT
Sec. 62-304 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-310
1:346
Sec. 62-310. Street closings.
No person shall close any street or portion thereof for excavation, repair
or construction of the street, gutters, sewers, water mains or for any other
reason without obtaining a permit from the City. He or she shall notify the
Police Chief, the Fire Chief and the Director of Public Works and utilities
at least 24 hours prior to the time at which the street or any portion of the
street would be closed.
Sec. 62-311. Breaking of curbs.
Sec. 62-312. Fees.
Fees for work on City property shall be as adopted from time to time by the
Public Works Committee and presented in the construction manual.
Sec. 62-313. Right-of-way repair.
(a) Permit required. No person shall break or remove any curb within the
City without a permit therefor from the City.
(b) Application; permit. The application for such permit shall be executed
by the applicant stating the exact location where he intends to break or
remove the curb and the reason for the need to do so.
(a) Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
repair of the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within
the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work
could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under Section 62-318.
(b) Repair. In addition to repairing its own work, the permittee must repair
the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas, including the
paving and its foundations, to the specifications of the Department. The
Department shall inspect the area of the work and accept the work
when it determines that proper repair has been made, per
specifications of the Department. A permittee may request to have the
City repair the right-of-way.
(1) City repair. If the permittee requires the City to repair the right-ofway,
the City may accept or reject the request at its sole option. If
the City accepts, the permittee shall be billed for the City's costs
and shall pay the amount thereof within 30 days of billing.
(2) Permittee repair. If the permittee chooses to repair the right-of-way,
it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
repair bond in an amount determined by the Department to be
sufficient to cover the cost of repairing the right-of-way to
Department specifications. If, 12 months after completion of the
repair of the right-of-way, the Department determines that the
Sec. 62-310 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-313
1:347
Sec. 62-314. Restoration in lieu of repair and degradation.
The permittee may elect to restore the excavation and surrounding
pavement in lieu of repair and a degradation fee. If restoration is elected,
the Department shall specify the area to be restored, and the methods
and materials to be used for the restoration. The permittee shall then also
comply with the preceding Section 62-313(a) through (e) as applied to
restoration instead of repair.
Sec. 62-315. Inspection.
right-of-way has been properly repaired, the surety on the repair
bond shall be released.
(c) Standards. The permittee shall perform repairs according to the
specifications of the Department and/or in the conditions specified in
the permit. The Department shall have the authority to prescribe the
manner and extent of the repair, and may do so in written procedures of
general application or on a case-by-case basis.
(d) Guaranties. The permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for
12 months following its completion, except for organic material which
shall be maintained for 12 months. During this period it shall, upon
notification from the Department, correct all repair work to the extent
necessary, using the method required by the Department. Said work
shall be completed within 10 calendar days of the receipt of the notice
from the Department, not including days during which work cannot be
done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days
when work is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under
Section 62-318.
(e) Failure to repair. If the permittee fails to repair the right-of-way in the
manner and to the condition required by the Department, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all repair required by the
Department, the Department, at its option, may do such work. In that
event, the permittee shall pay to the City, within 30 days of billing, the
cost of repairing the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required,
the City may exercise its rights under the repair bond.
(a) Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall notify the Department.
(b) Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work site available to the
Department and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the
work.
(c) Authority of Department. At the time of inspection the City may order
the immediate cessation of any work which poses a threat to the life,
health, safety or well-being of the public. The City may issue an order to
the registrant for any work that does not conform to the applicable
Sec. 62-313 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-315
1:348
Sec. 62-316. Joint applications.
Sec. 62-317. Supplementary applications.
Sec. 62-318. Other obligations.
standards, conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to
correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within
10 days after issuance of the order, the registrant shall present proof
to the Department that the violation has been corrected. If such proof
has not been presented within the required time, the Department may
revoke the permit pursuant to Section 62-319.
(a) Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate
the right-of-way at the same place and time.
(b) With City projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled excavation
performed by the City, whether or not it is a joint application by two or
more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
degradation portion of the excavation permit fee.
(c) Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same excavation,
which the Department does not perform, may share in the payment of
the excavation permit fee. Registrants must agree among themselves as
to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their applications.
(a) Limitations on area. An excavation permit is valid only for the area of
the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may perform any
work or excavate outside the area specified in the permit, except as
provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater
than that specified in the permit must be excavated must, before
working in that greater area:
(1) Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby; and
(2) Be granted a new permit or permit extension.
(b) Limitation on dates. An excavation permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after
the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end
date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and
receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working
after the end date of the previous permit.
(c) Fees for supplementary Applications. A permittee shall pay
administration costs for any additional permits.
(d) A permittee is not required to pay an additional degradation fee for the
same excavation, if one has already been paid on the original permit.
Sec. 62-315 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-318
1:349
Sec. 62-319. Revocations; suspensions; refusals to issue; extensions
of permits.
(a) Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a permit to excavate and/or
occupy the right-of-way does not relieve the permittee of its duty to
obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all
fees required by any other City, county, state, or federal rules, laws or
regulations. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local,
state and federal laws, including but not limited to Section 98-206(7)(c).
A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable
codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all
work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who
does the work.
(b) Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, or with the approval of the
Department, no right-of-way excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
(a) Grounds. The Department may refuse to issue a permit or may revoke,
suspend or refuse to extend an existing permit if it finds any of the
following grounds:
(1) The applicant or permittee is required by Section 62-303 to be
registered and has not done so;
(2) The applicant or permittee is seeking to perform work not included
in its construction and major maintenance plan required under
Section 62-313, which work was reasonably foreseeable by the
applicant or permittee at the time said plan was filed;
(3) Issuance of a permit for the requested date would interfere with an
exhibition, celebration, festival, or other event;
(4) Misrepresentation of any fact by the applicant or permittee;
(5) Failure of the applicant or permittee to maintain required bonds
and/or insurance;
(6) Failure of the applicant or permittee to complete work in a timely
manner;
(7) The proposed activity is contrary to the public health, safety or
welfare;
(8) The extent to which right-of-way space where the permit is sought
is available;
(9) The competing demands for the particular space in the right-ofway;
(10) The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other
rights-of-way for the facilities in the right-of-way;
Sec. 62-318 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-319
1:350
Sec. 62-320. Work done without permit.
(11) The applicability of ordinances or other regulations of the right-ofway
that affect location of facilities in the right-of-way;
(12) The condition and age of the right-of-way, and whether and when it
is scheduled for total or partial reconstruction; or
(13) The applicant or permittee is otherwise not in full compliance with
the requirements of this chapter or state or federal law.
(b) Discretionary issuance. Notwithstanding Subsection (a), the
Department may issue a permit where issuance is necessary to:
(1) Prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the
permittee or applicant; or
(2) Allow such customer to materially improve its utility service; or
(3) Allow the permittee or applicant to comply with state or federal law
or City ordinance or an order of a court or administrative agency.
(c) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Department
revoking, suspending, refusing to issue or refusing to extend a permit
may file a request for review with the Board of Public Works. A request
for review shall be filed within 10 days of the decision being appealed.
Following a hearing, the Board of Public Works may affirm, reverse or
modify the decision of the Department.
(a) Emergency situations.
(1) Each registrant shall immediately notify the City by verbal notice
on an emergency phone number provided by the City of any event
regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The
registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to
respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the
necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and otherwise
fully comply with the requirements of this article.
(2) If the City becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's
facilities, the Department may attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected or potentially affected by
the emergency. The City may take whatever action it deems
necessary to protect the public safety as a result of the emergency,
the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.
(b) Nonemergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, excavates a right-ofway
must subsequently obtain a permit, and shall, in addition to any
penalties prescribed by this article, pay double the normal fee for said
permit, pay double all the other fees required by this article or other
Sec. 62-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-320
1:351
Sec. 62-321. Supplementary notification.
If the excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the
date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the Department of the
accurate information as soon as this information is known.
DIVISION 3
FACILITIES; INDEMNIFICATION; SEVERABILITY
Sec. 62-322. Location of facilities.
chapters of the City Code, deposit with the Department the fees
necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with
all of the requirements of this article.
(a) Undergrounding. Under conformity with local, state, and federal law,
unless existing aboveground facilities are used, the installation of new
facilities and replacement of old facilities shall be done underground or
contained within buildings or other structures in conformity with
applicable codes.
(b) Corridors. The Department may assign specific corridors within the
right-of-way, consistent with Wisconsin Public Service Commission
standards. All excavation or other permits issued by the Department
involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the
proper corridor for the facilities at issue consistent with the Wisconsin
Public Service Commission's corridor selection standards.
(c) Limitation of space. The Department may prohibit or limit the
placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way if there
is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests of persons to
occupy and use the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the
Department shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all
existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but may prohibit or limit
the placement of new or additional facilities when required to protect
the public, health, safety or welfare.
(d) Any structures resembling communication towers shall be located and
comply with the standards set forth in Section 98-206(7) of the City of
Lake Geneva Zoning Ordinances as amended from time to time.
(e) Relocation of facilities.
(1) Except as prohibited by state or federal law, a registrant must
promptly and at its own expense, with due regard for seasonal
working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its facilities
in the right-of-way whenever the Department requests such
removal and relocation, and shall restore the right-of-way to the
same condition it was in prior to said removal or relocation. The
Department may make such request to prevent interference by the
company's facilities with:
Sec. 62-320 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-322
1:352
Sec. 62-323. Interference with other facilities during municipal
construction.
Sec. 62-324. Indemnification.
The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees, by acceptance of the
permit, to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City, its officers, boards,
committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents from and
against all loss or expense (including liability costs and attorney's fees) by
reason of any claim or suit, or of liability imposed by law upon the City
or its agents or employees for damages because of bodily injury, including
death at any time resulting therefrom, sustained by any person or persons
or on account of damages to property, including loss of use thereof, arising
from, in connection with, caused by or resulting from the permittee's acts
or omissions in the exercise of its rights under this permit, whether caused
by or contributed to by the City or its agents or employees.
Sec. 62-325. Abandoned facilities.
a. A present or future City use of the right-of-way;
b. A public improvement undertaken by the City;
c. An economic development project in which the City has an
interest or investment;
d. When the public health, safety and welfare require it; or
e. When necessary to prevent interference with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be required to
remove or relocate its facilities from any right-of-way which has
been vacated in favor of a nongovernmental entity unless and until
the reasonable costs thereof are first paid to the person therefor.
(a) When the City performs work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary
to maintain, support, shore, or move a registrant's facilities, the City
shall notify the local representative. The registrant shall meet with the
City's representative within 24 hours and coordinate the protection,
maintenance, supporting, and/or shoring of the registrant's facilities.
The registrant shall accomplish the needed work within 72 hours,
unless the City agrees to a longer period.
(b) In the event that the registrant does not proceed to maintain, support,
shore, or move its facilities, the City may arrange to do the work and bill
the registrant, said bill to be paid within 30 days.
(a) Discontinued operations.
(1) A registrant who has determined to discontinue its operations in
the City must either:
Sec. 62-322 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-325
1:353
Sec. 62-326. Reservation of regulatory and police powers.
The City, by the granting of a permit to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy
the right-of-way, or by registering a person under this article does not
surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers
and rights, which it has now or maybe hereafter granted to the City under
the Constitution and statutes of the State of Wisconsin to regulate the use
of the right-of-way by the permittee; and the permittee by its acceptance
of a permit to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the right-of-way or of
registration under this article agrees that all lawful powers and rights,
regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be
from time to time vested in or reserved to the City, shall be in full force
and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the City at any time. A
permittee or registrant is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject
to the regulatory and policy powers of the City to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed
to agree to comply with all applicable general law, and ordinances enacted
by the City pursuant to such powers.
a. Provide information satisfactory to the Department that the
registrant's obligations for its facilities under this article have
been lawfully assumed by another registrant; or
b. Submit to the Department a proposal and instruments for
dedication of its facilities to the City. If a registrant proceeds
under this clause, the City may, at its option:
1. Accept the dedication for all or a portion of the facilities;
or
2. Require the registrant, at its own expense, to remove the
facilities in the right-of-way at ground or above ground
level; or
3. Require the registrant to post a bond or provide payment
sufficient to reimburse the City for reasonably anticipated
costs to be incurred in removing the facilities.
(2) However, any registrant who has unusable and abandoned facilities
in any right-of-way shall remove them from that right-of-way within
two years, unless the Department waives this requirement.
(b) Abandoned facilities. Facilities of a registrant who fails to comply with
Section 62-325(a), and which for two years remain unused shall be
deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a
nuisance. In addition to any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity,
the City may, at its option, abate the nuisance, take possession of the
facilities, or require removal of the facilities by the registrant, or the
registrant's successor in interest.
(c) Public utilities. This section shall not apply to a public utility as defined
by § 196.01(5), Wis. Stats.
Sec. 62-325 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-327
1:354
Sec. 62-327. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
Sec. 62-327 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 62-327
1:355
Chapter 66
SUBDIVISIONS
Sec. 62-327 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 62-327
1:356
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 66-1. Purpose and jurisdiction of chapter. [Code 1992, § 18.01]
This chapter shall regulate and control subdivision and division of land
within the corporate limits and the area of extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction of the city in order to promote public health, safety and general
welfare; to further the orderly layout and use of land; to secure safety
from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to
prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population;
to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks, playgrounds and other public requirements; to facilitate
the further resubdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land; to
conserve the value of buildings placed upon land, to provide the best
possible environment for human habitation and to encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the city and the area of its extraterritorial
plat approval jurisdiction. The approvals to be obtained by the
subdivider as required in this chapter are based on requirements designed
to accomplish the purposes of this section.
Sec. 66-2. Adoption of applicable state law provisions. [Code 1992,
§ 18.02]
Sec. 66-3. Rules of construction. [Code 1992, § 18.03(1)]
In this chapter all terms used which are defined in W.S.A., ch. 236, shall
have the same meaning as ascribed in that chapter and as the chapter may
(a) The provisions contained in W.S.A., ch. 236, governing the subdivision
and platting of land, and such other state laws as may apply and any
revisions or amendments thereof enacted by the state legislature; the
rules of the state department of health and social services relating to lot
size and lot evaluation, if the subdivision is not served by a public sewer
and provisions for such service have not been made; and the rules of the
state department of transportation relating to safety of access and
preservation of the public interest and investment in the streets, if the
subdivision abuts on a state trunk highway or connecting street, are all
made a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as if set out in
full in this section, except that where the provisions of this chapter are
more restrictive, this chapter shall apply.
(b) Any division of land within the city or its extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction which results in a subdivision shall be approved and
recorded as required by this chapter and by W.S.A., ch. 236.
(c) Any division of land within the city or its extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction resulting from a condominium development shall be
approved and recorded as required by this chapter and by W.S.A.,
§ 703.11, and other applicable statutes.
Sec. 66-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-3
1:357
hereafter be amended, unless otherwise defined in this chapter or unless
the context or subject matter clearly indicates otherwise. All words used
in the present tense include the future tense; the singular includes the
plural and the plural the singular; the word "person" includes associations,
copartnerships or corporations; and the word "shall" is mandatory while the
word "may" is permissive.
Sec. 66-4. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 18.03(2); Ord. No. 98-12, § I,
12-14-1998]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALLEY — A right-of-way which affords secondary access to properties
abutting a street.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one
or more streets and parks, cemeteries, shorelines of waterways, corporate
limits, railroad rights-of-way, or other line of demarcation.
BUILDABLE AREA — (FOR THE PURPOSE OF MEASURING LOT WIDTH)
— The narrowest width within the 30 feet of lot depth immediately in back
of the required front yard setback line.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The building inspector of the city, or his
authorized representative.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a lot or other parcel of land
so designated on a preliminary plat which denotes the area between such
line and the adjacent street right-of-way line where an enclosed building
and other obstructions are prohibited, except those obstructions that are
permitted by zoning regulations.
BUTT LOT — A lot located at the end of a block between two corner lots.
CITY — The City of Lake Geneva.
CITY CLERK — The city clerk of Lake Geneva.
CITY COUNCIL — The city council of Lake Geneva.
CITY ENGINEER — The engineer of the city.
COLLECTOR STREET — A subdivision street having a wider roadway width
than a minor street and which is a prime entrance or circulation street. Its
primary function is to collect and distribute traffic from minor streets.
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT — A real estate development,
redevelopment or ownership regime conversion project involving
establishment or alteration of the condominium form of ownership for all or
part of the development.
COUNTRYSIDE SUBDIVISION — A parcel or tract of land of no less than
40 acres in area, initially under single ownership or control which has been
subdivided into lots for single-family detached dwellings where each lot has
an area of no less than 1/2 of an acre and a width of no less than 100 feet
Sec. 66-3 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-4
1:358
at the buildable area and where regulations of this chapter may be modified
as specified in this chapter.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street with a single outlet.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines
along two substantially parallel streets.
EASEMENT — A quantity of land set aside over or under which a liberty,
privilege or advantage in land without profit, is dedicated and is distinct
from ownership of the land, is granted either to the public, a particular
person or a combination of both.
EXTRATERRITORIAL PLAT APPROVAL JURISDICTION — As defined in
W.S.A. § 236.02(2), (1 1/2 mile from corporate limits), except where
adjusted by the ETJ limits of other jurisdictions.
FINAL PLAT — A map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying
material as described in division 3 of article II of this chapter.
FRONTAGE ROAD — A minor street which is parallel to and either adjacent
to or within the right-of-way of a thoroughfare.
HALF STREET — A street of less than the total required width along one or
more property lines of a subdivision.
LAND IMPROVEMENT — Any sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system,
water supply and distribution system, roadway, terrace, sidewalk,
pedestrian way, no access strip, off-street parking area or other
improvement which the city may require under this chapter.
LOT — A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
transfer of ownership or for building development.
MASTER PLAN — The composite elements of the master plan of the city and
its environs, or any segment thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts and
textual material, as adopted by the plan commission.
MINOR STREET — A street of limited continuity. Its primary purpose is to
serve abutting properties.
NO ACCESS STRIP — A land area at least 12 feet wide along the rear lot
line of a double frontage lot and abutting a thoroughfare within which no
vehicular driveways shall be permitted.
OWNER — Any firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public
or quasipublic corporation, or a combination of any of them, or other
legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided or divided to commence and maintain proceedings under the
provisions of this chapter.
PEDESTRIAN WAY — A right-of-way across or within a block designated for
pedestrian use.
PLAN COMMISSION — The city plan commission.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision
as described in division 2 of article II of this chapter.
Sec. 66-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-4
1:359
ROADWAY — That portion of the street designated for vehicular use.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street designated for pedestrian use.
STREET (PUBLIC OR PRIVATE) — A right-of-way which affords primary
means of access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties, whether
designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane or however
otherwise designated.
STREET WIDTH — The shortest distance between the right-of-way lines of
a given street.
SUBDIVIDER — Any owner commencing proceedings under this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — A division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owner
thereof or his agent for the purpose of sale or of building developments,
where:
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS — The basic land planning principles
established as guides for the preparation of preliminary plats.
TERRACE — An unpaved strip of land situated within the street.
THOROUGHFARE — A street with a high degree of continuity which also
serves as an arterial traffic way between the various districts of the city and
its environs.
Sec. 66-5. Enforcement of chapter. [Code 1992, § 18.16]
No plat of any subdivision or land division shall be entitled to record in the
office of the register of deeds or have any validity until it shall have been
approved in a manner prescribed in this chapter.
Sec. 66-6. Penalty for violation of chapter. [Code 1992, § 18.20; Ord.
No. 98-12, § I, 12-14-1998]
Additional penalties for failure to comply with the requirements of this
chapter shall include invalidation of purported transfers of titles at the
option of the purchaser in accordance with the provisions of W.S.A.
§ 236.31(3).
Sec. 66-7. Building permit. [Code 1992, § 18.14]
No building permit shall be issued by any city official for the construction
of any building, structure or improvement to land or any lot within a
subdivision or land division which has been approved for platting until there
The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of 1 1/
2 acres each or less in area.
(1)
Five or more parcels or building sites of 1 1/2 acres each or less in area
are created by successive divisions within a period of five years.
(2)
(3) The act of division involves the creation of a new street.
Sec. 66-4 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-7
1:360
is compliance with all requirements of this chapter and other pertinent
ordinances.
Sec. 66-8. Occupancy permit. [Code 1992, § 18.15]
No occupancy permit shall be granted by any city official for the use of
any structure within a subdivision or land division approved for platting or
replatting until required utility facilities have been installed and made ready
to service the property, and roadways providing access to the subject lots
have been constructed or are in the course of construction, and are suitable
for vehicular traffic.
Sec. 66-9. Conformance with policies. [Ord. No. 98-12, § III,
12-14-1998]
It is the intent of the city council that land be developed in harmony with
the following policies agreed to in the master plan, plan for parks and open
space, official map, and the Walworth County land use plans, as adopted by
the city. Therefore, the following policies shall apply:
(1) To plan the location and/or timing of new development to make it
efficient, to reduce public costs and to encourage separation and
distinction between municipalities.
(2) To direct and stage new growth only to those areas planned and
programmed for development and capable of providing a full range of
urban services, including transportation and schools.
(3) To discourage scattered development and urban sprawl.
(4) To insure that land uses complement rather than conflict with natural
features such as rolling topography, trees, creeks, ponds and rock
formations.
(5) To develop a system of interior open spaces in which existing
environmental corridors to delineate neighborhoods, control storm
water drainage and provide circulation for pedestrian and bicycle
traffic.
(6) To locate multi-family development and local commercial development
convenient to each other and near arterials.
(7) To encourage preservation of open space and aesthetic quality in
development through the use of planned development districts.
(8) To favor land use intensities and patterns that are supportive of
alternative modes of transportation.
(9) To promote and maintain balanced commercial activity that is viable
and responsive to the needs of the community and the surrounding
market area.
Sec. 66-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-9
1:361
Sec. 66-10. Land suitability. [Ord. No. 98-12, § III, 12-14-1998]
No land shall be divided or subdivided for a use which is held unsuitable
by the plan commission for reason of flooding or potential flooding, soil
limitations, inadequate drainage, steep topography, incompatible
surrounding land use, or any other condition likely to be harmful to the
health, safety or welfare of the future residents or users of the area, or
harmful to the community.
Sec. 66-11. Determination of adequacy of public facilities and
services. [Ord. No. 98-12, § III, 12-14-1998]
(10) To preserve the quality of the water and the air and to prevent extreme
noise and visual blight.
(11) To preserve prime agricultural land for agricultural use.
(12) To encourage development in the city with balanced residential,
commercial, industrial and open space uses and public services.
(1) Except as provide herein, the plan commission shall determine land
suitability prior to the time the preliminary plat or certified survey is
considered for approval, following review and recommendations by the
appropriate city commissions and committees. The plan commission
may impose special conditions on the plat or certified survey map
deemed necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of future
residents of the area. Those areas that are found to be environmentally
sensitive shall be considered for preservation as open space. The
determination of land suitability will be evaluated through the site
assessment procedures. The subdivider shall furnish such maps, data
and information as may be necessary to make a determination of land
suitability.
(2) Should the plan commission determine that the land is unsuitable for
the intended use or development, it shall state its reasons in writing to
the subdivider within 30 days of initial plan commission action. The
subdivider may present additional evidence to support the proposed
subdivision. Upon review of the additional evidence, the plan
commission shall affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of
unsuitability.
(3) The subdivider may appeal the determination of unsuitability as
provided in the appeals procedure.
(a) A certified survey map, preliminary plat or final plat shall not be
approved unless the plan commission and the common council
determine that adequate public facilities and public services are
available to meet the needs of the proposed subdivision.
(b) The applicant shall furnish any data requested by the city engineer who
shall transmit this information to appropriate city commissions,
committees and boards for review and shall act as coordinator for their
Sec. 66-9 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-11
1:362
reports to the plan commission and the common council on the
adequacy of water, sanitary and storm sewers, fire service, police, parks
and open space and recreation facilities, and transportation facilities.
(c) Public facilities and public services for a proposed subdivision may be
found to be adequate when the following conditions exist:
(1) The proposed subdivision is located in an urban service area where
mainline interceptor sewer service is presently under construction,
or designated by the common council for extension of sewer
service. The plan commission and the common council shall also
consider the recommendations of the city engineer and the public
works committee on the capacity of trunk lies and of sewerage
treatment facilities and any other information presented.
(2) The proposed subdivision is located within an urban service area
serviced by an arterial transmission water main with adequate
capacity for the proposed development or if the water distribution
system that is needed is under construction or scheduled for
construction. The plan commission and the common council shall
consider the recommendations of the city engineer and the public
works committee on line capacities, water sources and storage
facilities as well as any other information presented.
(3) The city engineer and public works committee recommend to the
plan commission and the common council that adequate facilities
are available to insure the proper storm water management.
(4) The park board recommends that future residents of the proposed
subdivision can be assured park, recreation and open space areas,
facilities and services that meet the standards of the park and
opens space plan.
(5) The police and fire commission shall verify that timely and
adequate service can be provided to the residents.
(6) The proposed subdivision is accessible by existing publicly
maintained, all weather roads adequate to accommodate both
existing traffic and that traffic to be generated by the proposed
subdivision, or necessary additional roads and road improvements
are budgeted for construction with public or private financing, or
public transportation service sufficient to serve the subdivision in
combination with the foregoing is available or programmed for the
area. The plan commission and the common council shall consider
the recommendations of other commenting agencies and
jurisdictions, and such factors as level of service, average and peak
use, and any other information presented.
(7) Where the plan commission and the common council determine
that one or more public facilities or services are not adequate for
the proposed development, but that a portion of the area could be
served adequately, or that careful phasing of the development
Sec. 66-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-11
1:363
Sec. 66-12. Lot sizes. [Ord. No. 98-12, § III, 12-14-1998]
In the case of all subdivisions, including minor subdivisions, lot sizes shall
conform to the area and width requirements of the zoning code, unless
otherwise modified by the provisions of this article.
Sec. 66-13. Dedication and reservation of land. [Ord. No. 98-12,
§ III, 12-14-1998]
Sec. 66-14. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 98-12, § III, 12-14-1998]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
could result in all public facilities and public services being
adequate, conditional approval may include only such portions or
may specify phasing of the development.
(a) Whenever a tract of land to be divided within the jurisdiction of this
ordinance encompasses all or any part of a street, highway, bikeway,
pedestrianway, greenway, environmental corridor, waterway, or a
drainage or utility easement designated in the master plan or official
map, the subdivider shall plat said public way in the locations and
dimensions indicated on said master plan or official map. The plan
commission shall determine whether said public way should be
dedicated to the public or reserved by the subdivider.
(b) Whenever a tract of land to be divided within the jurisdiction of this
article encompasses all or part of a park site, open space or other
recreation area or school site designated in the master plan, park and
opens space plan, or official map, said public sites shall be platted and
dedicated or reserved by the subdivider at the discretion of the plan
commission in the locations and dimensions indicated on said plans or
map in accordance with the requirements of this article.
(c) Once a preliminary plat or certified survey is approved, any lands
proposed for public use above shall not be altered without the written
approval of the plan commission, the park commission, and public
works committee.
(1) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order;
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements;
(3) The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting
are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by the zoning code
or other applicable laws or ordinances unless the parcels have been
part of a prior land division or subdivision.
(4) Where sale or exchange of parcels involves only a change of lot lines,
that the land division may be approved by the zoning administrator
after a staff review to determine conformance with city ordinances.
Sec. 66-11 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-15
1:364
Sec. 66-15. Extraterritorial land division policies. [Ord. No. 98-12,
§ III, 12-14-1998]
The following policies shall govern the city planning commission in
approving division of land within the extraterritorial area in order to protect
rural character and farming viability, if the city elects to apply its
extraterritorial land division authority through council resolution.
(1) No land divisions (subdivisions nor minor subdivisions) as defined in
this ordinance will be permitted within the mile and 1/2 extraterritorial
limits of the city without approval of the city, per the procedures in this
article as applicable to land divisions within the city.
(2) Land divisions (subdivisions and minor subdivisions) will be permitted
for farm-related dwellings and for rural residential dwellings, not
exceeding an overall density of one dwelling unit for 35 acres, exclusive
of the farmstead. Lots for nonresidential use will be handled on a caseby-
case basis. The standards used to review these land divisions will be
the same as the standards contained in the county exclusive
agricultural zoning district ordinances that are used for considering
rezonings. The only exception to this policy is that lots resulting in the
infill of existing subdivisions may be permitted.
(3) The minimum density of residential development in the mile and 1/2
extraterritorial area shall be one acre. A smaller lot size may be allowed
if also approved by the respective town board.
(4) The maximum density of residential development in the mile and 1/2
extraterritorial area shall be one dwelling unit for 35 acres, exclusive of
the farmstead.
(5) The city will attempt to seek consistency of the city's plans and locally
adopted town plans. To the extent that the policies of the city are more
restrictive, the city's policies shall prevail. All land divisions within the
extraterritorial area will be subject to the land reservation or dedication
requirements of this ordinance. This specifically means the following:
a. Any waterway or storm water management area identified on the
city master plan or official map shall be dedicated in conformance
with requirements of this ordinance.
b. Any lands falling within the limits of an environmental corridor, as
mapped by the city will be required to record a public open space
easement specifying that the use shall be consistent with
conservancy area zoning in the city zoning ordinance.
(6) Lands falling within the first mile and a half of the extraterritorial area
shall be required to meet all of the development layout design
standards contained in this article.
(7) All land divisions within the extraterritorial area will be required to
follow erosion control plans in compliance with this article.
Sec. 66-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-15
1:365
Sec. 66-16. Extraterritorial land division procedures. [Ord. No.
98-12, § III, 12-14-1998]
In all cases, the time period within which action is required shall not begin
until the town board, the staff serving the county zoning committee, and the
city have received all maps, drawings and data required for plat approval.
Sec. 66-17. Extraterritorial land division variance provisions. [Ord.
No. 98-12, § III, 12-14-1998]
A variance may be granted by the common council to permit a parcel to be
created by a proposed land division in the extraterritorial review area when
it is shown that the application satisfies the following standards:
(8) All land divisions within the extraterritorial area shall pay the required
review fees contained in this article.
(9) The plan commission may require placement of covenants or deed
restrictions that are deemed necessary and appropriate by the city
planning commission to protect the purpose and intent of the city's
plans and ordinances. Any such restrictions shall be placed on the face
of the certified survey map or on surrounding lands from which the lot
or lots were created to verify the density standard established herein.
(10) If a variance is granted to the above provision the resulting division of
land shall conform to all of the pertinent regulations of this article.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall divide any land located within the
mile and 1/2 extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the city,
without first filing an application and a certified survey map for
approval by the plan commission.
(2) Pre-application procedure. Before filing an application for approval of a
certified survey, the subdivider shall consult with the department of
public works and shall prepare the following:
a. Prepare a preliminary sketch for review and approval.
b. Complete a site assessment checklist, or when required, an
expanded site assessment report required by this article, for review
and approval.
This procedure is intended to assist the developer in appraising
the objectives of these regulations, the master plan, the official
map and other pertinent city ordinances. The pre-application
information shall be submitted to the plan commission for review
and approval.
(3) Following completion of the pre-application procedure, submittal
requirements for land divisions within the extraterritorial land division
jurisdiction enacted by common council resolution shall be identical to
those required for land divisions within the city limits.
Sec. 66-15 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-17
1:366
Sec. 66-18. through Sec. 66-35. (Reserved)
(1) A finding of fact must be made that the purpose of the proposed parcel
is to be a lot for a dwelling unit which is to be occupied by a person who,
or a family at least one member of which earns a substantial part of his
or her livelihood from farm operations on the parcel, and/or contributes
work which is substantially needed in the farm operation, and is the
parent or child of the farm operator or the spouse of the farm operator;
and
(2) A finding of public interest must be made that the proposed parcel and
use is reasonable upon consideration of these factors:
a. The potential for conflict with agricultural use.
b. The need of the proposed use for a location in an agricultural area.
c. The availability of alternative locations.
d. Compatibility with existing or permitted use on adjacent lands.
e. The productivity of the lands involved.
f. The location of the proposed use so as to reduce to a minimum the
amount of productive agricultural land converted.
g. The need for public services created by the proposed use.
h. The availability of adequate public services and the ability of
affected local units of government to provide them without a
reasonable burden.
i. The effect of the proposed use on water or air pollution, soil erosion
and rare or irreplaceable natural resources.
When the site is zoned exclusive agricultural under the county
zoning ordinances, the plan commission shall defer to the county
conditional use decisions on the standards of (2), where such a
county decision is needed to establish the dwelling unit.
(3) The minimum parcel size allowable under (4) by variance is one acre,
exclusive of any area dedicated to the public.
(4) If a variance is granted under this subsection the division of land shall
be subject to all other pertinent provisions of this and related
ordinances.
Sec. 66-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-18
1:367

ARTICLE II
PLATS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 66-36. Land divisions other than subdivisions. [Code 1992,
§ 18.04(4); Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 8-30-2007]
It is the intention of the city council to discourage the division of lands
other than as subdivisions, but where such divisions are made in compliance
with existing city, town, county and state laws, the following provisions shall
apply:
(1) Procedure. The divider shall file a certified survey map with the plan
commission, which shall have not more than 40 days to review and
approve, approve conditionally or reject. The divider shall be notified in
writing of any conditions of improvement or reasons for rejection.
a. Sanitary sewerage and stormwater system.
b. Water supply.
c. Street grading.
d. Street improvements.
e. Public utilities.
(2) Requirements. The division of the land shall comply with the provisions
of this chapter relating to general requirements, division standards and
required improvements. Prior to approval of the division of land, final
plans and specifications for the sanitary sewer, water main, storm
sewer and other land improvement plans and specifications shall be
reviewed by the city engineer.
(3) Payment. If such improvements cannot physically be installed at this
time, the owner shall place in escrow the amount of money necessary to
install such improvements at a future date. The amount to be placed in
escrow will be determined by the city engineer and will be
representative of the unit prices being bid for such improvements at the
time the certified survey is approved.
(4) Mapping. The certified survey map shall be prepared by a land surveyor
registered in the state and shall contain the following information:
a. All corners shall be monumented in accordance with W.S.A.,
§ 236.15(1)(d).
b. The map shall be prepared in accordance with W.S.A.,
§ 236.20(2)(a), (b), (c), (e), (f), (g), (h), (j), (k) and (l), and shall be
prepared on durable white paper 8 1/2 inches wide by 14 inches
Sec. 66-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-36
1:369
Sec. 66-37. Condominium project procedures. [Code 1992,
§ 18.04(5)]
Each condominium project shall be reviewed on the basis of a condominium
plat prepared pursuant to W.S.A., § 703.11, and other applicable statutes,
as well as these land division and subdivision regulations as a plat or
certified survey map for the land development or subdivision elements of
the project. Procedures outlined in section 66-36 shall apply to city review
of condominium project plat.
long. All lines shall be made with nonfading black ink on a scale of
not more than 500 feet to an inch.
c. The map shall include the affidavit of the surveyor who surveyed
and mapped the parcel and shall be typed, lettered or reproduced
legibly with nonfading black ink, giving a clear concise description
of the land surveyed, bearings and distances from a corner marked
and established in the U.S. Public Land Survey. Such affidavit shall
include the statement of surveyor to the effect that he has fully
complied with the requirements of this section.
d. The map shall be filed by the divider and recorded with the register
of deeds.
(5) Payment to the park fund. Payments shall be made to the park fund as
follows:
a. The divider shall be required to pay to the city a fee as specified in
this subsection with such fee being placed in the park fund which
shall be used as specified in section 54-4:
1. Four hundred dollars per new residential lot created.
2. Two hundred dollars per new commercial lot created.
b. Payment shall be made in a lump sum, or 50% may be paid at the
time of final land approval and the balance paid within one year
thereafter, on the condition that a performance bond by a surety
company authorized to do business in the state and approved by
the city attorney is simultaneously filed with the city clerk.
c. Where a lot or parcel has been previously created and a payment
has been made, then if the lot or parcel is further divided, payment
shall be required only for the additional parcels or residential lots
created.
(6) Professional fees. Costs incurred by the plan commission and/or council
in retaining legal, planning, engineering and other technical and
professional advice in connection with the review of subdivisions, plats
or other land divisions shall be charged to the applicant. The applicant
shall be notified if costs will be incurred.
Sec. 66-36 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-38
1:370
Sec. 66-38. Lot line adjustments. [Code 1992, § 18.04(6)]
The city engineer or the city building inspector may require the owners of
the adjoining property who have sold or exchanged parcels of land between
themselves so as to effect a lot line adjustment to furnish evidence that
the resulting lots have not been reduced below the minimum sizes required
by this chapter, the city zoning ordinance or other applicable laws or
ordinances. The evidence shall be in the form of either a plat of survey or a
point of the area marked to show the new lot line stakes and the dimensions
of the resulting lots, stamped by a registered land surveyor, and that the
new lot line has been staked on the ground by the registered land surveyor.
Such evidence shall be submitted no later than 30 days following the written
request therefor made by the city engineer or city building inspector to the
owners. No person shall sell or exchange parcels of land between adjoining
property if additional lots are created without complying with this chapter
or if the lots resulting are reduced below the minimum sizes required by this
chapter, the city zoning ordinance or other applicable laws or ordinances.
Sec. 66-39. through Sec. 66-55. (Reserved)
Sec. 66-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-39
1:371

DIVISION 2
PRELIMINARY PLAT
Sec. 66-56. Preliminary consultation. [Code 1992, § 18.04(1)]
It is recommended that the subdivider, prior to preparation of plans and
other documents required for an application for approval of a preliminary
plat, consult with the plan commission and other city officials relative
to requirements of the master plan, city zoning ordinance, this chapter
and other applicable codes and ordinances of the city. Request for such
consultation does not require filing an application and payment of a fee, but
it is suggested that the subdivider have a preliminary sketch plan of the
proposed subdivision.
Sec. 66-57. Filing of permits. [Code 1992, § 18.04(2)(a)]
Any person contemplating the subdivision of land within the city or its
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction before submitting a final plat for
approval shall file with the city clerk at least 10 days prior to a regular
meeting of the plan commission, legible prints of a preliminary plat
conforming to the master plan, regulations contained in this chapter
governing preliminary plats and other applicable codes and ordinances of
the city. The subdivider shall provide 11 such prints at his expense.
Sec. 66-58. Official filing; copy recipients. [Code 1992,
§ 18.04(5)(b)]
The submission of the prints of the preliminary plat shall constitute official
filing, and the city clerk shall note on each print the date filed and shall
immediately forward copies to the following:
Sec. 66-59. Official approval. [Code 1992, § 18.04(2)(c)]
(1) Two copies for each of the state agencies required to review the plat to
the department of development.
(2) One copy for the official file.
(3) Two copies for the plan commission.
(4) Two copies to the city engineer.
(a) The plan commission shall, within 90 days of the submission of the
preliminary plat, review the plat and negotiate with the subdivider on
changes deemed advisable, approve, approve conditionally or reject
such plat. The subdivider shall be notified in writing of any conditions of
approval or the reasons for rejections. Pursuant to W.S.A., ch. 236, no
approval shall be granted until it has been certified that there is no
objection to the plat by any agency authorized to object.
(b) Upon such approval by the plan commission, two copies of the approved
preliminary plat shall be signed by the chairman of the plan
Sec. 66-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-59
1:373
Sec. 66-60. Contents.
The preliminary plat shall show the following:
commission. Both copies shall be transmitted to the city clerk, one for
the official file; the other to be transmitted to the subdivider.
NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plat of the subdivision
shown hereon has received approval by the plan commission of the
City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, and upon compliance by the
subdivider with requirements of qualifications governing approval of
preliminary plats and with other revisions and stipulations that may
be required, the city council will receive the application for final plat
approval for all or a part of such approved preliminary plat, when
submitted by the subdivider in such form and within such time as
required by this ordinance.
The Plan Commission of the City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin
Date __________ 19 _____
By
Chairman
(1) Identification and description. The identification and description shall
indicate the following:
a. Proposed name of subdivision, not duplicating the name of any plat
heretofore recorded in the city or the county.
b. Location by section, town and range or by other legal description.
c. An accompanying boundary line survey map with accurate
distances and angles prepared and certified by a registered
surveyor and an accompanying topographic map indicating source
of survey shall accompany the preliminary plat.
d. Names and addresses of the owner and subdivider having control
of tract and designer of the plat.
e. Graphic (engineering) scale shall not exceed 100 feet to one inch.
f. North point (designated as true north).
g. Date of preparation.
(2) Existing conditions. Existing conditions shall be indicated as follows:
a. Boundary line of proposed subdivision in accordance with
subsection (1)c. of this section.
b. Total acreage therein.
Sec. 66-59 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-60
1:374
c. Existing zoning districts in proposed subdivision and adjoining
areas.
d. Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted
streets or other rights-of-way designating type of improvements,
railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open
spaces, easements, section lines, and corporation lines within the
tract and to a distance of at least 300 feet beyond the boundaries of
the subdivision.
e. Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, or
other underground facilities and permanent buildings and other
structures, within the subdivision and to a distance of 100 feet
beyond its boundaries; also indicating locations and invert
elevations of manholes and catchbasins, and location of fire
hydrants. Elevations shall be based upon the city datum or upon an
established elevation acceptable to the city engineer and the
benchmark used in determining the elevations shall be noted.
f. Location map drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals
1,000 feet, indicating boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or
subdivided land within an area bounded by nearest thoroughfares
or other natural boundaries, type of use and ownership of adjoining
land and alignments of existing streets.
g. Topographic data in accordance with subsection (1)c of this
section, including existing contours at vertical intervals of not more
than two feet, except in unusual topographical conditions such
vertical intervals may be required to be altered as determined by
the city engineer. Topographic data shall refer to the city datum or
upon an established elevation acceptable to the city engineer, and
the benchmark used in determining the elevations shall be noted.
Location of watercourses, marshes and other significant features
shall be shown. Soil boring data seepage tests may be required at
locations and depths as determined by the city engineer.
h. Locations of or reference to locations of existing monuments or
survey markers used in preparation of survey and grade elevation
of such monument and markers.
(3) Subdivision design features. The subdivision design features shall be
indicated as follows:
a. The design of the preliminary plat shall be in substantial accord
with the master plan.
b. Layout of streets showing street widths and names (not duplicating
the name of any street already used in the city or its environs,
unless the street is an extension of or in line with an already named
street, when that name shall be used). Proposed collector streets
shall be designated and through streets shall be extended to
boundaries of the subdivision.
Sec. 66-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-60
1:375
Sec. 66-61. Qualifications covering approval of preliminary plat.
[Code 1992, § 18.04(2)(e); Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 8-30-2007]
Sec. 66-62. Filing fee. [Code 1992, § 18.13]
A fee of $1 per lot, with a minimum fee of $25 and a maximum fee of
$100, shall be paid by the subdivider to the city at the time of filing the
preliminary plat with the city council at the office of the city clerk.
Sec. 66-63. through Sec. 66-75. (Reserved)
c. Location and width of alleys, pedestrian ways, utility easements
and no access strips.
d. Layout, numbers and typical dimensions of blocks and lots, scaled
to the nearest foot.
e. Minimum front and side street building setback lines, indicating
dimensions.
f. Areas (other than those listed in subsection (3)b, (3)c and (3)d of
this section), if any, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public
or semipublic uses, indicating in each the approximate acreage,
designated by letter or number.
g. Source of domestic water supply and types and directions of flow of
sanitary sewage and stormwater drainage systems.
(a) Changes or revisions in the subdivision design features of an approved
preliminary plat may be required by the plan commission when
necessary in the interest and needs of the community in keeping with
the provisions of this chapter and in consideration of conditions
unforeseen at the time of approval of the preliminary plat.
(b) No land will be approved for subdivision which is subject to periodic
flooding or which contains inadequate drainage facilities, unless the
resultant divisions become unified parts of contiguous lots or parcels.
However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in
the opinion of the city engineer, make such land completely safe for
improvement and occupancy and provide adequate drainage, the
preliminary plat for subdivision may be approved. Such approval will be
based upon scientific engineering data prepared by a registered
engineer and submitted by the subdivider.
(c) Subsequent to the approval of the preliminary plat and prior to filing an
application for final plat approval, the subdivider shall have the city
engineer review the plans and specifications for all sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, water main improvements and all other land
improvements. All plans and specifications are to be reviewed by the
city engineer and other public officials having jurisdiction over such
approvals.
Sec. 66-60 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-63
1:376
DIVISION 3
FINAL PLAT
Sec. 66-76. Official filing; copy recipients. [Code 1992,
§ 18.04(3)(a)]
Sec. 66-77. Official approval. [Code 1992, § 18.04(3)(b)]
(a) Within six months after approval of the preliminary plat by the plan
commission, the subdivider at his expense shall file with the city clerk
an application for approval of the final plat covering all or a part of the
approved preliminary plat. Such application shall include the original,
the required number of copies of the final plat as set forth in subsection
(c) of this section, copies of supporting documents and prints of plans
and specifications for land improvements required to be installed by the
subdivider. The final plat shall retain the design characteristics of the
approved preliminary plat, except the plan commission may require
such changes or revisions in the subdivision design features when
necessary in the interest and needs of the community in keeping with
the provisions of this chapter.
(b) Where less than the entire land area shown in the preliminary plat is
contained in the final plat to be filed for record, the recordations of such
final plat shall automatically extend the approval of the unrecorded
balance of the preliminary plat for successive six-month periods.
(c) Within two days of receipt of an application for final plat approval, the
clerk shall forward legible copies, together with a list of the authorities
to which the plat must be submitted for approval under W.S.A.,
§ 236.10, furnished by the subdivider at his expense, as follows:
(1) One copy to the official file.
(2) Two copies to the plan commission.
(3) Two copies to the city engineer.
(4) The original or two copies for each of the state agencies required to
review the plat to the department of development which shall
examine the plat for compliance with W.S.A., §§ 236.15, 236.16,
236.20 and 236.21(1) and (2).
(a) The plan commission shall make its report to the city council in writing
indicating approval or disapproval of the final plat within 90 days after
receipt of such plat from the city clerk and if its advice is negative, the
report shall set forth the basis of disapproval. However, if the plan
commission requires amendment of the final plat, the time for filing by
the plan commission on the amended final plat may be extended 90
days after receipt of such amended plat. The amended final plat shall be
refiled, in keeping with the provisions of this article, with the city clerk
for referral to the plan commission.
Sec. 66-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-77
1:377
Sec. 66-78. Contents. [Code 1992, § 18.04(3)(c)]
The final plat shall show the following:
(b) When the plan commission has approved the final plat, it shall be signed
by the chairman and attested by the recording secretary on the form
approved.
(c) After approval by the plan commission, two legible copies of the final
plat shall be forwarded to the council, together with a letter of
transmittal and report calling attention to variations (if any)
recommended by the plan commission and the reasons thereto, and
conveying to the council such other information as the plan commission
may deem necessary. The plan commission shall also submit to the city
council the supporting documents and plans and specifications for land
improvements accompanying the final plat.
(d) The city council shall approve or reject the final plat within 60 days of
its submission by the subdivider, unless the time is extended by
agreement with the subdivider and the time of such extension is
entered upon the minutes of the city council meeting. If the plat is
rejected, the reasons shall be stated in the minutes of the council
meeting and a copy of such reasons or a written statement of such
reasons shall be supplied the subdivider and his surveyor.
(e) The city clerk shall certify on the face of the original drawing that the
copies referred to in subsection (d) of this section were forwarded as
required and the date thereof, and that no objections to the plat have
been filed within a twenty-day limit set by W.S.A., § 236.12(4), or if filed,
have been met.
(f) Upon approval by the city council, the clerk shall secure from the
subdivider at his expense two copies of the final plat, three copies of all
supporting documents and three sets of prints of plans and
specifications for land improvements. The final plat in exact form as
approved by the city council shall be filed for record with the county
register of deeds by the city clerk. The city clerk shall also have the
recording data placed upon such prints. The subdivider shall pay the
recording fees.
(g) The city clerk shall retain one copy of the supporting documents, and
one set of prints of plans and specifications for land improvements for
the official file and deliver to the city engineer and plan commission
each a print of the final plat and one copy of the supporting documents,
and two sets of prints of the plans and specifications for land
improvements to the city engineer.
(1) Generally. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with
requirements of W.S.A., § 236.20, and shall show all information
contained on the preliminary plat in accordance with requirements of
section 66-60, except section 66-60(1) and section 66-60(2)b—(2)h
Sec. 66-77 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-78
1:378
inclusive, and section 66-60(3)(d) and section 66-60(3)(g) and all other
surveying and engineering data and information as required by W.S.A.,
§ 236.20.
(2) Certifications. The application for approval of the final plat shall not be
deemed completed until certificates required by W.S.A., ch. 236, other
than subsections (2)i, (2)j and (2)k of this section, have been duly
executed.
a. Owner's certificate of dedication:
As owner(s), I (we) hereby certify that I (we) caused the land
described on this plat to be surveyed, divided, mapped and
dedicated as requested on the plat. I (we) also certify that this plat
is required by W.S.A., § 236.10 or W.S.A., § 236.12 to be submitted
to the following for approval or objection: (list governing bodies
required to approve or who may object to the plat).
Witness the hand and seal of said owner(s) this _______ day of
____________, 19 _____.
In presence of:
(Seal)
owner's name
(Seal)
owner's name
State of Wisconsin)
) SS
__________ County)
Personally came before me this _____ day of _____, 19 _____, the
above named __________ to me known to be the person who
executed the foregoing instrument and acknowledged the same.
(Notary Seal)
Notary Public, , Wisconsin
My commission expires .
b. Corporate owner's certificate of dedication:
(corporate name)
a corporation duly organized and existing under and by virtue of
the laws of the State of Wisconsin, as owner, does hereby certify
that said corporation caused the land described on this plat to be
surveyed, divided, mapped and dedicated as represented on this
plat.
Sec. 66-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-78
1:379
(corporate name)
does further certify that this plat is required by W.S.A., § 236.10 or
W.S.A., § 236.12 to be submitted to the following for approval or
objection: (list governing bodies required to approve or who may
object to the plat).
In witness whereof, the said __________ (corporate name) has
caused these presents to be signed by __________, its president, and
countersigned by __________, its secretary (cashier), at __________,
Wisconsin, and its corporate seal to be hereunto affixed on this
_____ day of __________, 19 _____.
In the presence of:
Corporate Name
•
(Corporate Seal) President
Countersigned:
•
Secretary or Cashier
State of Wisconsin)
) SS
__________ County)
Personally came before me this _____ day of _____, 19 _____,
President, and __________, Secretary (cashier) of the above named
corporation, to me known to be the persons who executed the
foregoing instrument, and to me known to be such President and
Secretary (cashier) of said corporation, and acknowledged that
they executed the foregoing instrument as such officers as the
deed of said corporation, by its authority.
(Notary Seal)
Notary Public, __________,
Wisconsin
My commission expires
__________.
c. Consent of mortgagee:
Sec. 66-78 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-78
1:380
I, __________, mortgagee of the above-described land, do hereby
consent to the surveying, dividing, mapping and dedication of the
land described on this plat, and I do hereby consent to the above
certificate of __________, owner.
Witness the hand and seal of __________, mortgagee, this _____ day
of ________, 19 _____.
In the presence of:
(Seal)
Mortgagee
State of Wisconsin)
) SS
__________ County)
Personally came before me this _____ day of _____, 19 _____, the
above named __________, to me known to be the person who
executed the foregoing instrument and acknowledged the same.
(Notary Seal)
Notary Public, __________,
Wisconsin
My commission expires
__________.
d. Consent of corporate mortgagee:
__________ (corporate name), a corporation duly organized and
existing under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Wisconsin,
mortgagee of the above-described land, does hereby consent to
the surveying, dividing, mapping and dedication of the land
described on this plat and does hereby consent to the above
certificate of __________, owner.
In witness whereof, the said __________ (corporate name) has
caused these presents to be signed by __________, its President,
and countersigned by __________, its Secretary (cashier), at
__________, Wisconsin, and its corporate seal to be hereunto affixed
this _____ day of __________, 19 _____.
In the presence of:
Corporate Name
(Corporate Seal) President
Countersigned:
Sec. 66-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-78
1:381
Secretary or Cashier
State of Wisconsin)
) SS
________________County)
Personally came before me this _____ day of _____, 19 _____,
__________, president and __________, secretary (cashier) of the
above named corporation, and to me known to be such president
and secretary (cashier) of said corporation, and acknowledged
that they executed the foregoing instrument as such officers as the
deed of said corporation, by its authority.
(Notary Seal)
Notary Public, __________,
Wisconsin
My commission expires
__________.
e. City engineer's certificate:
State of Wisconsin)
) SS
Walworth County)
I, __________, city engineer of the City of Lake Geneva do hereby
certify that the land improvements described in this final plat and
plans and specifications therefor and street names shown in said
plat meet the requirements of the City of Lake Geneva and have
been approved by all public authorities having jurisdiction.
Dated at Lake Geneva, Walworth County, Wisconsin, this _____
day of _____, 19 _____.
City Engineer
f. Certificate of city clerk:
State of Wisconsin)
) SS
Walworth County)
I, __________, being the duly appointed, qualified and acting city
clerk of the City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, do hereby certify
that copies of this plat were forwarded to all public authorities
having jurisdiction as required by W.S.A., § 236.12(2) on the _____
day of __________, and that within the twenty-day limit set by
W.S.A., § 236.12(3) (no objections to the plat have been filed) (all
objections to the plat have been met).
Sec. 66-78 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-78
1:382
Sec. 66-79. Agreements. [Code 1992, § 18.05]
City Clerk
Date
g. Plan commission certificate:
State of Wisconsin)
) SS
Walworth County)
Approved this _____ day of _____, 19_____.
Lake Geneva Plan Commission
Chairman
h. City council resolution:
Resolved, that the plat of __________, in the City of Lake Geneva,
Wisconsin, owner(s) be and the same, is hereby approved by the
city council.
Signed
President of the City Council
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of a resolution
duly adopted by the city council of the City of Lake Geneva,
Wisconsin, on the _____ day of _____, 19 _____.
City Clerk
(a) Prior to recording final plat. Prior to recording the final plat in the office
of the register of deeds:
(1) Completion agreement. The subdivider shall file with the city clerk
an executed agreement that land improvements required by this
chapter to be installed by the subdivider in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the city engineer shall be completed
within two years following approval of the final plat by the city
council, and that the subdivider shall comply with other applicable
ordinances of the city relative to payment for installation of
required land improvements to be completed by the city.
(2) Completion bond, deposit or other security. The subdivider shall
post with the city clerk a completion bond for a penal sum sufficient
to cover the cost of the land improvements to be installed by the
subdivider as required by this chapter or, in lieu of a bond, a
deposit of cash or other security or undertaking acceptable to the
Sec. 66-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-79
1:383
city council. If a completion bond or other guarantee is posted,
there shall be good and sufficient surety thereon, approved as to
form by the city attorney and conditioned upon the installation
of such improvements within two years following the approval
of the final plat. If cash or other security is deposited, it is to
be used insofar as it is sufficient to defray the cost of making
such improvements. Any unused balance will be returned to the
depositor. There shall be no reduction of that portion of the bond or
other guarantee or deposit applying to a particular improvement,
unless and until that improvement is complete and accepted or
approved by the city council. The cost of land improvements to be
covered by the completion bond, cash deposit, other security or
undertaking shall be in accordance with cost estimates for such
improvements prepared by the city engineer and approved by the
city council.
(3) Construction of curb and gutter or street project. If the developer
elects to proceed with the construction of the curb and gutter or
street project, he shall deposit with the city a total of 120% of the
construction bid. This may be made in the form of cash deposit or
an irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the city attorney at the
city council's option.
(b) Acknowledgment of bond; form. The completion bond shall be
acknowledged before a notary public by the principal and surety and
shall be in substantially the following form:
Know all men by these presents, that: we, _____ as principal and as
surety, are firmly bound to the City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, in the
penal sum of $_____, lawful money of the United States of America, for
the payment of such sum, well and truly to be made, we bind ourselves,
our heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, jointly and severally,
by these presents.
The condition of the above obligation is such that:
Whereas, __________ has obtained, according to law and ordinances of
the City of Lake Geneva, approval of the (Plat of __________), being a
Subdivision of __________ in Walworth County, Wisconsin, conditioned
upon: (a) that by _____ date the making of certain land improvements
to wit: __________ _____ as more fully described in plans dated _______
and prepared by __________; (b) the execution and delivery of this bond.
Now, if the said __________ shall well and faithfully and in a good
and workman-like manner of good materials according to law and
ordinances of the City of Lake Geneva, and in conformity with said
plans dated __________ construct said improvements.
Then this obligation shall be null and void; otherwise, the same shall
remain in full force and effect.
In witness whereof, we have hereunto set our hands and seals this
_____ day of __________, 19 _____.
Sec. 66-79 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-79
1:384
Sec. 66-80. through Sec. 66-95. (Reserved)
Principal
Surety
NOTARY CERTIFICATE
State of Wisconsin)
) SS
County of Walworth)
I, __________, a Notary Public in and for said County, in the state
aforesaid, do hereby certify that __________ personally known to me
to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing
instrument, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged
that they signed the above instrument as their own free and voluntary
act for the uses therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notorial Seal this _____ day of __________, 19
_____.
Notary Public
(c) Certification of city council approval. The city clerk shall not certify the
approval of the city council on the final plat until the required bond,
cash deposit, or any other security or undertaking has been filed by the
subdivider as required by this article and other applicable ordinances of
the city.
Sec. 66-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-80
1:385

ARTICLE III
DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 66-96. Subdivision design standards. [Code 1992, § 18.06]
Design standards for subdivisions shall be as follows:
(1) Street plan. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and
location of all streets shall conform to the master plan, and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets; to
reasonable circulation of traffic within the subdivision and adjoining
lands; to topographical conditions; to runoff of stormwater; to public
convenience and safety; and in their appropriate relations to the
proposed uses of the area to be served.
(2) Streets. Design standards for streets shall be as follows:
a. Right-of-way widths; minimum dimensions. All right-of-way widths
shall conform to the following minimum dimensions:
Type Streets
Residential
Subdivision
Manufacturing or
Business Subdivision
Collector 60 feet 80 feet
Minor streets 60 feet 70 feet
Half streets One-half total rightof-
way of proposed
street or as
required by the plan
commission
Not permitted
Cul-de-sac 50 feet 70 feet
Frontage 40 feet 50 feet
b. Standards for thoroughfares. Right-of-way widths and other design
standards of thoroughfares, including freeways, expressways,
parkways, major and secondary thoroughfares, shall be in
accordance with those designated on the master plan or by federal,
state or county authorities having jurisdiction, whichever has the
greater width and design standard requirements.
c. Deflections in horizontal centerlines of blocks. Where there is a
deflection in horizontal centerlines within a given block at any
given point in excess of 10°, a curve shall be inserted with a radius
of not less than:
Collector
streets
300 feet
Minor streets 100 feet
Sec. 66-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-96
1:387
d. Connection of street gradients. Different connecting street
gradients shall be connected with vertical curves. Minimum length
in feet of these curves shall provide a sight distance of not less than
300 feet, measured from an eye level four feet high, with a clear
view of an obstacle not over two feet high.
e. Minor street alignment. Minor streets shall be so aligned that their
use by through traffic will be discouraged.
f. Street jogs; centerline offsets. Street jogs with centerline offsets of
less than 125 feet should be avoided.
g. Intersections. It must be evidenced that all street intersections and
confluences encourage safe and efficient traffic flow and, in
general, be at or near right angles avoiding acute angles. An
intersection of more than two streets shall be avoided unless
specific conditions of design indicate otherwise.
h. Alleys. Alleys are not permitted in residential areas unless deemed
necessary by the plan commission.
i. Culs-de-sac. Cul-de-sac streets in residential subdivisions shall be
not more than 500 feet in length, measured along their centerlines
from the streets of origin to the ends of their rights-of-way, or may
be longer than 500 lineal feet, provided not more than 15 lots abut
upon their rights- of-way lines, except such streets shall not exceed
400 feet in length in subdivisions for multiple-family dwellings.
Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of such proportions that a
circle having a diameter of 100 feet might be inscribed therein. The
terminus shall be connected with the approach street lines by
reverse curvatures having radii of not less than 30 feet each.
j. Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity
with the other requirements of this chapter, and where the city
council finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the
other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever an
existing or dedicated half street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such
tract. A half street, where included, shall be graded at one level,
and the regrading or new construction of any half street shall
conform to the grade and pavement of the adjacent half street.
k. Vehicular and pedestrian access. Provisions shall be made for
vehicular and pedestrian access to residential property abutting a
thoroughfare either by frontage roads or double frontage lots
backing to the thoroughfare. Where the double frontage backup
treatment is used, a no access strip shall be provided. These
standards are established for the purpose of providing protection
to residential properties and to separate through and local traffic.
Sec. 66-96 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-96
1:388
l. Street gradients. Gradients of streets shall be at least 0.4% and not
exceed on:
Collector streets 7%
Minor streets 10%
(3) Alleys and pedestrian ways. Design standards for alleys and pedestrian
ways are as follows:
a. Alleys, when permitted in residential subdivisions, shall be at least
20 feet wide. Alleys in business and manufacturing subdivisions
shall be at least 22 feet wide.
b. Pedestrian ways where required by the plan commission and city
council shall be at least 12 feet wide.
(4) Easements. Easements shall be provided for any overhead or
underground utility service, including sanitary sewers and stormwater
drainage, where deemed necessary by the city engineer. They shall be
7 1/2 feet wide and be established at the rear of each lot and along such
other lot lines as to provide continuity of alignment from block to block.
At deflection points in these easements, if overhead utility lines are
contemplated, additional easements shall be established for pole line
anchors. Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage
easement conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse.
It shall include an additional area adjoining both edges of the
established watercourse to cover the area that has been affected by
damaging floodwaters, as certified by the subdivider's surveyor.
(5) Block standards. Block standards shall be as follows:
a. In residential subdivisions, the maximum lengths of blocks
containing lots less than 150 feet in width shall be 1,800 lineal feet,
and the maximum length of blocks containing lots 150 feet and over
in width shall be 2,640 lineal feet. No blocks shall be less than 900
lineal feet in length unless approved by the plan commission.
Pedestrian ways leading to schools, parks or other common
destinations may be required by the plan commission.
b. In blocks designated for manufacturing, business or institutional
development, maximum lengths of blocks shall be as approved by
the plan commission. Blocks intended for commercial, industrial
and institutional use must be designated as such, and the plan must
show adequate off-street street areas to provide for off-street
parking, loading docks and such other facilities as may be required
to accommodate motor vehicles.
c. The shape of blocks shall be dictated by topographical features, the
basic street system and traffic pattern, lot depths and areas
designated for public and other nonresidential land uses.
Sec. 66-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-96
1:389
d. Where a subdivision borders upon or is traversed by a railroad
right-of-way or arterial street, the plan commission may require a
street (on one or both sides of such right-of-way or street)
approximately parallel to and at a distance removed suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land, i.e. park purposes, deep
residential lots fronting on it with a visual barrier established in a
no access reservation strip along the rear property lines and offstreet
parking, business or other uses as permitted by zoning
district regulations.
(6) Lot standards. Lot standards shall be as follows:
a. In general, lots should be as nearly rectangular in shape as
practicable.
b. Width and area of lots lying within the city shall conform with lot
width and area requirements set forth in the city zoning ordinance.
The width and area of lots located entirely outside of the city and
within the city's extraterritorial plat jurisdiction area shall conform
with lot width and area requirements of the county zoning
ordinance and with the requirements of the state department of
health and social services. Where the typical width of interior lots is
75 feet or less, corner lots shall be increased in width by 20% over
the width of typical interior lots. Where the typical width of interior
lots is greater than 75 feet the width of corner lots shall be
increased in width by 15 feet over the typical width of interior lots.
All lots created as a result of a land division shall conform to the
standards outlined in this subsection. However, so as to utilize or
develop substandard, irregular or unusual parcels, in keeping with
the existing character of a neighborhood, divisions other than
subdivisions may be approved which do not meet these standards,
when approved by two-thirds majority vote of the entire city council
after review and recommendation by the city plan commission.
c. Lots shall not have less than 115 feet of average depth for interior
lots and not less than 100 feet of depth for corner lots.
d. Width, area and depth of lots designated for manufacturing,
business or institutional development shall be as approved by the
plan commission.
e. All lots shall abut upon a street.
f. Side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street line
or substantially so.
g. Double-frontage lots are not permitted, except where lots back
upon a thoroughfare, in which case a no access strip shall be
shown, or as specifically approved by the plan commission in order
to provide acceptable building sites.
Sec. 66-96 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-96
1:390
Sec. 66-97. Parks, playgrounds, and other public areas. [Code 1992,
§ 18.07]
h. Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream
shall have an additional depth or width as required by the plan
commission in order to provide acceptable building sites.
i. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all
natural features such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots
or similar conditions.
j. All subdivisions that include lots contiguous to Geneva Lake shall
have:
1. A minimum width of 100 feet and a minimum depth of 175 feet;
in addition the building located thereon shall be at least 100
feet from the shore of Geneva Lake, except that if an
established sewer line transverses such lots, the building line
shall be an additional 10 feet from such sewer line.
2. A lot width of at least 100 feet and a lot depth of at least 125
feet for other lots in such subdivision.
(7) Lake and stream short plats. All subdivisions abutting a lake or stream
shall provide public access at least 60 feet wide providing access to the
low water mark so that there will be public access at not more than 1/2
mile intervals, as measured along the lake or stream shore unless
topography and ground conditions do not permit.
(a) The subdivider shall, at the city's option, after considering the
recommendations of the park board and city plan commission,
contribute to the city one of the following:
(1) Lands dedicated for public parks, playgrounds and recreation. The
area of land to be so dedicated shall be equal to 5% of the gross
land area contained within the subdivision. The land shall be
conveyed to the city in fee simple unless the city council directs
otherwise.
(2) A sum to be calculated as follows:
a. Four hundred dollars per single-family residential lot.
b. Two hundred dollars per multifamily residential unit.
c. Two hundred dollars per net developable acre not used for
residential purposes.
(b) Funds paid under this section shall be paid in full to the city prior to
final approval of the subdivision plot. Such funds will be deposited into
the park fund as enumerated by city ordinance. Disbursements from the
park fund shall also be in accordance with city ordinance.
Sec. 66-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-97
1:391
Sec. 66-98. Dedications. [Code 1992, § 18.08]
Sec. 66-99. Acceptance of streets. [Code 1992, § 18.09]
If any plat of subdivision contains public or private streets or public
thoroughfares which are dedicated in this section as such, whether located
within the corporate limits of the city or in part outside of the city, or
contains proposed or existing streets located outside of the corporate limits,
the approval of the plat by the city council or the subsequent annexation of
the property to the city shall not constitute an acceptance by the city of such
streets or thoroughfares, nor of the improvements constructed or installed
thereon or therein, irrespective of any acts by an officer, agent or employee
of the city with respect to such streets or improvements. The acceptance
of such streets or thoroughfares shall be made only by the adoption of a
resolution by the city council, after there has been filed with the city clerk
a certificate by the city engineer certifying that all improvements required
to be constructed or installed in or upon such streets or thoroughfares, in
connection with the approval of the plat of subdivision by the city council,
have been fully completed and the construction or installation thereof has
been approved by him.
(c) All lands dedicated for public parks, playgrounds and recreation shall
be for the use of the general public and not be restricted by intent or
design to serve only a limited public.
(d) This section for parks, playgrounds and other public areas applies to all
subdivisions and planned unit developments regardless of how the land
is held in title.
(a) Effect of recording on dedications. When any plat is certified, signed,
acknowledged and recorded as prescribed by W.S.A., ch. 236, every
donation or grant to the public or any person, society or corporation
marked or noted as such on such plat shall be deemed a sufficient
conveyance to vest the fee simple of all parcels of land, so marked or
noted, and shall be considered a general warranty against such donors,
their heirs and assigns to the donees for their use for the purposes
therein expressed and no other, and the land intended for the streets,
alleys, ways, commons or other public uses as designated on the plat
shall be held by the city or other authority having jurisdiction outside
the corporate limits in which the plat is situated, in trust to and for such
uses and purposes.
(b) Dedications to public accepted by approval. When a final plat of a
subdivision has been approved by the city and all other required
approvals are obtained and the plat is recorded, such approval shall
constitute an acceptance for the purpose designed on the plat of the
uses of all lands shown thereon, as dedicated to the public, except
acceptance of streets. See section 66-99.
Sec. 66-97 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-100
1:392
Sec. 66-100. Required land improvements. [Code 1992, § 18.10;
Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 8-30-2007]
Before a final plat of a subdivision may be approved by the city council, the
subdivider shall have the city engineer review and approve final plans and
specifications for the sanitary sewer, water main, storm sewer installations
and any other final plans and specifications, prepared by a registered
engineer, for the construction of the other land improvements. The
subdivider shall submit an agreement along with a guarantee, as required
by the city council, that the subdivider shall comply with other applicable
ordinances of the city relative to land improvements to be installed by
the city. The city engineer shall certify in writing to the plan commission
and city council that such plans and specifications meet the minimum
requirements of the city, county, state and other authorities having
jurisdiction. The following land improvements, installed in accordance with
regulations of this chapter, shall be required for all subdivisions recorded
after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived:
(1) Sanitary sewers and stormwater systems. Sanitary sewers and
stormwater systems shall be as follows:
a. Public sanitary sewer systems shall serve each lot in the
subdivision. The subdivider shall install in accordance with city
standards or make arrangements for such installation by the city at
his expense, a sanitary sewer system serving all lots in the
subdivision and connection of such system with the city sewer
system including sewer stub terminals, located inside the street
curb or pavement edge, in front of each lot in the subdivision.
b. In subdivisions located within the city or in the unincorporated area
covered by extraterritorial jurisdiction of this chapter, where
connection with a public sanitary sewer system is considered not
economically feasible by the city council, each lot shall be served by
an individual sewage disposal system or by a community sewer
system, provided that in either case installation and operations
conform with applicable statutes, ordinances and codes of the
state, county and city.
c. A stormwater drainage system designed to serve the entire
subdivision and the connection of such system with an adequate
out-fall, shall be installed by the subdivider or arrangements made
for installation by the city in accordance with other applicable
ordinances of the city. If the subdivider makes arrangements with
the city for such installation to be completed within five years after
approval of the final plat by the city council, the subdivider shall
install and maintain during the period of time prior to completion of
such installation by the city, a temporary stormwater drainage
system which is adequate to carry off stormwater from all lots and
streets and be connected with an approved open ditch or
underground the out-fall.
Sec. 66-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-100
1:393
d. Where sewer lines of larger capacity than necessary are installed to
serve only the subdivision, as delineated in the preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall be required to pay for that part of the total cost of
such installation as determined by the city council on the basis of
the proportionate benefit of such installation to the subdivision.
(2) Water supply. The water supply shall be as follows:
a. A water distribution system, connected to the city water supply and
with water stub terminals located at the outside of street curb or
pavement in front of each lot shall be installed by the subdivider in
accordance with city standards, to serve each lot in the subdivision
or arrangements made by the subdivider for such installation to be
completed at his expense by the city. In subdivisions located in the
unincorporated areas covered by the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
this chapter, water supply may be from individual wells or a
community water supply and distribution system, provided that in
either case installation and operations conform with applicable
statutes, ordinances and codes of the state, county and city.
b. Where water mains of larger capacity than necessary are installed
to serve only the subdivision, as delineated in the preliminary plat,
the subdivider shall be required to pay for that part of the total cost
of such installation as determined by the city council, on the basis
of the proportionate benefit of such installation to the subdivision.
(3) Street grading. The subdivider shall grade the full width of street
rights-of-way in accordance with grade elevations approved by the city
engineer and remove all stumps, trees that cannot be saved, boulders
and similar obstructions within the rights-of-way.
(4) Street improvements. Street improvements shall be as follows:
a. Pavement base and wearing surface. The subdivider shall install in
accordance with city standards pavement base and wearing
surface for all streets and alleys, if any, in the subdivision, or make
arrangements for completion of such improvements by the city in
accordance with other applicable ordinances of the city.
b. Street pavement widths; minimum dimensions. Street pavements
shall have an overall width in accordance with the following
minimum dimensions:
Sec. 66-100 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-100
1:394
Street Pavement Widths
(between face of curbs or outer edges of roadway
pavement)
Type of Street
Residential
Subdivision
Manufacturing or
Business
Subdivisions
Collector 36 feet 56 feet
Minor 27 feet 40 feet
Cul-de-sac 27 feet 40 feet
Half street One-half width of
proposed street, but
not less than 18 feet
Not permitted
Frontage road 27 feet 40 feet (or as
required by
applicable
governmental
highway authorities.)
Thoroughfares In accordance with federal, state, county or
local requirements
c. Cul-de-sac turnarounds. Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a
minimum diameter, measured from faces of the outside curb or
outside edges of roadway pavement of 80 feet for residential
subdivisions and 100 feet for manufacturing and business
subdivisions.
d. Pavements in alleys. Pavements in alleys shall be not less than 20
feet wide, when required, in residential subdivisions and not less
than 22 feet wide in business or manufacturing subdivisions.
e. Curbs; curbs and gutters. Curbs or curbs and gutters shall be
installed by the subdivider in accordance with city standards or
arrangements made by the subdivider for completion of such
improvements by the city in accordance with other applicable
ordinances of the city. Curbs or curbs and gutters need not be
installed in residential subdivisions containing no lots less than 100
feet in width, except when recommended by the city engineer and
required by the city council.
f. Pavement edges or curbs at corners. Curbs or pavement edges at
corners shall have a radius of not less than 25 feet.
g. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed by the subdivider in
accordance with city standards in business or manufacturing
subdivisions and when required by the city council, in residential
subdivisions or arrangements made by the subdivider for
completion of such improvement in accordance with other
Sec. 66-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-100
1:395
Sec. 66-101. Exceptions for countryside subdivisions. [Code 1992,
§ 18.11]
In a countryside subdivision where the street system within the subdivision
is designed to serve almost exclusively for access to and from the dwellings
therein as contrasted to an interior street system containing streets which
applicable ordinances of the city. When sidewalks are required in
residential subdivisions they shall be not less than four feet wide in
minor or cul-de-sac streets and not less than five feet in collector
streets or thoroughfares.
h. Street lighting system. A street lighting system may be installed by
the subdivider in accordance with city standards or arrangements
made for completion of such improvement at a later date by the
city. However, the subdivider shall install and pay for a street
lighting system containing approved ornamental light standards or
other types and quantity of fixtures in excess of the minimum city
standards.
i. Terraces within street rights-of-way; grading and planting of grass
seed. The subdivider shall grade and plant grass seed in all
terraces within street rights-of-way in accordance with standards
and specifications approved by the city.
(5) Public utilities. Public utilities shall be as follows:
a. Above-the-ground electric and telephone distribution and
transmission lines and structures serving only the lots in the
subdivision shall be located in easements along rear lot lines and
side lot lines at locations of extensions from block to block, and,
when recommended by the plan commission and authorized by the
city council, such lines may be located in street rights-of-way when
deemed necessary by engineering data submitted by the utility
company.
b. Where telephone, electric and gas service lines are placed
underground in a subdivision, conduits or cables shall be placed
within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will
not conflict with other underground services. Further, all
transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or
hazardous to the public.
c. All drainage and underground utility installations which traverse
privately owned property shall be protected by easements.
(6) Required land improvements in undeveloped subdivisions. The
requirements of this section shall also apply to all subdivisions that
were final platted, but undeveloped prior to the effective date of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived. The definition of
undeveloped subdivisions will include all platted subdivisions where no
roadway or sewer and water improvements have been installed.
Sec. 66-100 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-101
1:396
primarily accommodate traffic having origin or destination in areas beyond
the subdivision, there shall be allowed exceptions in the regulations
contained in this chapter as follows: In article II of this chapter, all of section
66-57 and section 66-37, and in section 66-100(4)(b) except thoroughfares.
Such exceptions shall be allowed only when, in the opinion of the plan
commission, such exceptions do not affect the master plan or the intent of
this chapter.
Sec. 66-102. City engineer services. [Code 1992, § 18.12; Ord. No.
07-07, §§ 1, 2, 8-30-2007]
(a) The subdivider shall have the city engineer review and approve the final
plans and specifications for the sanitary sewer, water main, storm
sewer installation and any other required improvements.
(b) All required land improvements that remain public shall be bid through
the city engineer's office and shall be inspected by the city engineer
during the course of construction.
(c) All fees associated with subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be
the responsibility of the subdivider.
(d) The city engineer shall keep the records required by state statute.
Sec. 66-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 66-102
1:397
Chapter 70
TAXATION
Sec. 66-102 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 66-102
1:398
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 70-1. through Sec. 70-30. (Reserved)
Sec. 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 70-1
1:399

ARTICLE II
PROPERTY TAXES
Sec. 70-31. Preparation of tax roll and tax receipts. [Code 1992,
§ 3.01]
Sec. 70-32. Tax payments. [Code 1992, § 3.11; amended 6-13-2011
by Ord. No. 11-17; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-08]
The real estate and personal property taxes assessed in the City shall be
paid to the Treasurer as follows:
(a) Aggregate tax stated on roll. Pursuant to W.S.A., § 70.65(2), the Clerk
shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate amount of
state, county, local, school and other general property taxes minus
credits applied under W.S.A., § 79.10(9), except credits determined
under W.S.A., § 79.10(7m), in a single column in the roll opposite the
parcel or tract of land against which the tax is levied, or, in the case of
personal property, in a single column opposite the name of the person
against whom the tax is levied. Each tax bill or receipt shall show the
purpose for which the taxes are to be used giving the breakdown for
state, county, local, school and other general property taxes. The tax
roll shall indicate all corrections made under W.S.A., §§ 70.43 and
70.44.
(b) Tax receipts. Pursuant to W.S.A., § 74.19, the Treasurer shall enter in
each tax receipt given by the County Clerk for the payment of taxes the
name of the person paying the taxes, if that person is not the owner of
the property taxed, the date of payment and the aggregate amount of
taxes paid. Tax receipts shall be signed and a duplicate kept by the
Treasurer after noting the payment of taxes upon the tax roll. The
Treasurer shall then deliver the receipt to the appropriate person.
[Amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No.
14-08]
(1) The first installment of real estate taxes which shall be not less than
50% of the total real estate taxes (including special assessments) shall
become due and payable on January 1 each year and may be paid
without interest thereon through January 31. Any such real estate tax,
no portion of which has been paid on or prior to January 31, shall
thereafter bear interest at the rate of 1 1/2% per month, or a fraction
thereof, from January 1 preceding. The Treasurer shall report the
unpaid balance of such real estate taxes to the County Treasurer at the
time of settlement. The second and final installment is due and payable
July 31.
(2) Personal property taxes shall become due and payable in their entirety
on January 1 of each year and may be paid to and including January 31
without interest. Thereafter, all unpaid personal property taxes shall
Sec. 70-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 70-32
1:401
Sec. 70-33. through Sec. 70-54. (Reserved)
bear interest at the rate of 1 1/2% per month, or a fraction thereof, from
February 1 preceding.
(3) All real estate taxes, including special assessments, remaining unpaid
at the time settlement is made with the County Treasurer, shall be paid
thereafter at the office of the County Treasurer in Elkhorn, Wisconsin.
Sec. 70-32 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 70-33
1:402
ARTICLE III
ROOM TAX
Sec. 70-55. Tourism commission. [Added 3-27-2017 by Ord. No.
17-03]
(a) Members. The Tourism Commission shall consist of six members: two of
the members shall be Aldermen of the City of Lake Geneva; one
member shall be a citizen of the City of Lake Geneva; the remaining
three members shall be from the business community wherein one of
the members must represent the Wisconsin hotel and motel industry; at
least one member must be a member of the Lake Geneva Downtown
Business Improvement District (BID), and at least one member must be
a business owner within the City of Lake Geneva. Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be confirmed by
the City Council. Commissioners shall serve for a one-year term, at the
pleasure of the appointing official, and may be reappointed.
(b) Ex-Officio members. The Mayor, the City Comptroller, and the Executive
Director of the organization with whom the Tourism Commission
contracts to perform tourism promotion functions shall be ex-officio,
non-voting members of the Commission. The Lake Geneva City
Administrator or her/his designee shall serve as the staff liaison to the
Commission.
(c) Officers. The Commission shall elect, from among its members a
chairperson, a vice chairperson and a secretary.
(d) Meetings. The Commission shall hold meetings not less than quarterly.
(e) Procedure. Four members shall constitute a quorum. Action shall be by
majority of those present and voting. The Commission shall adopt rules
of procedure for governing the conduct of its meetings.
(f) Powers and duties. The Commission shall be responsible for the
coordination of tourism promotion and tourism development within the
City and for ensuring that all room tax dollars it receives from the City,
per state statutes, is spent on tourism promotion and development. The
Commission shall contract with tourism entities as defined in § 66.0615,
Wis. Stats., for tourism promotion services. "Tourism promotion and
tourism development" means any of the following that are significantly
used by transient tourists and reasonably likely to generate paid
overnight stays at more than one establishment on which a room tax
may be imposed, that are owned by different persons and located within
the City of Lake Geneva in which a tax under this section is in effect; or,
if at any time the City of Lake Geneva has only one such establishment,
reasonably likely to generate paid overnight stays in that
establishment:
(1) Marketing projects, including advertising media buys, creation and
distribution of printed or electronic promotional tourist materials,
Sec. 70-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 70-55
1:403
Sec. 70-56. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 3.12]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
GROSS RECEIPTS — As defined in W.S.A., § 77.51(4)(a), (b), (c) and (cm),
insofar as applicable.[Amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-16]
HOTEL or MOTEL — As defined in W.S.A., § 77.52.
TRANSIENT — As defined in W.S.A., § 77.52(2)(a)1.
Sec. 70-57. Levied; rate. [Code 1992, § 3.12(2); amended 7-13-2009
by Ord. No. 09-16]
Pursuant to W.S.A., § 66.0615, a tax is imposed on the privilege and service
of furnishing at retail rooms or lodging to transients by hotel keepers, motel
operators and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available
to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for the use
of the accommodations. Such tax shall be at the rate of 5% of the gross
receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging. Such tax shall not
be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by W.S.A., § 77.52(2)(a)1. The
proceeds of such tax collected shall be apportioned 2% to the hotel, motel
or other person filing the return and 98% to the city.
or efforts to recruit conventions, sporting events, or motorcoach
groups.
(2) Transient tourist informational services.
(3) Tangible municipal development, including a convention center.
(g) Record. The Commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings
to include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
(h) Reports. The Commission shall prepare and timely file all reports as
required under the statute and/or by the City.
(i) Compensation. The Commission members shall serve without
compensation.
(j) Confidentiality of Information Provided by Lodging Facilities. Pursuant
to § 66.0615(3), Wis. Stats., any information provided by the City of
Lake Geneva regarding room tax payment shall be confidential except
for persons using the information in the discharge of their duties
imposed by law or of the duties of their office or by order of a court.
Sec. 70-55 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 70-58
1:404
Sec. 70-58. Monthly returns. [Code 1992, § 3.12(3); Ord. No. 08-06,
§ 1, 6-23-2008; amended 1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 10-16; 2-28-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-07; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-08]
This article shall be administered by the Treasurer. The tax imposed is due
and payable by the last day of the month following the end of the reporting
month, which shall be each calendar month. A monthly and annual return
shall be filed with the Treasurer by those furnishing at retail such rooms and
lodging within the City on or before the same date on which such tax is due
and payable upon a form approved by the City. Attached to the return shall
be copies of sales tax forms filed with the State of Wisconsin Department of
Revenue for the corresponding month of the monthly return and room tax
forms filed with the Treasurer.
Sec. 70-59. Annual return. [Code 1992, § 3.12(4); amended
1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 10-16; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08;
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
Every person required to file monthly returns shall file an annual calendar
year return. Such annual return shall be filed within 30 days of the close of
each calendar year. The annual return shall summarize the monthly returns,
reconcile and adjust for errors in the monthly returns, and shall contain
certain additional information as the Treasurer requires.
Sec. 70-60. Permit. [Code 1992, § 3.12(5); amended 7-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-16; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-08]
Sec. 70-61. Revocation and suspension procedure. [Code 1992,
§ 3.12(6); amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-08]
(a) Application; fee. Every person furnishing rooms or lodging under
Section 70-57, shall annually file with the Treasurer an application for a
permit for each place of business. Every application for a permit shall
be made upon a form prescribed by the Treasurer. At the time of making
an application, the applicant shall pay the Treasurer a fee set from time
to time by the Council for each permit.
(b) Issuance; transferral; display. After compliance with Subsection (a) of
this section, and Section 70-59 by the applicant, the Treasurer shall
grant and issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of
business within the City. Such permit is not assignable and valid only
for the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of
business at the place designated therein. It shall at all times be
conspicuously displayed at the place for which issued.
(a) Failure to comply with article; notice. When any person fails to comply
with this article, the Treasurer may, upon 10 days' written notification
and after affording such person the opportunity to show cause why his
Sec. 70-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 70-61
1:405
Sec. 70-62. Unpaid taxes. [Code 1992, § 3.12(7); amended
7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-16; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08;
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
If any person liable for any amount of tax under this article sells his business
or stock of goods or quits his business, his successors or assigns shall
withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount
until the former owner produces a receipt from the Treasurer that it has
been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person subject
to the tax imposed by this section fails to withhold such amount of tax
from the purchase price as required, he shall become personally liable for
payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the
price of the accommodations valued in money.
Sec. 70-63. Treasurer to determine tax and refunds. [Code 1992,
§ 3.12(8); amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-16; 5-29-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
permit should not be revoked, revoke or suspend any or all of the
permits held by such person under this article.
(b) Renewal of suspended or revoked permits. The Treasurer shall give to
such person written notice of the suspension or revocation of any of his
permits. The Treasurer shall not issue a new permit after the revocation
of a permit until such person complies with the provisions of this
article. A fee as set by the Council from time to time shall be imposed
for the renewal or issuance of a permit which has been previously
suspended or revoked.
(a) The Treasurer may, by office audit, determine the tax required to be
paid to the City or the refund due to any person under this article. This
determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the
return being audited or on the basis of any of their information within
the Treasurer's possession. One or more such office audit
determinations may be made of the amount due for any one or for more
than one period.
(b) The Treasurer may, by field audit, determine the tax required to be paid
to the City or the refund due to any person under this article. The
determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the
return being audited or upon any other information within the
Treasurer's possession. Whenever the Treasurer has probable cause to
believe that the correct amount of room tax has not been assessed or
that the tax return is not correct, the Treasurer is authorized to
examine and inspect the financial records pertaining to the furnishing
of accommodations at the establishment in question in order to verify
the tax liability of that person or of another person.
Sec. 70-61 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 70-64
1:406
Sec. 70-64. Forfeiture for failure to comply with Treasurer’s request
to inspect. [Added 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-16;8 amended
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
Any person who fails or refuses to permit the inspection of his records
by the Treasurer after such inspection has been duly requested by the
Treasurer shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $250. Each day, or a
portion thereof, that such violation continues is hereby deemed to constitute
a separate offense. The total forfeiture imposed shall not exceed 5% of the
tax imposed by this article.
Sec. 70-65. Estimated tax. [Code 1992, § 3.12(9); amended
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08]
If any person fails to file a return as required by this article, the Treasurer
shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts under Section
70-57. Such estimate shall be made for the period for which such person
failed to make a return and shall be based upon the state sales tax records
and memoranda as stated in Section 70-63. On the basis of this estimate,
the Treasurer shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid
to the City adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to 10% of such
sum.
Sec. 70-66. Interest on unpaid taxes. [Code 1992, § 3.12(10)];
amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-16
All unpaid taxes under this article shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per
annum from the due date of the return until paid.
Sec. 70-67. Delinquent taxes. [Code 1992, § 3.12(11); amended
7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-16]
A forfeiture of 25% of the room tax due for the previous year or $5,000,
whichever is less, of the tax imposed, is hereby established and due and
owing in the event that the room tax is not paid within 30 days after the due
date of the return.
Sec. 70-68. Recordkeeping. [Code 1992, § 3.12(12); amended
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
Every person liable for the tax imposed by this article shall keep or cause to
be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such
form as the Treasurer requires.
Sec. 70-69. Confidentiality. [Code 1992, § 3.12(13)]
(a) All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to
such returns on file with the Treasurer are deemed to be confidential,
8. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Secs. 70-64
through 70-69 as Secs. 70-65 through 70-70, respectively.
Sec. 70-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 70-69
1:407
Sec. 70-70. Forfeiture for failure to obtain a permit. [Code 1992,
§ 3.12(14); amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-16]
Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this article who fails to
obtain a permit as required in Section 70-60 shall be subject to a forfeiture
not to exceed $200. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
except the Treasurer may divulge their contents to the following and
no others: [Amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-08]
(1) The person who filed the return; and
(2) Officers or agents of the City as may be necessary to enforce
collection.
(b) No person having an administrative duty under this article shall make
known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information
obtained by an investigation of records or any person on whom a tax is
imposed by this article, or the amount or source of income, profits,
losses, expenditures, or any particulars thereof, set forth or disclosed in
any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or
examined by any person, except as otherwise provided by this article.
[Added 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-16]
Sec. 70-69 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 70-70
1:408
ARTICLE IV
DELINQUENT TAXES, ASSESSMENTS AND CLAIMS
[Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
Sec. 70-71. Effect on licenses, certificates and claims.
No license, certificate, or permit shall be granted for any premises for which
taxes, assessments or other claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid
or to any person delinquent in payment of such claims to the City. In the
event a premises or person is delinquent in payment of such claims to the
City, at times other than initial granting or renewal of a license, the Council
may, in its discretion, suspend or revoke said license(s). “Delinquent” for
the purposes of this section shall mean the claim remains unpaid for 30
days after it became due. Being delinquent hereunder shall be grounds for
suspension or revocation of the license, permit, or certificate applicable
hereunder.
Sec. 70-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 70-71
1:409
Chapter 74
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets, sidewalks and other public places —
See Ch. 62.
Vehicles for hire — See Ch. 86.
Sec. 70-71 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 70-71
1:410
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 74-1. Provisions of state law adopted by reference. [Code 1992,
§ 7.01]
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all provisions of
W.S.A., chs. 340 to 348 and § 941.01(1), including any future revisions or
amendments thereto, describing and defining regulations with respect to
vehicles and traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only; Chapter MVD
5, Wis. Adm. Code, describing and defining standards for motor vehicle
equipment; Chapter Trans 302, Wis. Adm. Code, describing and defining
vehicle marking; and Chapter Trans 308, Wis. Adm. Code, describing and
defining requirements for trailer and semitrailer brake, hitch and coupling,
safety chains, cables and leveling bars, including penalties to be imposed
and procedure for prosecution, are hereby adopted by reference and made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this section. Any act required to
be performed or prohibited by any statute or administrative code provision
incorporated in this section by reference is required or prohibited by this
chapter.
Sec. 74-2. Enforcement of chapter. [Code 1992, § 7.31; Ord. No.
07-06, § 1, 6-11-2007]
(a) Enforcement procedure. This chapter shall be enforced according to
W.S.A., §§ 23.33, 66.12, 345.11 to 345.61, 350.17 and 800.01 et seq.
(b) Deposit by violators. Violators of this chapter shall make deposits of
money at the police station or Clerk of Court's office as follows:
(1) Any person arrested for a violation of this chapter may make a
deposit of money as directed by the arresting officer at the police
station, the Clerk of Court's office or by mailing the deposit to such
places. The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit
shall notify the arrested person, orally or in writing, that:
a. If the person makes a deposit for a violation of a traffic
regulation, the person need not appear in court at the time
fixed in the citation, and the person will be deemed to have
tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture and
penalty assessment if required by W.S.A., § 165.87, a jail
assessment if required by W.S.A., § 302.46, plus any applicable
fees prescribed in W.S.A., ch. 814, not to exceed the amount of
the deposit that the court may accept as provided in W.S.A.,
§ 345.37.
b. If the person fails to make a deposit for a violation of a traffic
regulation or appear in court at the time fixed in the citation,
the court may enter a default judgment finding the person
guilty of the offense or issue a warrant for his arrest.
Sec. 74-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-2
1:411
Sec. 74-3. Penalty for violation of chapter. [Code 1992, § 7.30]
Sec. 74-4. Traffic control signs, signals, devices and
markings—ratification of existing.
All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings in place on the date
of adoption of this Code are expressly ratified and confirmed.
Sec. 74-5. Same—official. [Code 1992, § 7.18]
(2) The amount of the deposit shall be determined in accordance with
the deposit schedule established by the state judicial conference
and shall include the penalty assessment established under W.S.A.,
§ 165.87, a jail assessment if required by W.S.A., § 302.46, and
costs. If a deposit schedule has not been established, the arresting
officer shall require the alleged offender to deposit the forfeiture
established by the Chief of Police, which shall include the penalty
assessment established under W.S.A., § 165.87. Deposits for
nonmoving violations shall not include the penalty assessment.
(3) The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall issue
the arrested person a receipt therefor.
(c) Petition to reopen judgment. Whenever a person has been convicted in
this state on the basis of a forfeiture of deposit or a plea of guilty or no
contest and the person was not informed as required under W.S.A.,
§ 345.27(1) and (2), the person may, within 60 days after being notified
of the revocation or suspension of the operating privilege, petition the
court to reopen the judgment and grant him an opportunity to defend
on merits. If the court finds that the petitioner was not informed as
required under W.S.A., § 345.27(1) and (2), the court shall order the
judgment reopened. The court order reopening the judgment
automatically reinstates the revoked or suspended operating privilege.
(a) As required by specific state laws. The penalty for violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be a forfeiture and penalty assessment if
required by W.S.A., § 165.87, a jail assessment if required by W.S.A.,
§ 302.46, plus any applicable fees prescribed in W.S.A., ch. 814.
(b) State forfeiture statutes. Any forfeiture for violation of Section 74-1
shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for violation of
the statutes adopted by reference, including any variations or increases
for subsequent offenses.
(c) Local regulations. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the
penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Section
1-12.
(a) Street Superintendent to erect. The Street Superintendent shall
procure, erect and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals
and markings conforming to the Uniform Traffic Control Devices
Sec. 74-2 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-5
1:412
Sec. 74-6. Traffic and parking regulations on school district
grounds. [Code 1992, § 7.03; Ord. No. 05-16, § 1, 7-11-2005;
amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-15]
Sec. 74-7. Parades and processions. [Code 1992, § 12.17]
Manual giving such notice of the provisions of this chapter as required
by state law. Signs shall be erected in such locations and manner as
the Street Superintendent shall determine will best effect the purposes
of this chapter and give adequate warning to users of the street or
highway.
(b) Removal of unofficial signs and signals. The Street Superintendent shall
have the authority granted by W.S.A., § 349.09, and is directed to order
the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device placed, maintained or
displayed in violation of this chapter or W.S.A., § 346.41. Any charge
imposed on a premises for removal of an illegal sign, signal or device
shall be reported to the Council at its next regular meeting for review
and certification.
(a) Parking. All parking on grounds of the Lake Geneva School District
during school hours shall be by permit only and shall be restricted to
areas designated for parking by the District boards. No person shall
park a motor vehicle in a posted area other than the one for which he
has been issued a permit. Each vehicle must display a valid current
permit for the area to which it is assigned. All visitors shall park only in
areas posted for visitor parking.
(b) Speed limits. No person shall, at any time, operate a motor vehicle upon
the Lake Geneva School District’s grounds at a speed in excess of 15
miles per hour.
(c) Vehicles prohibited at specific times. No person shall, at any time,
operate a motor vehicle, other than a school bus, in or upon any drive
designated for buses only by sign, on any Lake Geneva School District
grounds, during weekdays of months schools are in session. Exception
to this will be school-owned vehicles, emergency vehicles and shortterm
delivery vehicles; i.e., Post Office, UPS, etc.
(d) No vehicles will park at any yellow curb or posted no-parking area
within the Lake Geneva School District. No vehicles may park in any
lawn or grasses unless directed to by District officials.
(e) No vehicle may park overnight on any Lake Geneva School District
grounds without the permission of the District or its representatives.
(f) "Lake Geneva School District" is defined as the properties at: Lake
Geneva Schools Administration Offices at 208 E. South Street, Badger
High School at 220 E. South Street, Lake Geneva Middle School at 600
Bloomfield Road, Central/Denison Elementary School at 900 Wisconsin
Street and Eastview Elementary School at 535 Sage Street.
Sec. 74-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-7
1:413
Sec. 74-8. Streets closed to travel. [Code 1992, § 7.19]
Sec. 74-9. Required use of red flashing lights for school buses.
[Code 1992, § 7.25]
The operator of a school bus equipped with flashing red lights as specified
in W.S.A., § 347.25(2), as amended from time to time, shall actuate such
lights in residential and business districts of the City when pupils or other
authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at a location at which
there are no traffic signals and such persons must cross the street or
highway before being loaded or after being unloaded. Such lights shall be
actuated at least 100 feet before stopping to load or unload such pupils or
other authorized passengers and shall not be extinguished until loading or
unloading is completed and persons who must cross the highway are safely
across.
Sec. 74-10. Snow emergencies. [Code 1992, § 7.10(13)]
(a) An application for a permit to the City Clerk shall be made for authority
to hold any parade or public procession, except funerals, at least 30
days prior to the date the event is to take place upon a form prepared by
the Clerk.
(b) The Police Chief shall have the duty and power to designate hours,
routes and number of vehicles, persons or other accouterments of such
parade or procession.
(a) Whenever any street, highway or alley is impassable or unsafe for travel
during the construction or repair of any such street, highway or alley,
and until it is ready for traffic, the authorities in charge of the
maintenance or construction thereof shall apply to the Street
Superintendent for permission to close the same by maintaining
barriers at each end of the closed portion. The barriers shall be of such
material and construction and so placed as to indicate that the
thoroughfare is closed and shall be lighted at night.
(b) No unauthorized person shall remove, take down, alter the position of,
destroy, pass over or beyond any barrier so erected or travel with any
vehicle upon any portion of a thoroughfare closed by barriers, as
provided in this section, or travel in any manner upon the materials
placed thereon as part of the repair or construction work or shall deface
any materials so placed. In addition to the penalty provided by this
chapter, any violator of this section shall be liable for all damages done
to the highway, street or other thoroughfare or material thereon.
(a) Declaration. The Mayor or in his absence the President of the City
Council shall have the authority to declare a snow emergency whenever
conditions arise which in his judgment necessitate such declaration,
subject to the Council action as provided by statute.
Sec. 74-7 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-10
1:414
(b) Authorized actions by Police and Fire Chiefs. Upon the declaration of a
snow emergency, the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire
Department are authorized to hire tow trucks; require snowplow
accompaniment of rescue squads and ambulances, both inside and
outside the corporate limits of the City; establish a public information
telephone reception center; advise radio stations WTMJ, WMIR and
WLKG of declaration of the snow emergency; and to take any other
action either or both may deem necessary under the circumstances.
(c) Plowing priority system. There is established a snow emergency
plowing priority system. A map of the streets of the City which
designates the primary routes in yellow, the secondary routes in blue
and the emergency facilities in red shall be maintained in the office of
the City Clerk, the Police Department, Fire Department and the Street
Department. The Street Department shall first clear and keep clean all
primary routes and entrances and exits to the emergency facilities.
Then all secondary routes shall be cleared and maintained.
(d) Parking; penalty for prohibited parking. During a snow emergency,
there shall be no parking on all primary and secondary routes. Any
vehicles parked on such routes shall be towed away at the owner's
expense, as provided in Section 74-37.
(e) Termination. The snow emergency may be terminated by the Mayor or
the City Council. The snow emergency shall be limited to the time
during which such snow emergency conditions exist.
(f) Section not to limit authority of City officers. This section shall not in
any way limit or prohibit any authority conferred upon the Mayor, City
Council, Chief of Police or Chief of the Fire Department by prior
ordinance or statute.
Sec. 74-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-10
1:415

ARTICLE I.5.
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Sec. 74-11. Prohibited acts. [Ord. No. 98-2, 3-9-1998]
Sec. 74-12. Removal and impoundment. [Ord. No. 98-2, 3-9-1998]
The Chief of Police, Building Inspector or any person acting on their behalf
is authorized to remove and impound, or cause to be removed and
impounded, any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home which is
abandoned in violation of this article. Whenever the charges for removal
and storage are paid; such vehicle shall be released to its owner. Whenever
a citation upon which removal and storage is authorized is released by the
Chief of Police, Building Inspector or their duly authorized representatives,
or whenever the charge for which a citation upon which removal and
storage is authorized is dismissed by the court, the Chief of Police, Building
Inspector or their duly authorized representative shall release the vehicle
without payment of charges for removal and storage and shall refund any
charge for removal and storage of such vehicle which shall have been
previously paid. The owner of the vehicle is entitled to an informal hearing
before the Chief of Police, Building Inspector or their duly authorized
(a) No person shall abandon any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or
mobile home on any highway or public or private property within the
City.
(b) A motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home shall be deemed
abandoned within the meaning of this article, and shall constitute a
public nuisance, in any of the following situations:
(1) Whenever any such vehicle is left unattended on any highway or
public or private property within the City for such time and under
such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to
have been abandoned;
(2) Whenever any such vehicle is disassembled, inoperable,
unlicensed, junked or wrecked and is stored or allowed to remain in
the open upon public or private property within the City for a
seventy-two-hour period following written notification by the Police
Department or Building Inspector's office. The written notification
shall be on forms prescribed by the Police Department and Building
Inspector's office. The written notification shall be served on the
owner of the real property where the vehicle is located and mailed
to the last known address of the vehicle owner, if different than the
owner of the real property; or
(3) Whenever any such vehicle has been allowed to remain standing on
any highway or public property in the City for more than 48 hours
after a notice of parking violation has been placed on the vehicle.
(c) Any mail notices will be sent pursuant to W.S.A., § 342.40.
Sec. 74-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-12
1:417
representative concerning the amount of accrued towing and storage
charges. Any such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed and
disposed of under Section 74-13.
Sec. 74-13. Reclamation or disposal. [Ord. No. 98-2, 3-9-1998]
Any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home removed and
impounded under this article shall be subject to the reclamation and
disposal provisions set forth in W.S.A. § 342.40.
Sec. 74-14. Owner responsible for impoundment and sale costs; fee
for administrative costs. [Ord. No. 98-2, 3-9-1998]
Sec. 74-15. Storage and disposition costs. [Ord. No. 98-2, 3-9-1998]
Sec. 74-16. Notice of sale or disposition. [Ord. No. 98-2, 3-9-1998]
Within five days after the sale or disposal of a vehicle, as provided in W.S.A.
§ 342.40, the Chief of Police or his duly authorized representative shall
advise the State Department of Transportation, Division of Motor Vehicles,
or such sale or disposition on a form supplied by the Division. A copy of such
form shall also be given to the purchaser of the vehicle. A copy shall also be
retained on file in the City.
Sec. 74-17. Penalty for violation of article. [Ord. No. 98-2,
3-9-1998]
Any person who shall abandon a vehicle in violation of this article shall,
upon conviction forfeit not less than $25 or more than $500.
Sec. 74-18. through Sec. 74-35. (Reserved)
(a) The owner of any abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is
responsible for the abandonment and all costs of impounding, storage
and disposing the vehicle. Costs not recovered by the sale of the vehicle
may be recovered in a civil action by the City against the owner.
(b) Whenever a vehicle is towed at the request of a City agency, the owner,
on claiming such vehicle, shall pay the towing fee, plus administrative
costs of $25.
(a) Storage costs shall be charged at the rate of $10 per day for impounded
abandoned vehicles.
(b) The owner of a vehicle impounded and stored as evidence, or pending a
court jurisdiction, is responsible for the costs of storing and disposing
of the vehicle once the vehicle is no longer needed as evidence or the
court case has been adjudicated. Storage costs shall be charged at the
rate of $10 per day to commence 24 hours after the owner has received
official notification that the vehicle can be released to the rightful
owner.
Sec. 74-12 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-18
1:418
ARTICLE II.
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
DIVISION 1.
(RESERVED)9
Sec. 74-36. through Sec. 74-55. (Reserved)
9. Editor's Note: Former Division 1, Generally, consisting of Section 74-36, No stopping
zones, adopted Code 1992, § 7.11; Section 74-37, towing charges for vehicles moved by
City, adopted Code 1992, § 7.20; Section 74-38, Loading and unloading zones, adopted
Code 1992, § 7.26; Section 74-39, Denison School loading and unloading zone, adopted
Ord. No. 04-36, § 1, 9-27-2004; and Section 74-40, School bus warning lights, adopted
Ord. No. 06-05, § 1, 2-13-2006, was repealed 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-02.
Sec. 74-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-36
1:419

DIVISION 2.
PARKING REGULATIONS
Sec. 74-56. through Sec. 74-65. (Reserved)10
Sec. 74-66. Fire lanes. [Code 1992, § 7.10(12)]
Sec. 74-67. Restricted parking for compact cars. [Added
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 10-11; amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
15-02]
Sec. 74-68. through Sec. 74-110. (Reserved)
(a) Erection of signs. When signs are erected giving notice, no person shall
park any vehicle in a fire lane.
(b) Penalty for violation of section. The Police Department shall tow away
all vehicles parked in violation of this section. Any person who violates
this section shall be subject to a forfeiture, plus the cost of towing and
storing the vehicle.
(a) It shall be a violation of this section for any car larger than a compact
car to be parked in any space designated as "Compact Car Only" or if
the compact vehicle is parked outside the designated lines for such
"Compact Car Only" parking space.
(b) "Compact cars" are defined as those vehicles designated as "small cars"
under the category "Market Class" at www.fueleconomy.gov, a site
maintained by the United States Department of Energy and United
States Environmental Protection Agency.
(c) Any person who shall violate this section may stipulate his guilt or nolo
contendere and pay a forfeiture and penalties in an amount as
established by resolution of the Common Council.
10.Editor's Note: Former Section 74-56, No parking, standing or stopping zones, adopted
Code 1992, § 7.10(1); former Section 74-57, Parallel parking, adopted Code 1992,
§ 7.10(2); former Section 74-58, Boat trailers, adopted Code 1992, § 7.10(3); former
Section 74-59, Night parking, adopted Code 1992, § 7.10(4), as amended; former Section
74-60, No parking where snow is to be removed, adopted Code 1992, § 7.10(5); former
Section 74-61, Backing into parking stalls or spaces, adopted Code 1992, § 7.10(6), as
amended; former Section 74-62, Terrace parking, adopted Code 1992, § 7.10(7); former
Section 74-63, Limited time parking zones, adopted Code 1992, § 7.10(8); and former
Section 74-65, Tow-away zones, adopted Code 1992, § 7.10(10), were repealed 2-11-2013
by Ord. No. 13-02.
Sec. 74-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-68
1:421

ARTICLE III.
VEHICLE OPERATION
Sec. 74-111. Traffic schedules.
The City traffic schedules are maintained in the Police Department and
Clerk's office.
Sec. 74-112. Unattended vehicles. [Code 1992, § 7.13; Ord. No.
05-23, § 1, 8-8-2005]
(a) Prohibited acts. No person shall leave an automobile unattended on any
street, parking lot, public ground or alley while the motor is running.
No person shall permit a motor vehicle in his custody to stand or remain
unattended upon any street, alley or public place in the City without
first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key and
taking it with him.
(b) Officer to remove key. Whenever any police officer finds any motor
vehicle standing in violation of the provisions in Subsection (a) of this
section, the officer shall remove the key and deliver the key to the
Police Department. Upon so doing, the officer shall attach to the vehicle
a notice that the keys will be returned upon presentation of the notice
and proof of ownership of the vehicle.
(c) Motor vehicles weighing more than 6,000 pounds or exceeding 23 feet.
Motor vehicles weighing more than 6,000 pounds or exceeding 23 feet
in length shall be subject to the following:
(1) No person shall park for any period of time or leave standing for
any period of time any motor vehicle weighing more than 6,000
pounds or exceeding 23 feet in length on any public street in a
residentially zoned district, public parking lot or property.
(2) The operator or owner of any truck weighing more than 6,000
pounds or any truck tractor, motor bus, trailer or semitrailer
exceeding 23 feet shall not park the same on any street in the City
longer than 30 minutes, except for loading and unloading.
(3) In commercial and industrially zoned districts where such parking
is not otherwise prohibited or restricted, this section shall not
prohibit any owner or operator of any of the vehicles listed in
Subsection (c)(2) of this section from parking such vehicles for
longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. A commercial vehicle in excess of 23 feet in length may be
parked on any public street in any district for a temporary period of
time necessary to make a pickup or delivery from a building
fronting on that street between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., provided further that such pickup or delivery shall commence
immediately upon parking the vehicle and continue without
Sec. 74-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-112
1:423
Sec. 74-113. Driving onto lake. [Code 1992, § 7.15]
No person shall remove, without proper authority, any rope, cable or
barricade of any description which has been placed across any entrance to
Geneva Lake. No person shall drive a motor-driven vehicle in such a manner
as to bypass or circumvent any barricade across an entrance to Geneva
Lake when such barricade has been so placed by proper authorities for the
purpose of warning drivers not to enter the frozen surface of Geneva Lake.
Sec. 74-114. (Reserved)11
Sec. 74-115. Transporting person in cargo areas of motor trucks.
[Ord. No. 96-6, § 7.27(I), 6-10-1996]
Sec. 74-116. Dynamic braking noise prohibited. [Ord. No. 02-43,
§ 1, 9-23-2002]
interruption until completed and in no circumstances shall such
vehicle park on any public street in excess of 30 minutes.
(4) The parking prohibitions of this subsection do not apply to school
buses as defined in W.S.A., § 340.01(56).
(a) Prohibited generally. No person may operate upon a street, alley or
highway, a motor truck having a gross weight of 10,000 pounds or less,
when any person is in an open cargo area of the motor truck.
(b) Exceptions. Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
(1) A person operating a farm truck in conjunction with farm
operations.
(2) A person operating a motor truck in a parade sanctioned by a local
municipality.
(3) A person operating a motor truck for the purpose of transporting
licensed deer hunters during the authorized deer hunting season.
(4) A person riding in a cargo area engaged in necessary duties as an
employee.
(a) Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to cause unreasonable, loud,
or excessive noise within the City by operating any motor vehicles with
a dynamic braking device engaged (including Jake braking, engine
braking, or compression braking devices), except for the aversion of
imminent danger to persons or property.
(b) Emergency vehicles. Emergency vehicles shall be exempt from this
section.
11.Editor’s Note: Former Section 74-114, Display of power, adopted as § 7.17 of the 1992
Code, was repealed 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-14.
Sec. 74-112 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-116
1:424
Sec. 74-117. through Sec. 74-150. (Reserved)
(c) Signs. Signs shall be installed at the main arterial highways and truck
routes leading into the City that shall state that such section is in effect.
The Director of Public Works is authorized and directed to post
appropriate signs consistent with the provisions of this section.
Sec. 74-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-117
1:425

ARTICLE IV.
BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES
Sec. 74-151. Registration. [Code 1992, § 7.23(1)]
Sec. 74-152. Inspection. [Code 1992, § 7.23(2)]
The Police Department shall cause to be inspected each bicycle presented
for registration and may refuse to register any bicycle found to be in unsafe
mechanical condition or not equipped as required.
Sec. 74-153. Operation without tags or in unsafe manner. [Code
1992, § 7.23(3)]
No person shall operate any bicycle not properly registered or carrying a
proper identification tag upon any street, highway, roadway or alley in the
City, or operate any bicycle in an unsafe manner or in violation of any state
law.
Sec. 74-154. Change of ownership. [Code 1992, § 7.23(4)]
Within 10 days after any bicycle registered under this article has changed
ownership or been permanently dismantled and taken out of operation, such
information shall be reported to the Police Department by the person in
whose name the bicycle has been registered.
Sec. 74-155. Warning device required. [Code 1992, § 7.23(5)]
No bicycle shall be operated on City streets unless equipped with an audible
signal.
Sec. 74-156. Parking. [Code 1992, § 7.23(6)]
No person shall leave or park a bicycle at such a place or in such a way as
to create a hazard to pedestrians, automobile operators or anyone else.
Sec. 74-157. Riding in certain areas prohibited. [Code 1992,
§ 7.23(7); amended 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-09]
No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or any similar
device upon a sidewalk within the business district; Broad Street, from
(a) Required. No City resident shall operate a bicycle upon any public
street, highway, roadway or alley within the City unless such bicycle is
properly registered and has attached to it a proper registration device.
(b) Fee. A registration fee shall be paid in the amount to be set from time to
time by the Council.
(c) Term. Registration shall be good for life of the bicycle or until the
ownership changes, at which time the bicycle must be reregistered.
Sec. 74-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-157
1:427
Geneva Street to Wrigley Drive; Main Street, from Cook Street to Mill
Street; Center Street, from Geneva Street to Wrigley Drive; Wrigley Drive,
from Main Street to Baker Street; the complete area surrounding the
Riviera Ballroom, being the sidewalks, lawns and piers; the tennis courts
located at Badger High School, East View School and Maple Park; or the
Brunk Pavilion and the appurtenances thereto.
Sec. 74-158. through Sec. 74-185. (Reserved)
Sec. 74-157 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-158
1:428
ARTICLE V.
N[AEdIGdHedB3O-R2H2-O2O01D0 EBLyEOCTrdR.I NC oV. E1H0-I0C4LES 12]
Sec. 74-186. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE (NEV) — Neighborhood electric
vehicle as defined in § 340.01(27h) of the Wisconsin Statutes and currently
registered and licensed as such by the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation.[Amended 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-14]
Sec. 74-187. Operation on streets restricted.
Individuals may operate an NEV on or across the following streets:
Sec. 74-188. Compliance with traffic laws; license required.
(1) Any street within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Lake Geneva
having a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less that is not a part
of the State Trunk Highway Network.
(2) Any street within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Lake Geneva
having a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less that is a part of
the State Trunk Highway Network:
a. On State Highway 50, from Snake Road to Curtis Street.
b. Across numbered state highways where the state highway has a
speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less and the intersection has
traffic control signals. [Amended 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-14]
(a) The operation of NEVs shall comply with all traffic statutes and
ordinances applicable to vehicles traveling upon streets and highways
in the City of Lake Geneva.
(b) Any person operating an NEV within the jurisdictional limits of City of
Lake Geneva shall hold a valid regular or probationary driver's license
and follow all motor vehicle laws. [Amended 9-9-2019 by Ord. No.
19-14]
(c) Each person operating a neighborhood electric vehicle on a public
street in the City of Lake Geneva shall be granted all of the rights and
be subject to all of the duties applicable to a driver of any motor vehicle
in the State of Wisconsin, including maintaining insurance as required
by state law, except as to the special regulations in this section and
except as to those provisions which by their nature do not apply to the
operation of a neighborhood electric vehicle.
12.Editor’s Note: This Ordinance Also Repealed Former Article V, Snowmobiles, Adopted As
§ 7.22(1) Through (4) Of The 1992 Code.
Sec. 74-186 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-189
1:429
Sec. 74-189. Violations and penalties.
Sec. 74-190. through Sec. 74-199. (Reserved)
(a) Any person who shall violate any Wisconsin traffic law in a
neighborhood electric vehicle may be issued a uniform traffic citation
and be subject to the penalties provided by the Uniform State Traffic
Deposit Schedule.
(b) Any person who shall violate any provision of this article in a
neighborhood electric vehicle may be issued a City of Lake Geneva
citation.
Sec. 74-189 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-190
1:430
ARTICLE VI.
TRAFFIC CODE
Sec. 74-200. Provisions of state law adopted by reference. [Ord. No.
07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all provisions of
W.S.A., chs. 340 through 348 and § 941.01(1), including any future revisions
or amendments thereto, describing and defining regulations with respect
to vehicles and traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only; Ch. MVD
5, Wis. Adm. Code, describing and defining standards for motor vehicle
equipment; Ch. Trans. 302, Wis. Adm. Code, describing and defining vehicle
marking; and Ch. Trans. 308, Wis. Adm. Code, describing and defining
requirements for trailer and semitrailer brake, hitch and coupling, safety
chains, cables and leveling bars, including penalties to be imposed and
procedure for prosecution, are hereby adopted by reference and made part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed
or prohibited by any statute or Administrative Code provision incorporated
herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter.
Sec. 74-201. Repealer. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
All traffic code provisions heretofore adopted by the City Council and not
included in the following sections of Chapter 74 are hereby repealed.
Sec. 74-202. Speed limits. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
(a) State speed limits adopted. The provisions of W.S.A., §§ 346.57, 346.58
and 346.59, are adopted as part of this section as if fully set forth
herein, except as specified under W.S.A., § 349.11(3)(c).
(b) Speed limits. No operator shall drive a vehicle in excess of the limits
expressed on the following highways:
(1) Fifty-five miles per hour:
Pilgrim Church Road from South Lakeshore Drive to Highway
120/Willow Road intersection
Highway 120 eastbound from Pilgrim Church Road/Willow Road
intersection to County H
(2) Forty-five miles per hour:
Main Street (Highway 50), from the intersection of Edwards
Boulevard (Highway 120) to the east City limits
(3) Forty miles per hour.
Main Street (Highway 50), from Curtis Street, to Edwards
Boulevard (Highway 120)
(4) Thirty-five miles per hour:
Sec. 74-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-202
1:431
Sec. 74-203. (Reserved)13
Sec. 74-204. Stop intersections. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
The intersections designated are declared stop intersections. When stop
signs are erected giving notice thereof, every operator of a vehicle
approaching a stop sign at any such intersection shall stop as required by
law.
Bloomfield Road, from the intersection of Wells Street, eastbound
to City limits
Elkhorn Road, from the intersection of George Street to the
northwest City limits
Sheridan Road, and Center Street and Interchange North
intersection northeasterly to the City limits
Main Street, from Sky Lane Drive to west City limits
(5) Thirty miles per hour:
Edwards Boulevard, from the intersection of Highway 50
southerly to Townline Road, then 45 miles per hour until
Bloomfield Road [Amended 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-18]
Edwards Boulevard, from the southernmost entrance on the
eastern side of the Home Depot parking lot, northerly to Sheridan
Springs Road and continuing westerly on Sheridan Springs Road
to the intersection of Interchange North [Added 6-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-18]
(6) Twenty-five miles per hour:
Geneva Parkway North
Geneva Parkway South
Main Street, Sky Lane Drive east to Curtis Street
Sheridan Springs Road, Interchange northeast to City limits
South Lake Shore Drive to the south City limits
South Street, from South Lake Shore Drive to Wells Street
Wells Street, from a point 500 feet southeasterly of the
intersection of Campbell Street to the south City limits
(1) Single-stop intersections. The following intersections are designated
stop intersections: [Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-15]
13.Editor’s Note: Former Sec. 74-203, Traffic and parking regulations on school district
grounds (Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007), was repealed 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-15. See
Sec. 74-6 for current provisions.
Sec. 74-202 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-204
1:432
Alley, running east and west north of Pleasant Street; stopping at
Madison Street and Maxwell Street
Andria Drive, southbound; stopping at Townline Road
Ann Street, eastbound; stopping at Center Street
Ann Street, westbound; stopping at Williams Street
Badger Lane, southbound; stopping at Conant Street
Bonnie Brae Lane, southbound; stopping at South Street
Campbell Street, eastbound; stopping at Wells Street
Cass Street, eastbound; stopping at Curtis Street
Cass Street, westbound; stopping at South Lake Shore Drive
Cemetery Road, westbound; stopping at Elkhorn Road
Center Street, southbound; stopping at Wrigley Drive
Clover Street, northbound; stopping at LaSalle Street
Clover Street, southbound; stopping at Park Row
Commercial Court, southbound; stopping at Park Drive
Connie Circle, eastbound; stopping at Timothy Drive
Cook Street, northbound; stopping at North Street
Cook Street, southbound; stopping at Main Street
Cottontail Lane, southbound; stopping at Highway 50/Grand Geneva
Parkway
Country Club Drive, southbound; stopping at Main Street
Curtis Street, northbound; stopping at Main Street
Curtis Street, southbound; stopping at Townline Road
Darwin Street, eastbound; stopping at Curtis Street
Dodge Street, westbound; stopping at Forest Drive
Dorwood Drive, southbound; stopping at South Street
Eagle Drive, eastbound; stopping at Promontory Drive
East Street, northbound; stopping at Main Street
Edgewood Court, southbound; stopping at Edgewood Drive
Edgewood Drive, eastbound; stopping at Elkhorn Road
Elm Street, northbound; stopping at Maple Street
Elmwood Avenue, southbound; stopping at Linda Lane
Eugene Drive, eastbound; stopping at Dorwood Drive
Eugene Drive, westbound; stopping at South Lake Shore Drive
Forest Street, northbound; stopping at McDonald Road
Forest Street, southbound, stopping at Main Street (Highway 50)
Francis Drive, westbound; stopping at Forest Street
Sec. 74-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-204
1:433
Franklin, southbound; stopping at Dodge Street
Fremont Avenue, southbound; stopping at Dodge Street
Gardner Street, eastbound; stopping at Center Street
Gardner Street, westbound; stopping at Williams Street
Garrison Drive, eastbound; stopping at Dorwood Drive
Garrison Drive, northbound; stopping at Eugene Drive
Geneva Parkway North, westbound; stopping at Edwards Boulevard
Geneva Parkway South, southbound; stopping at Park Drive
Geneva Street, westbound; stopping at Maxwell Street
George Street, eastbound; stopping at Williams Street
Grant Street, eastbound; stopping at Williams Street
Grant Street, westbound, stopping at Elkhorn Road
Grove Street, eastbound; stopping at Sage Street
Grove Street, westbound; stopping at Center Street
Haskins Street, westbound; stopping at Center Street
Havenwood Drive, southbound; stopping at Main Street
Heather Circle, eastbound; stopping at Andria Drive
Henry Street, eastbound; stopping at Center Street
Hillcrest Drive, eastbound; stopping at Timber Lane
Host Drive, westbound; stopping at Wells Street
Kendall Lane, southbound; stopping at Conant Street
Lagrange Drive, eastbound; stopping at South Lake Shore Drive
Lake Geneva Boulevard, northbound; stopping at Wells Street
Lake Geneva Boulevard, southbound; stopping at South Street
Lake View Drive, northbound; stopping at Main Street
Lake View Drive, southbound; stopping at Lake Shore Drive [Added
9-23-2019 by Ord. No. 19-15]
Lake View Drive, southbound; stopping at Orchard Lane (first
intersection with Orchard Lane)
LaSalle Street, eastbound; stopping at Maxwell Street
Linda Lane, eastbound; stopping at Main Street
Logan Street, eastbound; stopping at Madison Street
Madison Street, southbound; stopping at Main Street
Maple Street, westbound; stopping at South Lakeshore Drive
Marion Street, eastbound; stopping at Clover Street
Marshall Street, eastbound; stopping at Center Street
Marshall Street, westbound, stopping at Madison Street
Sec. 74-204 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-204
1:434
Maxwell Street, northbound, stopping at Elkhorn Road
Maxwell Street, southbound, stopping at Main Street
Maytag Road, westbound; stopping at South Lakeshore Drive
Mill Street, northbound, stopping at Geneva Street
Mill Street, southbound, stopping at Main Street
Miller Road, eastbound, stopping at Timber Lane
Milwaukee Avenue, eastbound, stopping at Center Street
Milwaukee Avenue, westbound, stopping at Williams Street
Minahan Road, northbound, stopping at Interchange North
Minahan Road, southbound, stopping at Sheridan Springs Road
Mobile Street, northbound; stopping at Wells Street
North Street, eastbound; stopping at Center Street
North Street, westbound; stopping at Warren Street
Park Drive, eastbound; stopping at Southwind Drive
Park Drive, westbound; stopping at Edwards Boulevard (Highway
120)
Park Row, eastbound; stopping at Madison Street
Pearson Drive, southbound; stopping at Main Street
Peller Road, southbound; stopping at Main Street (Highway 50)
Penny Lane, westbound; stopping at Romin Road
Pheasant Court, northbound; stopping at Eagle Drive
Pilgrim Church Road, northbound; stopping at South Lake Shore
Drive
Pine Tree Lane, eastbound; stopping at South Lake Shore Drive
Pleasant Street, eastbound; stopping at Madison Street
Pond View Drive, southbound; stopping at Dodge Street
Promontory Drive, northbound; stopping at Edgewood Drive
Rogers Court, eastbound; stopping at Center Street
Rogers Court, westbound; stopping at William Street
Rolling Lane, southbound; stopping at South Street
Romin Road, northbound; stopping at Laurie Street
Romin Road, southbound; stopping at South Street
Rush Street, eastbound; stopping at Mobile Street
Sage Street, northbound; stopping at Sheridan Road
Sage Street, southbound; stopping at Geneva Street
Sheridan Springs Road, westbound; stopping at Interchange North
Sky Lane, southbound; stopping at Main Street
Sec. 74-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-204
1:435
Skyline Drive, westbound; stopping at Curtis Street
Snake Road, northbound; stopping at Main Street
South 12, exit ramp, northbound; stopping at South 50
South 12, exit ramp, southbound; stopping at South 50 (stop light)
South Street, westbound; stopping at South Lake Shore Drive
Southwind Drive, southbound; stopping at Townline Road
Spring Street, westbound; stopping at Center Street
Sue Ann Drive, eastbound; stopping at Timothy Lane
Sue Ann Drive, westbound; stopping at South Lake Shore Drive
Timothy Drive, northbound; stopping at Oakwood Lane
Timothy Drive, southbound; stopping at Eugene Drive
Tolman Street, southbound; stopping at George Street
Tomike Street, southbound; stopping at Grant Street
Veterans Parkway, northbound; stopping at Park Drive
Veterans Parkway, southbound; stopping at Townline Road
Walker Street, eastbound; stopping at Center Street
Walker Street, westbound; stopping at Williams Street
Walworth Street, westbound; stopping at Center Street
Warren Street, northbound; stopping at Park Row
Warren Street, southbound; stopping at Main Street
Water Street, westbound; stopping at Center Street
Waverly Street, northbound; stopping at Water Street
West Street, northbound; stopping at Main Street
Wheeler Street, eastbound; stopping at Madison Street
Wheeler Street, westbound; stopping at Elkhorn Road
Wisconsin Street, westbound; stopping at Cook Street
Wrigley Drive, eastbound; stopping at Broad Street
Wrigley Drive, northbound; stopping at Baker Street
#2 Geneva Square, southbound; stopping at Sheridan Springs Road
(2) Traffic signals. All traffic shall observe and obey traffic signals at the
following locations:
a. The intersection of Broad Street and Main Street shall be
controlled by traffic signals at all times.
b. The intersection of Main Street and Wells Street shall be controlled
by traffic signals at all times.
c. The intersection of Main Street and Center Street shall be
controlled by traffic signals at all times.
Sec. 74-204 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-204
1:436
d. The intersection of South 50/Main Street and Highway 120/
Edwards Boulevard shall be controlled by traffic signals when such
signals are in operation. When they are not, this intersection shall
be a four-way stop.
e. The intersection of Interchange North and entrance of Geneva
Square Mall shall be controlled by traffic signals when such signals
are in operation. When they are not in automatic mode, they will be
signalized by flashing. When they are not operable, it will be an allway
stop.
(3) Two-way stops. Traffic from two directions shall stop at the following
intersections:
Baker Street, westbound, and South Lakeshore Drive, southbound,
where the two streets meet. Eastbound Baker Street can only turn
south onto South Lakeshore Drive, and northbound South Lakeshore
Drive can only turn westbound onto Baker Street, due to one-way
streets in the area.
Bloomfield Road, eastbound and westbound; stopping at Edwards
Boulevard (Highway 120)
Bonnie Brae Lane, northbound and southbound; stopping at Rush
Street
Campbell Street, eastbound and westbound; stopping at South
Lakeshore Drive
Center Street, northbound and southbound; stopping at Sheridan
Road
Crawford Street, northbound and southbound; stopping at Haskins
Street
Crawford Street, northbound and southbound; stopping at Walworth
Street
Dodge Street, eastbound and westbound; stopping at Center Street
Dodge Street, eastbound and westbound; stopping at Dodge Street
Edgewood Court, southbound, and Eagle Drive, northbound; stopping
at Edgewood Drive
Geneva Street, eastbound and westbound; stopping at Broad Street
Heather Court, eastbound, and Joshua Lane, westbound; stopping at
Andria Drive
Henry Street, eastbound and westbound; stopping at Williams Street
High Street, northbound, and Conant Street, eastbound; stopping
where the streets intersect. Westbound traffic on Conant Street does
not stop
Horace Street, northbound and southbound; stopping at Grant Street
Marshall Street, eastbound and westbound; stopping at Williams
Street
Sec. 74-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-204
1:437
Mill Street, northbound, and Sage Street, southbound; stopping
where both streets intersect with Geneva Street
North Street, eastbound and westbound; stopping at Broad Street
Orchard Lane, eastbound and westbound; stopping at Lakeview Drive
Pioneer Drive, northbound and southbound; stopping at Haskins
Street
Townline Road, eastbound and westbound; stopping at Edwards
Boulevard (Highway 120)
Waverly Street, northbound and southbound; stopping at Haskins
Street
Waverly Street, northbound and southbound; stopping at Walworth
Street
Wisconsin Street, eastbound and westbound; stopping at Broad Street
Wisconsin Street, eastbound and westbound; stopping at Center
Street
(4) Three-way stops. Traffic from all directions stop at the following
intersections
Cook Street, northbound and southbound, Wisconsin Street,
westbound; stopping where the streets intersect
Madison Street, northbound and southbound, Wisconsin Street,
eastbound; stopping where the streets intersect
Wells Street, northbound and southbound, Townline Road, westbound;
stopping where the streets intersect
(5) Four-way stops. Traffic from all directions shall stop at the following
intersections. [Amended 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-07]
Center Street and Geneva Street
Clover Street and Pleasant Street
Cook Street and Geneva Street
Darwin Street and East Street
Dodge Street and Broad Street
Dodge Street and Cook Street
Dodge Street and Elmwood/Jefferson
Dodge Street and Madison Street
Dodge Street and Maxwell Street
Dodge Street and Warren Street
Elmwood Avenue and Wisconsin/Miller Road
Elmwood Avenue and Jefferson Street
Geneva Street and Broad Street
Sec. 74-204 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-204
1:438
Sec. 74-205. Yield right-of-way intersections. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1,
11-12-2007]
The following intersections are designated yield right-of-way intersections:
Vehicle traveling on streets indicated below in partly small case letters
shall yield the right-of-way to vehicle traveling on streets indicated below in
capital letters.
CRAWFORD STREET, northbound, at Spring Street
CRAWFORD STREET, southbound, at Water Street
DODGE STREET, eastbound, at Center Street (Only right turn lane is yield
sign)
EVERGREEN DRIVE, eastbound and westbound, at Lakeview Drive
FRANKLIN, northbound, at Park Row
HIGH STREET, southbound, at Price Place
PRICE PLACE, eastbound, at Jefferson Street
Geneva Street and Cook Street
Geneva Street and Warren Street
Lake Geneva Boulevard and Laurie Street
Lake Geneva Boulevard and Rush Street
LaSalle Street and Carey Street
Laurie Street at Bonnie Brae Lane
Madison Street and Geneva Street
Madison Street and George Street
Madison Street and Grant Street
Madison Street and North Street
Maxwell Street and Wisconsin Street
Mobile Street and Laurie Street
Park Row and Maxwell Street
Pilgrim Church Road at Willow Road and Highway 120
Pleasant Street and Maxwell Street
Sage Street and Dodge Street
Sage Street and Haskins Street
Sage Street and Spring Street
Sage Street and Water Street
Townline Road (Seymour Street) and Wells Street
Walworth Street and Sage Street
Warren Street and Wisconsin Street
Wells Street and South Street and Bloomfield Road
Sec. 74-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-205
1:439
SOUTH 12 eastbound, exit ramp, at SOUTH 50, eastbound
WAVERLY AVENUE, southbound, at Water Street
Sec. 74-206. U-turns and turns. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
(a) U-Turns. The operator of a vehicle shall not make a U-turn upon a
highway at any place designated in § 346.33 Wis. Stat. The provisions of
§ 346.33, Wis. Stats. are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference. The City Council, by resolution, shall designate intersections
wherein U-turns are prohibited. Signs prohibiting U-turns will be
posted at such intersections. [Added 4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-03]
(b) Turns.
Traffic proceeding east on Wrigley Drive shall not turn left onto Broad
Street
Traffic proceeding south on Mill Street shall not turn left onto Main
Street
The left-hand lane of Center Street northbound at the intersection of
Center Street and Main Street shall be left turn only
The right-hand lane of Center Street northbound at the intersection of
Center Street and Main Street shall be for through and right-hand turn
traffic only
The right-hand lane of Center Street southbound at the intersection
of Main Street and Center Street shall be for through and right-hand
turns only
The left-hand lane of Center Street southbound at the intersection of
Main Street and Center Street shall be for left-hand turns only
The right-hand lane of Main Street westbound at the intersection of
Main Street and Center Street shall be for right-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Main Street westbound at the intersection of
Main Street and Center Street for left-hand turn traffic only
The center lane westbound at the intersection of Main Street and
Center Street for straight ahead or westbound traffic only
The left-hand lane of Edwards Boulevard (Highway 120) southbound at
the intersection with Townline Road is for left-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Edwards Boulevard (Highway 120) northbound
at the intersection with Townline Road is for right-hand turn traffic
only
The left-hand lane of Wells Street northbound at the intersection with
Campbell Street is for left-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Townline Road westbound at the intersection with
Wells Street is for left-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Townline Road westbound at the intersection
with Wells Street is for right-hand turn traffic only
Sec. 74-205 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-206
1:440
The right-hand lane of Wells Street southbound at the intersection with
South Street is for right-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Wells Street southbound at the intersection with
South Street is for straight or left-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Wells Street northbound at the intersection with
South Street is for straight or left-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Wells Street northbound at the intersection with
South Street is for right-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of South Street eastbound at the intersection with
Wells Street is for left-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of South Street eastbound at the intersection with
Wells Street is for straight or right-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Geneva Street eastbound at the intersection
with Broad Street is for right-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Geneva Street eastbound at the intersection with
Broad Street is for straight or left-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Geneva Street westbound at the intersection with
Broad Street is for left-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Geneva Street westbound at the intersection
with Broad Street is for straight or right-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Main Street eastbound at the intersection with
Cook Street is for left-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Main Street eastbound at the intersection with
Cook Street is for straight or right-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Main Street westbound at the intersection with
Cook Street is for left-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Main Street westbound at the intersection with
Cook Street is for straight and right-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Main Street westbound at the intersection with
Mill Street is for right-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Main Street westbound at the intersection with
Wells Street is for left-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Main Street westbound at the intersection with
Wells Street is for straight traffic only
The right-hand lane of Main Street eastbound at the intersection with
Wells Street is for right-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Main Street eastbound at the intersection with
Wells Street is for straight traffic only
The left-hand lane of Wells Street northbound at the intersection with
Main Street is for left-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Wells Street northbound at the intersection with
Main Street is for right-hand turn traffic only
Sec. 74-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-206
1:441
The left-hand lane of Main Street westbound at the intersection with
South Lakeshore Drive is for left-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Broad Street southbound at the intersection with
Main Street is for left-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Broad Street southbound at the intersection
with Main Street is for right-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Broad Street northbound at the intersection
with Main Street is for right-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Broad Street northbound at the intersection with
Main Street is for left-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Main Street westbound at the intersection with
Broad Street is for left-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Main Street westbound at the intersection with
Broad Street is for right-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Main Street eastbound at the intersection with
Broad Street is for left-hand turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Main Street eastbound at the intersection with
Broad Street is for right-hand turn traffic only
The two right-hand lanes of Edwards Boulevard (Highway 120)
northbound at the intersection with Main Street, (Highway 50) are for
right-hand turn traffic only
The left-hand lane of Edwards Boulevard (Highway 120) northbound
at the intersection with Main Street (Highway 50) is for left-hand turn
traffic only
The right-hand lane of Edwards Boulevard southbound at the
intersection with Main Street (Highway 50) is for right-hand turn
traffic only
The left-hand lane of Edwards Boulevard southbound at the
intersection with Main Street (Highway 50) is for left-hand turn traffic
only
The two left-hand lanes of Main Street (Highway 50) westbound at the
intersection with Edwards Boulevard (Highway 120) are for left-hand
turn traffic only
The right-hand lane of Main Street (Highway 50) westbound at the
intersection with Edwards Boulevard (Highway 120) is for right-hand
turn traffic only
The two right-hand lanes of Main Street (Highway 50) eastbound at
the intersection with Edwards Boulevard (Highway 120) are for righthand
turn traffic only
The left-hand turn lane of Main Street (Highway 50) eastbound at the
intersection with Edwards Boulevard (Highway 120) is for left-hand
turn traffic only
Sec. 74-206 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-206
1:442
Sec. 74-207. One-way traffic. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
The following parts of streets and allies are designated one-way traffic to
move only in the direction indicated:
Alley, between 100 blocks of Broad Street and Wrigley Drive, eastbound
only
Alley, between the 400 block of Wrigley Drive and South Lake Shore Drive,
southbound only
Baker Street, between Wells Street and South Lake Shore Drive,
westbound only
Cass Street, between Wells Street and South Lake Shore Drive, westbound
only
Elm Street, from South Street to Maple Street, northbound only
Park Row, on the north half, between Madison Street and Jefferson Street,
westbound only
Park Row, on the south half, between Madison Street and Jefferson Street,
eastbound only
South 12, entrance ramp, northbound from South 50
South 12, entrance ramp, southbound from South 50
South 12, exit ramp, northbound to South 50
South 12, exit ramp, southbound to South 50
South Lake Shore Drive, from Main Street to Baker Street, southbound
only
Wrigley Drive, southbound only from Main Street to the intersection with
Broad Street
Sec. 74-208. No passing zones. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
The parts of streets designated, are declared to be no passing zones. The
operator of a vehicle shall not drive on the left side of the center of the
roadway on any portion of a street which has been designated as a no
passing zone, either by signs or by an unbroken line on the pavement on
the right-hand side of and adjacent to the center line of the roadway. The
following parts of streets are designated no passing zones:
Center Street, either direction, from Wrigley Drive to the south to Sheridan
Springs Road to the north
George Street, either direction, from Wrigley Drive to the south to
Sheridan Springs Road to the north
Semitrailer trucks shall be prohibited from making a right turn from
Center Street into the alley which extends between Center Street
and Mill Street and which alley lies between Main Street and Geneva
Street, 600 block
Sec. 74-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-208
1:443
Main Street, either direction, from east City limits to beginning of four-way
lane South 50
Interchange North, either direction, northerly from the north curbline of
Grant Street to the west curbline of Center Street at its junction with South
Interchange North
South 50, either direction, from South 12 where South 50 is a divided
highway
South 120, either direction, from east curbline of South Lake Shore Drive
easterly on Baker Street thence right on Lake Shore Drive southerly to the
south City limits
Wells Street, either direction, from its junction with South 50 southerly to
the north curbline of Campbell Street
Sec. 74-209. Vehicular weight limitations. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1,
11-12-2007]
(a) Class B highways designated. All streets and alleys within the City
limits except the following enumerated streets, are designated Class B
highways and shall be subject to the weight limitations imposed by
W.S.A., § 348.16:
Baker Street from Wrigley Drive to South Lake Shore Drive
Broad Street from North Street to Wrigley Drive
Elkhorn Road from George Street to northwesterly City limits
George Street from Williams Street to Elkhorn Road
Main Street from east City limits to west City limits
North Street from Broad Street to Williams Street
Pilgrim Church Road
Sheridan Street from Williams Street to the point where Interchange
North leaves Sheridan Road northeasterly
South Lake Shore Drive from Baker Street to south City limits
Wells Street from Main Street to southeasterly City limits
Williams Street from Sheridan Street to North Street
Wrigley Drive from Broad Street to Baker Street
(b) Heavy traffic routes. The following streets and parts of streets within
the City are designated heavy traffic routes:
Baker Street from Wrigley Drive to South Lake Shore Drive
Broad Street from North Street to Wrigley Drive
Elkhorn Road from George Street to northwesterly City limits
George Street from Williams Street to Elkhorn Road
Main Street from east City limits to the west City limits
Sec. 74-208 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-209
1:444
Sec. 74-210. Parking regulations. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007;
amended 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15; 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 08-14;
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-07; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-09; 2-11-2013
by Ord. No. 13-02; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 15-02]
North Street from Broad Street to Williams Street
Pilgrim Church Road
Sheridan Street from Williams Street to the point where Interchange
North leaves Sheridan Street northeasterly
South Lake Shore Drive from Baker Street to south City limits
Wells Street from Main Street to southeasterly City limits
Williams Street from Sheridan Street to North Street
Wrigley Drive from Broad Street to Baker Street
(c) Use of other streets by heavy traffic
(1) No vehicle, except a motor bus, which is not equipped with
pneumatic tires or has a combined vehicle load weight exceeding
10,000 pounds, shall be operated or moved on any street or alley
not part of the heavy traffic route designated in Subsection (2) of
this section in the City, except for the purpose of obtaining orders
for moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or from a place
of business or residence facing thereon, provided that in no event
shall the weight of the vehicle and load on such other street exceed
the limitations of W.S.A., § 348.16(3), pertaining to Class A
Highways or deliveries on Class B highways.
(2) Through traffic 6,000 pounds gross weight and above is prohibited
in and through parking lot area immediately east of City Hall
between Geneva Street and alley (600 block of Geneva Street).
(a) No parking, standing or stopping zones. [Amended 10-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-13; 3-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-01; 7-25-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-10; 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 16-14; 11-28-2016 by Ord. No.
16-19]
(1) No vehicle shall be parked, stopped or standing, except to comply
with the directions of a traffic officer in any of the following:
Alley, between Marshall Street and Ann Street, running from
Center Street to Williams Street, behind Fire Department
Baker Street, south side, easterly from east curbline of Wrigley
Drive to west curbline of South Lake Shore Drive from hours of
10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Broad Street, west side, from Dodge Street 50 feet north
Broad Street, west side, from north curb of alley between Main
Street and Geneva Street to a point 74 feet north
Sec. 74-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-210
1:445
Broad Street, west side, 65 feet south of North Street
Campbell Street, south side, from South Lake Shore Drive to
Wells Street
Campbell Street, south side, from Wrigley Drive to South Lake
Shore Drive
Center Street, east side, from the north curbline of Wisconsin
Street to the south curbline of Sheridan Street
Clover Street, east side, from Park Row to LaSalle Street
Cook Street, west side, from the north curbline of Wisconsin
Street to the south curbline of North Street
Curtis Street, east side, from a point 807 feet south of the curb of
Main Street to a point 950 feet south of the south curb of Main
Street
Dodge Street, north side, from Broad Street to Forrest Street
Dodge Street, north side, from Sage Street to Center Street
Dodge Street, south side, from the intersection of Elmwood
Avenue and Dodge Street to a point 450 feet east
Edwards Boulevard, in its entirety
Elm Street, west side, from South Street to South Lake Shore
Drive
Elmwood Avenue, both sides, from the north line of the
intersection with Main Street, 160 feet north
Elmwood Avenue, east side, from Dodge Street, 60 feet south
Elmwood Avenue, west side, from Linda Lane to Dodge Street
Fremont Street, east side
Interchange North, both sides, north of Center Street to the City
limits
Madison Street, east side, from Wisconsin Street to Dodge Street
Maxwell Street, west side, from Geneva Street to Dodge Street
Mill Street, both sides, from south curbline of Geneva Street to
north curbline of Main Street
North Street, both sides, from the west curbline of Center Street
to the east curbline of Cook Street except for the south side of
the 700 block of North Street
Pleasant Street, south side
Rogers Court, north side, from Center to William Street
Sage Street, east side, from easterly extension of the south
curbline of Dodge Street to the north curbline of Mill Street
Sage Street, east side, north of the fire hydrant at Sage and
Grove Streets, a distance of 121 feet
Sec. 74-210 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-210
1:446
Sage Street, east side, from the south curbline of Water Street to
a point 155 feet north to the easterly extension of the north
curbline of Dodge Street
Sage Street, west side, from south curbline of Highway 120 to
north curbline of Grove Street, distance of 389 feet
Sheridan Road, both sides, from Minahan Road east to City limits
South Lake Shore Drive, east side, from the south curbline of
Baker Street to the north curbline of Cass Street
South Lake Shore Drive, east side, from the south curbline of
Main Street 154 feet south
South Lake Shore Drive, west side, from the north curbline of
Cass Street to Main Street
South Lake Shore Drive, west side, from the south curbline of
Main Street 220 feet south
Tolman Street, west side, from George Street to Wheeler Street
Townline Road, north side of the road, in the indented area that is
painted yellow and posted "no parking" at Veterans Park
Townline Road, south side of the road eastbound from Veterans
Parkway, to area across from service driveway to Veterans Park
Walker Street, north side, from Center Street to William Street
Warren Street, east side, from Geneva Street to Main Street
Water Street, south side, from Center Street to Sage Street
Williams Street, east side, from the north curbline of Henry
Street to the south curbline of Gardner Avenue
Wisconsin Avenue, north side, from Center Street to Elmwood
Avenue, except 130 feet east of the east curbline of Broad Street
Wisconsin Street, south side, from the east curbline of Broad
Street to 75 feet east
Wrigley Drive, southwesterly side, from the southernmost point of
the bridge existing thereon southeasterly to a point 406 feet of
the southwesternmost point of intersection of Wrigley Drive and
Center Street
This subsection shall not apply to physicians on emergency calls or
operators of authorized emergency vehicles during an emergency,
nor to spaces within such areas which are authorized loading
zones when used for loading or unloading.
(2) Except where specifically designated, parking of vehicles is
prohibited in all City parks unless a permit is first obtained from
City Hall.
(b) Parallel parking. Except as prohibited in Subsection (a)(1), parallel
parking only shall be permitted in the following zones:
Sec. 74-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-210
1:447
Broad Street, two stalls, on the east side of Broad Street from the
corner of Wisconsin Street to the driveway of the drive-through
windows of what is now PNC Bank.
Center Street, east side, south of Main Street
Center Street, east side, from Wrigley Drive to Wisconsin Street
except for that section between the south entrance of the Cove
parking lot to the White River
Center Street, west side, from Main Street to Wisconsin Street except
for that section in the 300 Block of Center Street
Clover Street, west side, from Park Row to LaSalle Street
Cook Street, east side, from Geneva Street to North Street
Cook Street, west side, from Main Street to Wisconsin Street
Dodge Street, north side, from Broad Street to Center Street
Geneva Street, both sides, from Sage Street to Madison Street, except
the 600 Block, south side from Sage Street to Center Street with four
stalls adjacent to City Hall for City parking; 700 Block north side,
from Center Street to Broad Street; and 800 Block, south side, from
Broad Street to Cook Street
Henry Street, south side, from the intersection of Williams Street and
Henry Street to a point 200 feet east
Madison Street, west side, from Main Street to George Street
Main Street, north side, from Mill Street to Center Street
Main Street, south side, from Mill Street to east of the Post Office
North Street, on north side, from Cook Street to Madison Street
North Street, on south side, from Broad Street to Center Street
South Lake Shore Drive, west side, from the north curbline of Cass
Street to Main Street, which shall include spaces for bus parking only
100 feet south of Main Street to the rear entrance to the Cove on
South Lake Shore Drive
Wisconsin Street, north side, four stalls, from the corner of Broad
Street to the driveway of what is now PNC Bank
Wisconsin Street, south side, from Broad Street to Center Street
(c) Boat trailers. The parking of boat trailers or any similar device used for
hauling boats, except single chassis vehicles, is prohibited on either
side of the entire length of Baker Street or Campbell Street and South
Lake Shore Drive and Wrigley Drive and on either side of the 100 block
of Center Street. It shall be a violation of this section for any motor
vehicle with a trailer or a trailer alone to be parked in the Sage Street
parking lot (Parking Lot D) [Amended 5-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-06]
(d) Night parking. [Amended 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03; 5-22-2017
by Ord. No. 17-05]
Sec. 74-210 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-210
1:448
(1) There shall be no parking of any vehicle on any City street or
municipal parking lot between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from
November 15 of each year to March 31 of the following year, except
for the municipal lot located at Sage Street Municipal Parking Lot
D which parking shall not exceed 24 hours.
(2) There shall be no parking of any vehicle on any City street or
municipal parking lot in the Downtown Business District from 3:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m. all year, except for the municipal lot located at
Sage Street Municipal Parking Lot D which parking shall not
exceed 24 hours.
(3) For the purpose of Subsection (d)(2), "Downtown Business District"
is defined as that portion of the City bounded by South Lake Shore
Drive on the east; Cook Street on the west; Wrigley Drive on the
south; and Geneva Street on the north.
(4) The Police Department may tow away all vehicles which are parked
in violation of this subsection.
(5) Whoever shall violate this subsection may be subject to a forfeiture
plus the costs of towing and storage.
(6) Permission for parking for guests of residents may be granted by
the Police Department on a per night basis for not more than 14
days for any one person or vehicle. Such permission may be
granted by the Police Department upon a telephone notification for
not more than three days. If request is made for permission to park
for more than three days, the applicant shall complete an
application at the Police Department. This subsection does not
apply to Subsection (d)(2) above.
(e) No parking, snow removal.
(1) For the purpose of removing snow from the streets and
surrounding areas, the Street Department may erect signs
prohibiting parking in the particular area where snow is intended
to be removed.
(2) The Police Department may tow away all vehicles parked in
violation of the no parking sign pursuant to this subsection.
(3) Any person who violates this subsection may be subject to a
forfeiture plus the cost of towing and storing the vehicle.
(f) Backing into parking stalls. No person shall back a vehicle (other than a
motorcycle) into any angled parking stall in the City. Construction and/
or maintenance vehicles may obtain a permit to back a vehicle into a
parking stall while actually engaged in their work from the City Clerk,
Utility Commission or Meter Department. [Amended 5-22-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-07]
Sec. 74-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-210
1:449
(g) Terrace parking. No person shall park a vehicle on the terrace area
between the street and sidewalk at any time.
(h) Limited time parking zones.
(1) When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park
a vehicle in a limited time parking zone, designated in Section
74-234, in excess of the time set forth in the schedule, except to
comply with the directions of a traffic officer.
(2) This subsection is subject to the provisions of Subsection (a)(1) of
this section.
(i) (Reserved)
(j) Tow-away zones. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, any
unauthorized vehicle parked in a tow-away zone, may be towed away at
the owner's expense, and the following areas are designate tow-away
zones:
Baker Street, south side, from the east curbline of Wrigley Drive to
the west curbline of South Lake Shore Drive
City launching ramp at the intersection of Wrigley Drive and Center
Street Fire House Ramp at 742 Marshall Street
South Lake Shore Drive, both sides, from the south curbline of Baker
Street to the north curbline of South Street
South Lake Shore Drive, both sides, from the south curbline of Main
Street to the north curbline of Cass Street
Wrigley Drive, west side, from the north curbline of Campbell Street
to the south curbline of Baker Street
(k) Fire lanes.
(1) When signs are erected giving notice, no person shall park any
vehicle in a fire lane.
(2) The Police Department shall tow away all vehicles parked in
violation of this section.
(3) Any person who violates this subsection shall be subject to a
forfeiture plus the cost of towing and storing the vehicle.
(l) Snow emergency.
(1) Declaration of snow emergency. The Mayor, or in his or her
absence, the President of the City Council, shall have the authority
to declare a snow emergency whenever conditions arise which in
his or her judgment necessitate the same, subject to the Council
action as provided by statute.
(2) Police and Fire Chiefs. Upon the declaration of a snow emergency,
the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department are
Sec. 74-210 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-210
1:450
Sec. 74-211. No stopping. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
authorized to hire tow trucks, require snow plow accompaniment
of rescue squads and ambulances, both inside and outside the
corporate limits to the City, establish a public information
telephone reception center, advise radios WTMJ and WLKG of
declaration of snow emergency and to take any other action either
or both may deem necessary under the circumstances.
(3) Plowing. There is hereby established a snow emergency plowing
priority system. A map of the streets of the City which designates
the primary routes in yellow, the secondary routes in blue and the
emergency facilities in red shall be maintained in the office of the
City Clerk, the Police Department, the Fire Department and the
Street Department. The Street Department shall first clear and
keep clean all primary routes and entrances and exits to the
emergency facilities. Then all secondary routes shall be cleared
and maintained.
(4) Parking. During a snow emergency, there shall be no parking on all
primary and secondary routes. Any vehicles parked on such routes
shall be towed away at the owner's expense, as provided in Section
74-220.
(5) Termination. The snow emergency may be terminated by the Mayor
or the City Council. The snow emergency shall be limited to the
time during which such snow emergency conditions exist.
(6) Limitation. This subsection shall not in any way limit or prohibit
any authority conferred upon the Mayor, City Council, Chief of
Police or Chief of the Fire Department by prior ordinance or
statute.
(m) Semi-trucks with or without trailers shall only be permitted to park on
Geneva Parkway between signs placed along said roadway. Semi-trucks
with or without trailers shall not be permitted to park on any other
streets within the City of Lake Geneva. The provisions of Section 74-59
of this Code shall not apply to this subsection.
(n) Upon streets where parking is authorized by official signs or markers,
where parking stalls are designated by markings on the pavement, it
shall be a violation of this section for any vehicle to be parked outside
the lines or markings delineating the parking stall. [Added 3-28-2016
by Ord. No. 16-01]
(a) When signs are erected giving notice, no person shall stop a vehicle in
any designated no stopping zone during the times set forth except to
comply with the directions of a traffic officer. This section shall not
apply to physicians on emergency calls or operators of emergency
vehicles during an emergency.
Sec. 74-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-211
1:451
Sec. 74-212. Accident reports. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall immediately, or
as soon as reasonably possible thereafter, file with the Police Department
a copy of the report required by W.S.A., § 346.70, if any. If the operator
is unable to make a report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of
the accident capable of making such report shall comply with this section.
Such reports shall be subject to the provisions and limitations in W.S.A.,
§§ 346.70(4)(f) and 346.73.
Sec. 74-213. Unattended vehicles. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
(b) There shall be no stopping at any time on Main Street, south side, from
the east line of Center Street, 133 feet east.
(a) Prohibited. No person shall leave an automobile unattended on any
street, parking lot, public ground or alley while the motor is running.
No person shall permit a motor vehicle in his or her custody to stand or
remain unattended upon any street, alley or public place in the City
without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key
and taking it with him or her.
(b) Officer to remove key. Whenever any police officer finds any motor
vehicle standing in violation of the provisions in Subsection (a), the
officer shall remove the key and deliver the same to the Police
Department. Upon so doing, the officer shall attach to the vehicle a
notice that the keys will be returned upon presentation of the notice
and proof of ownership of the vehicle.
(c) Motor vehicles weighing more than 6,000 pounds or exceeding 23 feet.
(1) No person shall park for any period of time leave standing for any
period of time any motor vehicle weighing more than 6,000 pounds
or exceeding 23 feet in length on any public street in a residentially
zoned district, public parking lot or property.
(2) The operator or owner of any truck weighing more than 6,000
pounds or any truck tractor, motor bus, trailer or semitrailer
exceeding 23 feet shall not park the same on any street in the City
longer than 30 minutes, except for loading and unloading.
(3) In commercial and industrially zoned districts where such parking
is not otherwise prohibited or restricted, this section shall not
prohibit any owner or operator of any of the above mentioned
vehicles from parking such vehicles for longer than 30 minutes
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. A commercial vehicle
in excess of 23 feet in length may be parked on any public street in
any district for a temporary period of time necessary to make a
pickup or delivery from a building fronting on that street between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., provided further that such
pickup or delivery shall commence immediately upon parking the
Sec. 74-211 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-213
1:452
Sec. 74-214. Abandoned vehicles. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
vehicle and continue without interruption until completed and in no
circumstance shall such vehicle park on any public street in excess
of 30 minutes.
(a) Abandonment. No person shall leave unattended any motor vehicle,
trailer, semitrailer or mobile home on any public street or highway, or
public or private property, for such time and under such circumstance,
as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned.
When any such vehicle has been left unattended on any City street or
highway, or on any public or private property, within the City without
the permission of the owner for more than 48 hours, the vehicle is
deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance.
(b) Removal and impoundment. Any vehicle in violation of this section shall
be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of under Subsection
(c), except if the Chief of Police or his representative determines the
cost of towing and storage charges for the impoundment would exceed
the value of the vehicle, the vehicle may be junked by the City prior to
the expiration of the impoundment period upon determination by the
Chief of Police or his representative that the vehicle is not wanted for
evidence or other reason.
(c) Disposal of abandoned vehicles.
(1) Value more than $100.
a. If the Police Chief or his representative determines that the
value of the abandoned vehicle exceeds $100, he or she shall
notify the owner and lienholders of record by certified mail
that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned and impounded
by the City and may be reclaimed within 15 days upon payment
of accrued towing, storage and notice charges, and if not so
reclaimed, shall be sold.
b. If an abandoned vehicle determined to exceed $100 in value is
not reclaimed within the period and under the conditions
provided above, it may be sold by sealed bid at auction, or, if no
satisfactory bid is received, at private sale.
c. After deducting the expense of impoundment and sale, the
balance of the proceeds, if any, shall be paid into the City
treasury.
(2) Value less than $100. Any abandoned vehicle which is determined
by the Chief of Police or his or her representative to have a value of
less than $100 may be disposed of by direct sale by a licensed
salvage dealer upon determination that the vehicle is not reported
stolen.
Sec. 74-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-214
1:453
Sec. 74-215. Driving onto lake. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
No person shall remove, without proper authority, any rope, cable or
barricade of any description which has been placed across any entrance to
Geneva Lake. No person shall drive a motor driven vehicle in such a manner
as to by pass or circumvent any barricade across an entrance to Geneva
Lake when such barricade has been so placed by proper authorities for the
purpose of warning drivers not to enter the frozen surface of Geneva Lake.
Sec. 74-216. Liquor in vehicles. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
Sec. 74-217. Display of power prohibited. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1,
11-12-2007]
No person shall make unnecessary and annoying noises with a motor
vehicle by squealing tires, excessive acceleration of engine or by emitting
unnecessary and loud muffler noises.
Sec. 74-218. Official traffic signs and signals. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1,
11-12-2007]
(d) Owner responsible for impoundment and sale costs. The owner of any
abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is responsible for the
abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle.
Costs not recovered for the sale of the vehicle may be recovered by a
civil action by the City against the owner.
(e) Notice of sale or disposition. Within five days after the sale or disposal
of a vehicle as provided in Subsection (c)(1) or (2), the Chief of Police or
his representative shall advise the state Department of Transportation,
Division of Motor Vehicles, of such sale or disposition on a form
supplied by the Division. A copy of such form shall also be given to the
purchaser of the vehicle and a copy shall be retained by the City.
(a) No underage person, unaccompanied by parent, guardian or spouse,
may possess, transport or have under his or her control, any alcohol
beverage in any motor vehicle, unless such person is employed by an
alcohol beverage licensee and such possession is during regular
working hours and in the course of his or her employment.
(b) No person shall have in his possession an open container containing an
alcohol beverage in a motor vehicle on a public street, alley or highway
within the City.
(a) Street Superintendent to erect. The Street Superintendent shall
procure, erect and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals
and markings conforming to the Uniform Traffic Control Devices
Manual giving such notice of the provisions of this chapter as required
by state law. Signs shall be erected in such locations and manner as the
Street Superintendent shall determine will best affect the purposes of
Sec. 74-214 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-218
1:454
Sec. 74-219. Streets closed to travel. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1,
11-12-2007]
Sec. 74-220. Towing charges for vehicles moved by City. [Ord. No.
07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
The owner of any abandoned vehicle or vehicle that is authorized to be
moved by the Police Department shall, prior to having the possession of
such vehicle returned to him, pay a reasonable towing charge as
determined by the towing operator and shall also pay to the City the outside
parking fee for each day such vehicle is in the City operated parking
facilities.
Sec. 74-221. Parking meters. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007; Ord.
No. 08-03, § 1, 3-10-2008; amended 11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-14;
5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-15; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-09; 7-9-2012
by Ord. No. 12-13; 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-09; 12-22-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-11; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 15-02]
this chapter and give adequate warning to users of the street or
highway.
(b) Removal of unofficial signs and signals. The Street Superintendent shall
have the authority granted by W.S.A., § 349.09, and is directed to order
the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device placed, maintained or
displayed in violation of this chapter or W.S.A., § 346.41. Any charge
imposed on a premises for removal of an illegal sign, signal or device
shall be reported to the council at its next regular meeting for review
and certification.
(a) Whenever any street, highway or alley is impassible or unsafe for travel
during the construction or repair of any such street, highway or alley,
and until it is ready for traffic, the authorities in charge of the
maintenance or construction thereof shall apply to the Street
Superintendent for permission to close the same by maintaining
barriers at each end of the closed portion. The barriers shall be of such
material and construction and so placed as to indicate that the
thoroughfare is closed and shall be lighted at night.
(b) No unauthorized person shall remove, take down, alter the position of,
destroy, pass over or beyond any barrier so erected or travel with any
vehicle upon any portion of a thoroughfare closed by barriers as
provided in this section, or travel in any manner upon the materials
placed thereon as part of the repair or construction work or shall deface
any materials so placed. In addition to the penalty provided by this
chapter, any violator of this section shall be liable for all damages done
to the highway, street or other thoroughfare or material thereon.
(a) Vehicle defined. "Vehicle," as used in this section, shall mean any device
in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported
upon a highway.
Sec. 74-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-221
1:455
(b) Parking station defined. "Parking stations" are the machines installed
throughout the City for the purpose of accepting payment at numbered
stalls throughout the City.
(c) Parking system defined. The "parking system" is hereby defined as the
parking stations, parking spaces as numbered, and signage for each
space.
(d) Parking station zones are ordained for the following areas and shall be
limited to the time designated as follows:
(1) Ten-minute parking station zones for library material pickup and
dropoff and authorized library use. [Amended 7-10-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-11]
Main Street, 900 block, south side, parking space 215, west of
Wrigley Drive, Library Park area as designated by posted signage
shall be used for library book pickup and dropoff and authorized
library use only. No deposit in the parking station shall be required
for this stall. Anyone violating the restrictions established herein
for this space shall be charged a fine established by resolution of
the City Council from time to time.
(2) Five-hour parking station zones. [Amended 4-25-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-03; 11-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-19]
Alley south of Main Street parking lot (five meters), north side
Baker Street, 500 block, north side
Baker Street, 500 block, south side from alley west
Broad Street, 100, 200, 400 and 500 blocks, both sides, excepting
therefrom Broad Street, west side, from north curb of alley
between Main Street and Geneva Street to a point 74 feet north
Broad Street, 300 block, both sides
Center Street, both sides, from Wisconsin Street to Wrigley Drive
Center Street municipal parking lot
City-owned parking lot in the north one-half of Block 27, original
plat of the City (700 block Geneva Street, south side)
Cook Street, both sides, from Geneva Street south to Wrigley
Drive
Cook Street, municipal parking lot
Geneva Street, both sides, from Cook Street east to Sage Street
Main Street, both sides, from the Mill Race Bridge west to Cook
Street
Main Street, south side, from Cook Street west to Maxwell Street
Newport West LLC parking lot
South Lake Shore Drive, 200 block, west side
Sec. 74-221 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-221
1:456
South Lake Shore Drive, 300 block, west side
Wisconsin Street, both sides, from Broad Street to Center Street
Wrigley Drive, both sides, from Main Street easterly to Broad
Street
Wrigley Drive, southeasterly side, next to boat launch ramp (10
parking spaces numbered 74 through 83 inclusive of the Center
Street parking lot)
(3) Ten-hour parking station zones. [Added 5-22-2017 by Ord. No.
17-08]
227 South Shore Drive Parking Lot I
(e) Hours. The limited parking in the parking station zones shall apply from
9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday. [Amended 4-25-2016
by Ord. No. 16-03]
(1) Exceptions. Each year from November 15 until the end of February
of the following year, free parking shall be established for all
parking station zones except in the following zones where parking
is free all year long:
a. Sage Street Municipal Parking Lot D.
b. Dunn Field Parking Lot E.
(f) Maintenance of parking system. Persons designated by the Mayor and
City Council shall provide for installation of parking stations and
signage, including curb and street marking lines, and shall maintain
such stations, spaces, and signage in good condition. Signage shall be
placed upon the curb next to individual parking spaces. Parking
stations, erected conveniently throughout the downtown area shall
display a signage or receipt showing legal parking upon deposit of
proper coin, currency or credit card as indicated by the instructions on
such parking stations. The receipt dispensed by the parking station
shall indicate expiration of the parking period.
(g) Deposit of payment. Parking stations only accept quarters, one-dollar
coins, one-dollar bills, and five-dollar bills and Visa, Mastercard, and
Discover credit cards for posted parking spaces. Parking space fees
shall be in an amount as established by resolution of the Common
Council from time to time. The parking of a vehicle beyond the period of
time fixed by this section where any parking space is located and
designated shall be a violation of this section. No person shall permit
any such vehicle registered in his or her name to be parked overtime or
beyond the period of time described above. Only one vehicle shall be
parked in any one parking meter space, except for motorcycles where
three motorcycles are permitted in each space.
(h) Authorized City parking stickers. Parking sticker fees may be modified
by the Common Council from time to time. Parking stickers are
Sec. 74-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-221
1:457
nontransferable and may become invalid if the holder loses his or her
resident status by moving out of the City of Lake Geneva or Walworth
County. It shall be a violation of this subsection to park in an unpaid
metered stall with an expired parking sticker, park in an unpaid meter
stall with a parking sticker not registered to the designated vehicle,
park in an unpaid meter stall with an altered parking sticker, or park in
an unpaid meter stall with the parking sticker not properly displayed,
i.e., displayed on the wrong side of the windshield, taped to the
windshield, or otherwise not displayed as noted on any disclaimers
provided when the sticker is issued. Forfeiture for violations of this
section shall be determined by resolution by the City Council from time
to time. [Amended 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-04; 5-22-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-09; 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 17-11; 2-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-02]
(1) Business in the City of Lake Geneva. Any business owner holding a
valid business license to operate in the City limits of Lake Geneva
may purchase for a two-year period up to two City parking stickers.
This sticker allows parking for up to two consecutive hours per day
without depositing payment in the parking station. This sticker also
allows for up to 10 consecutive hours per day (9:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.) in the 227 South Shore Drive Parking Lot I. The fee and the
requirements for this sticker shall be established from time to time
by resolution of the City Council.
(2) Nonresident property owner. Any person who owns a second home
in the City of Lake Geneva with a vehicle registered to that person
shall be eligible for a City parking sticker. This sticker allows
parking for up to two consecutive hours per day without depositing
payment in the parking station. This sticker also allows for up to 10
consecutive hours per day (9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.) in the 227 South
Shore Drive Parking Lot I. This sticker renews every evennumbered
year. The fee and the requirements for this sticker shall
be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(3) Parking lot pass. A parking lot pass is valid at all municipal parking
lots, excluding Newport Lot and North Shore Lot, from 9:00 a.m.
until 7:00 p.m., seven days a week. Parking is available on a firstcome-
first-served basis, and the placard holder may be forced to
park in a space located elsewhere and deposit the required
payment if there are no available spaces in the lots described in
this Subsection (3). Parking availability is not guaranteed. The fee
and the requirements for this placard shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the City Council. Only 40 placards are
issued annually and are provided on a first-come first-served basis.
(4) Resident. Any person who is a resident homeowner or resident
tenant eligible to vote in the City of Lake Geneva with a vehicle
registered to that person at his/her City address shall be eligible for
this type of parking sticker. This sticker allows parking for up to
two consecutive hours per day without depositing payment. This
Sec. 74-221 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-221
1:458
sticker also allows for up to 10 consecutive hours per day (9:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m.) in the 227 South Shore Drive Parking Lot I.
This sticker renews every even-numbered year. The fee and the
requirements for this sticker shall be established from time to time
by resolution of the City Council.
(5) Walworth County. Any resident of Walworth County with a vehicle
registered to that person at his/her Walworth County address may
purchase a City parking sticker which will allow parking for up to
two consecutive hours per day within the City without depositing
payment. This sticker also allows for up to 10 consecutive hours per
day (9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.) in the 227 South Shore Drive Parking
Lot I. This sticker renews every even-numbered year. The fee and
the requirements for this sticker shall be as established by
resolution of the City Council.
(i) Damage to parking station. No person shall deface, injure, tamper with,
open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking
station.
(j) Complaint by traffic officers. Authorized traffic officers or parking
personnel shall take the parking space number and the state vehicle tag
number of all vehicles violating the provisions of this section and
violations of a no parking zone, parking near a fire hydrant, for
unauthorized vehicle parking in a handicap zone, for backing into a
parking stall and for parking more than three motorcycles in a parking
stall and make complaint therefore in the appropriate department or
court for the City. Traffic officers or meter persons shall have the
authority to issue citations for all parking related violations.
(k) Penalties. Any person who shall violate the time limits established in
this section or fail to make payment as required by Subsection (e) may
stipulate to his guilt or enter a plea of nolo contendere and pay a
forfeiture and any penalties at a time and in an amount as established
by resolution of the Common Council. Such person shall also pay any
applicable collection charges if submitted to an agency for collection.
(l) Challenges to Parking Citations. [Added 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
19-03]
(1) Parking citations shall not be withdrawn by officers or supervisors
except for extraordinary circumstances where it is apparent the
parking citation was issued in error.
(2) Parking citations shall only be excused by the Parking Manager, the
Comptroller, or the City Administrator.
(3) Parking Department clerks or other Parking Department support
services staff located at the front counter in City Hall will provide
general information to citizens as to the parking regulations in the
City of Lake Geneva. The Parking Department Manager, the
Sec. 74-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-221
1:459
Sec. 74-222. Snowmobiles. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
Sec. 74-223. Bicycles. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
Comptroller or City Administrator should be contacted to address
unusual complaints or for more detailed explanations, if required.
(4) Citizens being informed of the general information and wishing to
further challenge the parking citation shall be referred to the
Parking Manager or, in their absence, the Comptroller or City
Administrator.
a. Any challenge to the parking citation shall be made to the
Parking Manager within 30 days of the citation's issuance.
b. If the challenge is denied, and the citizen still wishes to contest
the parking citation, the citizen must notify the Parking
Department of their desire to appeal the parking citation
within 10 days of the denial, and a municipal ordinance citation
with an appropriate court date to appear in Municipal Court
will be issued to the citizen.
c. Failure to comply with the time deadlines set forth above shall
preclude any further appeal of the parking citation.
(a) State statutes adopted. The statutory provisions describing and
defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles in W.S.A., ch. 350,
including all subsequent revisions and additions thereto, are hereby
adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute
incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this
section. Each section of the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by this section
shall bear the same number in this chapter as it has in the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(b) Public parks. No person shall operate a snowmobile in the public parks
or public grounds within the City.
(c) Trespass. No person shall operate a snowmobile on the property of
another without the express or implied consent of the owner or
occupant.
(d) Hours limited. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the City
between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(a) Registration.
(1) Required. No City resident shall operate a bicycle upon any public
street, highway, roadway or alley within the City unless such
bicycle is properly registered and has attached to it a proper
registration device.
(2) Fee schedule: two-dollar registration fee.
Sec. 74-221 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-223
1:460
Sec. 74-224. Skitching. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
No person shall cling to or be towed by a motor vehicle on any public
roadway in the City except as otherwise authorized by law.
Sec. 74-225. Required use of red flashing lights for school buses.
[Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 11-12-2007]
The operator of a school bus equipped with flashing red lights as specified
in W.S.A., § 347.25(2), as amended from time to time, shall actuate such
lights in residential and business districts of the City when pupils or other
authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at a location at which
there are no traffic signals and such persons must cross the street or
highway before being loaded or after being unloaded. The above-described
lights shall be actuated at least 100 feet before stopping to load or unload
such pupils or other authorized passengers and shall not be extinguished
(3) Term. The registration shall be good for the life of the bicycle or
until ownership changes, at which time it must be reregistered.
(b) Inspection. The Police Department shall cause to be inspected each
bicycle presented for registration and may refuse to register any
bicycle found to be in unsafe mechanical condition or not equipped as
required.
(c) Operation without tags or in unsafe manner. No person shall operate
any bicycle not properly registered or carrying a proper identification
tag upon any street, highway, roadway or alley in the City, or operate
any bicycle in an unsafe manner or in violation of any state law.
(d) Change of ownership. Within 10 days after any bicycle registered
hereunder has changed ownership or been permanently dismantled and
taken out of operation, such information shall be reported to the Police
Department by the person in whose name the bicycle has been
registered.
(e) Warning device. No bicycle shall be operated on City streets unless
equipped with an audible signal.
(f) Parking. No person shall leave or park a bicycle at such a place or in
such a way as to create a hazard to pedestrians, automobile operators
or anyone else.
(g) Riding on sidewalks, Riviera and tennis courts prohibited. No person
shall ride a bicycle, skate board, roller skates or any similar device upon
a sidewalk within the business district; Broad Street from Geneva
Street to Wrigley Drive; Main Street from Cook Street to Mill Street;
Center Street from Geneva Street to Wrigley Drive; Wrigley Drive from
Main Street to Baker Street; or the complete area surrounding the
Riviera Ballroom; being sidewalks; lawns and piers; or the tennis courts
located at Badger High School; East View School and Maple Park.
Sec. 74-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-225
1:461
until loading or unloading is completed and persons who must cross the
highway are safely across.
Sec. 74-226. Loading and unloading zones. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1,
11-12-2007]
Sec. 74-227. Transporting persons in cargo areas of motor trucks
prohibited. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
(a) No vehicle shall be parked, stopped or left standing in any zone
designated during the time set forth in the following schedules:
[Amended 3-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-01]
Broad Street, 500 block
Dodge Street, south side, from the curbline of Madison Street to Cook
Street, Monday through Friday on school days from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Madison Street, east side, from the alley south of Dodge Street to
Wisconsin Street, Monday through Friday on school days from 8:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Riviera Service Drive, at northwest corner of Riveria Building, limit 30
minutes
Wrigley Drive, south side, west of intersection of Center Street and
Wrigley Drive, first 10 stalls 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. (noon) Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays from May 20 through Labor Day each year and
area in front of Beach House
(b) Upon issuance of a City permit, a vehicle may be parked in a loading
and unloading zone for a period to exceed the normal time for loading
and unloading. Such permit shall be displayed in the front window of
the vehicle while it is parked.
(a) No person may operate upon a street, alley or highway, a motor truck
having a gross weight of 10,000 pounds or less, when any person is in
an open cargo areas of the motor truck.
(b) Subsection (a) does not apply to any of the following:
(1) A person operating a farm truck in conjunction with farm
operations.
(2) A person operating a motor truck in a parade sanctioned by a local
municipality.
(3) A person operating a motor truck for the purpose of transporting
licensed deer hunting during the authorized deer hunting season.
(4) A person riding in a cargo area engaged in necessary duties as an
employee.
Sec. 74-225 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-228
1:462
Sec. 74-228. Traffic control signal emergency preemption devices.
[Added 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-03]
Sec. 74-229. (Reserved)
(a) "Authorized emergency vehicle" means an authorized emergency
vehicle, as defined in W.S.A. § 340.01 (3) (a), (c), (g) or (i), owned by the
City of Lake Geneva or by another municipality or other agency that is
authorized by the City of Lake Geneva pursuant to Subsection (e) below.
(b) "Traffic control signal emergency preemption device" is a device,
located on or within a traffic control signal, that is designed to receive
an electronic, radio, light, or sound transmission from an approaching
vehicle that alters the normal sequence of the traffic control signal to
provide or maintain a green signal for the vehicle to proceed through
the intersection.
(c) "Transmitter" in this section means a device that emits a signal for the
purpose of activating a traffic control signal emergency preemption
device.
(d) Only authorized emergency vehicles may operate within the City of
Lake Geneva with a transmitter or in which a transmitter is located. No
operator of an authorized vehicle may use a transmitter except when
responding to an emergency call, when pursuing an actual or suspected
violator of the law, or when responding to, but not when returning from,
a fire alarm, except that transmitter may be activated by authorized
personnel for periodic testing, maintenance or repair of the transmitter
or traffic control signal emergency preemption device. Unless
authorized by the City of Lake Geneva as provided herein or in
Subsection (e) below, any other use of a transmitter is prohibited. This
subsection does not apply to a motor carrier or person in the business of
selling transmitters to authorized users who transports a transmitter in
original, unopened packaging or in an inoperative condition in an
enclosed storage compartment of the vehicle.
(e) The use of a transmitter by authorized emergency vehicles not owned
by the city of Lake Geneva is allowed only if specifically authorized by
the City of Lake Geneva pursuant to the following procedure: A request
by an outside agency for authorization to utilize a transmitter should be
submitted in writing to the City Administrator. Submittal shall also
include a copy of the requesting agency's certificate of insurance and
verification that emergency vehicle operators have completed a
comprehensive training program. An application for use of the
transmitter within the City of Lake Geneva shall be reviewed by a
committee consisting of the Fire Chief, Police Chief, and the Director of
Public Works, or their designees. Signing of appropriate contracts may
be required. The decision of the committee shall be final and may be
revoked at any time.
Sec. 74-228 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-230
1:463
Sec. 74-230. Penalty. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a forfeiture
and penalty assessment if required by W.S.A., § 165.87, a jail assessment if
required by W.S.A., § 53.46(1), plus any applicable fees prescribed in W.S.A.,
§ 814.
Sec. 74-231. Shortcut through business property. [Ord. No. 07-08,
§ 1, 11-12-2007]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any vehicle, so as to
pass over the parking lot or driveway used in the operation of any business
property, thereby avoiding traveling through an intersection over the usual
lanes of traffic.
Sec. 74-232. Violation; penalty. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
No person who has been convicted of a violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be issued a license or permit by the City of Lake Geneva,
Wisconsin, except a dog license, until the forfeiture imposed for such
violation and any penalty assessment, court costs and fees or surcharge is
paid.
Sec. 74-233. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-12-2007]
(1) State forfeiture statutes. Any forfeiture for violation of Section 74-200
shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for violation of
the statutes adopted by reference, including any variations or increases
for subsequent offenses.
(2) Local regulations. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the
penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Section
1-12 of this Municipal Code.
(3) Parking regulations. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the
penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be as provide in Section 1-12
of this Municipal Code.
(4) Parking violations.
a. W.S.A., § 346.51(1), Improper parking on/off roadway.
b. W.S.A., § 346.52(1), Stopping/standing in prohibited areas.
c. W.S.A., § 346.52(2), Second conviction.
(a) Enforcement procedure. This chapter shall be enforced according to
W.S.A., §§ 23.33, 66.12, 345.11—345.61, 350.17, and ch. 800.
(b) Deposit.
(1) Any person arrested for a violation of this chapter may make a
deposit of money as directed by the arresting officer at the police
Sec. 74-230 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-233
1:464
Sec. 74-234. Limited time parking zones. [Ord. No. 07-08, § 1,
11-12-2007; amended 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 08-14; 7-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-21; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-09; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
15-02; 3-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-01]
station, the Clerk of Court's office or by mailing the deposit to such
places. The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit
shall notify the arrested person, orally or, in writing, that:
a. If the person makes a deposit for a violation of a traffic
regulation, the person need not appear in court at the time
fixed in the citation and the person will be deemed to have
tendered plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture and
penalty assessment if required by W.S.A., § 165.87, a jail
assessment if required by W.S.A., § 53.46(1), plus any
applicable fees prescribed in W.S.A., § 814, not to exceed the
amount of the deposit that the court may accept as provided in
W.S.A., § 345.37.
b. If the person makes a deposit for a violation of a traffic
regulation, the person need not appear in court at the time
fixed in the citation and the person will be deemed to have
tendered plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture and
penalty assessment if required by W.S.A., § 165.87, a jail
assessment if required by W.S.A., § 53.46(1), plus any
applicable fees prescribed in W.S.A., § 814, not to exceed the
amount of the deposit that the court may accept as provided in
W.S.A., § 345.37.
(2) The amount of the deposit shall be determined in accordance with
the deposit schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial
Conference and shall include the penalty assessment established
under W.S.A., § 165.87, a jail assessment if required by W.S.A.,
§ 53.46(1), and costs. If a deposit schedule has not been
established, the arresting officer shall require the alleged offender
to deposit the forfeiture established by the Chief of Police, which
shall include the, penalty assessment established under W.S.A.,
§ 165.87. Deposits for nonmoving violations shall not include the
penalty assessment.
(3) The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall issue
the arrested person a receipt therefore as required by W.S.A.,
§ 345.26(3)(b).
(c) Petition to reopen judgment. The arresting officer or the person
receiving the deposit shall issue the arrested person a receipt therefor
as required by W.S.A., § 345.26(3)(b).
(a) Maximum two-hour parking, Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
Sec. 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-234
1:465
Grove Street, north side, from the west curbline of Sage Street to the
east curbline of Center Street, a distance of 346 feet
(b) Maximum one-hour parking, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.:
Madison Street, east side, from the south curbline of Wisconsin Street
to Geneva Street, 5 stalls
(c) Maximum one-hour parking, Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.:
Cook Street, west side, from the south curbline of Wisconsin Street to
Geneva Street, 5 stalls
Sec. 74-234 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 74-234
1:466
Chapter 78
UTILITIES
Sec. 74-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 74-234
1:467

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 78-1. Composition and powers. [Ord. No. 02-34, § I, 1-14-2002;
Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The Utility Commission shall be in charge of the City water and sewer
utilities and shall have all the powers and duties as set forth below in
Section 78-8 of the Municipal Code of the City of Lake Geneva. There shall
be seven members on the Utility Commission. The membership shall include
the Mayor, two Aldermen, the City Administrator, and three citizens.
Sec. 78-2. Officers. [Ord. No. 02-34, § I, 1-14-2002; Ord. No. 08-02,
3-10-2008; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The Commission shall choose a president and secretary from among its
ranks.
Sec. 78-3. Appointment. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The members shall be appointed to the Utility Commission by the Mayor.
The appointments shall be subject to approval by the Common Council.
Sec. 78-4. Term. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-04]
The citizen members shall each serve three-year terms. The terms of the
citizen members shall be staggered so as to have one member's term
expire each year. The Mayor, Aldermen, and the City Administrator shall
serve conterminously with their respective terms/appointments as Mayor,
Aldermen, and City Administrator.
Sec. 78-5. Vacancy. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 17-04]
Any vacancy shall be filled through the appointment procedures described
above for the remainder of the term.
Sec. 78-6. Salary. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 17-04]
Members of the Utility Commission shall serve without a stipend.
Sec. 78-7. Quorum. [Ord. No. 08-02, 3-10-2008; amended 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 17-04]
A majority of the membership of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business.
Sec. 78-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-8
1:469
Sec. 78-8. Committee powers and duties. [Ord. No. 08-02,
3-10-2008; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The Utility Commission shall have the duties and powers as set forth in
W.S.A. § 66.0805, including those described below:
(1) Meeting. The Utility Commission shall meet at least quarterly. The
Commission may meet as necessary, or as called by the President or as
called by a majority of the Commission. The City Clerk shall create and
post all agendas for this committee.
(2) Duties. The Utility Commission shall have the entire charge,
management and direction of the water and sewer utilities of the City.
The duties of the Utility Commission shall include, but shall not be
limited to:
a. Recommending utility ordinance amendments;
b. Refining development plans;
c. Reviewing and making recommendations on proposed
improvements, additions, extensions, or changes to the facilities;
d. Discussing issues of safety, function, maintenance needs, and
policy;
e. Planning for the effectuation of plant and infrastructure
improvements;
f. Other planning the Commission deems necessary and essential for
the improvement of the plant; and
g. Establishing water and sewer rates as prescribed by state statutes
and administrative rules.
(3) Employees. The Commission may employ a manager or superintendent
of utilities and may fix the compensation to be paid. The City Engineer
may be engaged by the Commission. The Commission may employ other
necessary employees and fix the compensation.
(4) Rules. The Commission shall make necessary rules to govern its own
proceedings and the government of the Utility Department.
(5) Construction work. The Commission shall immediately supervise any
utility construction work. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
construction exceeding the sum of $250,000 shall be reviewed by the
Public Works Committee and must be approved by the City Council. No
sewer and water extensions beyond City limits are permitted unless
specifically authorized by the City Council.
(6) Utility receipts shall be paid to a bonded cashier appointed by the
Utility Commission and turned over to the City Treasurer monthly.
Departmental expenditures shall be audited by the Utility Commission
Sec. 78-8 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-8
1:470
Sec. 78-9. through Sec. 78-30. (Reserved)
and, if approved by the President and Secretary of the Utility
Commission, shall be paid by the Comptroller for the City.
Sec. 78-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-9
1:471

ARTICLE II
WATER SERVICE
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 78-31. PSC rules adopted. [Code 1992, § 13.02; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The following rules issued by the Public Service Commission and on file in
the office of the Director of Utilities are adopted by reference in this section
as though fully set forth in this section. Whenever any provision of this Code
shall conflict with any PSC rule adopted by reference in this section, such
conflict shall be resolved in favor of the PSC rule.
Schedule No. Title
F-1 Public fire protection service
Upf-1 Private fire protection service - unmetered
Mg-1 General service - metered
Am-1 Additional meter reading charges
OC-1 Other charges
Mpa-1 Public service
Ug-1 General water service - unmetered
Sg-1 Seasonal service
BW-1 Bulk water
R-1 Reconnection charge
Cx-1 Water lateral installation charge
X-1 Water utility operation rules
X-2 Water main extension rule
X-3 Water main installations in platted subdivisions
Sec. 78-32. State code adopted. [Code 1992, § 13.46(7); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The City adopts by reference the state plumbing code, Chs. SPS 382
through 387, Wis. Adm. Code. This section does not supersede the state and
City plumbing codes but is supplementary to them.
Sec. 78-33. Operating valves and hydrants; breaking or tampering
with water meter seal. [Code 1992, § 13.39; amended 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-04]
No person other than an authorized employee of the Utility Commission
shall, without written authority, operate any valve within a stop box
controlling the flow of water to any premises or break or tamper with the
Sec. 78-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-33
1:473
seal of any water meter in service or open or operate any hydrant connected
with the distribution service or any valve thereon, except for purposes of
extinguishing fires, whether such hydrant is the property of the City or has
been placed by the owner for his own protection. No person shall wantonly
injure or impair the same. Only persons authorized by the Fire Chief for fire
purposes only and persons authorized by a proper City official are permitted
to use hydrant wrenches in the operation of hydrants connected with the
water supply of the utility. Permits for the use of hydrants apply only to such
hydrants as are designated in the permit for the particular use specified.
Sec. 78-34. Thawing frozen services. [Amended 3-13-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-04]
The provisions of § PSC 185.88, Wis. Adm. Code, are hereby incorporated
herein by reference.
Sec. 78-35. through Sec. 78-50. (Reserved)
(1) Thawing of a customer's lateral shall be at the utility's expense if:
a. The freeze-up is a direct result of a utility disconnect and the
disconnection occurs during a time when conditions are such that
freeze-up could reasonably be expected to occur; or
b. The customer's portion of lateral is electrically conductive and:
1. It is the first thaw for the customer at the location; and
2. The utility has not provided the customer with seasonal notice
of the corrective actions to be taken for a known condition.
(2) Lateral thawing shall be at the customer's expense if:
a. The customer's lateral is not electrically conductive and the freezeup
is not a direct result of a utility disconnect as set forth in sub.
(1)(a); or
b. The customer neglected to provide or maintain proper insulation or
protection for the lateral according to standard accepted practice,
or specific utility instructions on, for example, the required depth of
burial needed to prevent freezing; or
c. The utility advises the customer of the corrective measures to be
taken and the customer does not follow the utility's advice. (See
§ PSC 185.35 (7), Wis. Adm. Code, for bill adjustment where a
utility requests a customer to let water flow to prevent freezing); or
d. If the utility disconnects for a dangerous condition.
Sec. 78-33 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-35
1:474
DIVISION 2
(RESERVED)
Sec. 78-51. through Sec. 78-65. (Reserved)
Sec. 78-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-51
1:475

DIVISION 3
METERS
Sec. 78-66. Installation. [Code 1992, §§ 13.14, 13.16; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Sec. 78-67. Water passing through to be paid for. [Code 1992,
§ 13.17; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
All water which has passed through the meter shall be paid for. If it is
believed that the meter is registering incorrectly or if there is a sound
of running water, the consumer shall notify the office of the Utility
Commission, and a qualified employee will be sent to examine the service
and advise the consumer without a charge therefor.
Sec. 78-68. Relocation. [Code 1992, § 13.18; amended 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-04]
Where a property owner requests a change in the location of the meter,
such meter may be relocated as directed by the Utility Commission at the
expense of the property owner.
Sec. 78-69. Testing — generally. [Code 1992, § 13.19; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
All new meters purchased and all old meters which have been repaired or
removed from service for any cause shall be tested and adjusted to show
not more than a two-percent error before again being placed in service. All
(a) Meters will be furnished and placed by the Utility Commission. All
meters shall be so located that they shall be safeguarded from
obstructions and frost and to allow easy access thereto for reading and
inspection. The location shall be designated by proper employees of the
Utility Commission. No bypass or other connection between the meter
and the main shall be maintained, unless specifically authorized by the
Utility Commission.
(b) In setting meters, all connections shall be made according to the rules
and regulations of the Utility Commission. Water lines from outside the
building to the meter shall be a minimum of one inch in diameter and
free of any soldered joints. Meter horn or setters shall be required in
installation of all meters up to and including one inch. Shutoff valves
shall be installed before and after the meter setter. A sealed bypass
shall be required on all meters over one inch in size.
(c) Where a service is to be metered and there is no basement, or where it
is impossible to properly set a meter in the consumer's basement, the
Utility Commission will provide at the consumer's expense the proper
frostproof box of an approved design to be located outside the
consumer's building at a cost of labor, material and expense plus 10% to
cover overhead charges.
Sec. 78-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-69
1:477
meters shall be tested at least once every three years. A complete record
shall be kept of each meter, noting all repairs and inspections made and the
results of each test.
Sec. 78-70. Same — accuracy. [Code 1992, § 13.21; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The Utility Commission shall make a test of the accuracy of any water meter
not greater than two inches in size upon the written request of a consumer
filed at the office of the Utility Commission, provided the consumer does not
request such test more frequently than once in 12 months. Tests shall only
be made more frequently upon order of the state Public Service Commission
or at the expense of the consumer when the meter is within the tolerance
of 2%. Meters greater than two inches in size will be tested at the instance
and direction of the Utility Commission, but not less often than once every
two calendar years. All tests are to be made in conformity with the rules
provided by the Public Service Commission.
Sec. 78-71. Sealing. [Code 1992, § 13.20; amended 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-04]
All water meters while in service shall be kept under seal affixed by an
authorized employee or officer of the Utility Commission. The person
responsible for water bills for water supplied through a meter whose seal
has been tampered with or broken shall be deemed prima facie guilty of the
offense.
Sec. 78-72. Reading upon vacation of premises. [Code 1992,
§ 13.30; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Sec. 78-73. Remote register meters: installation. [Code 1992,
§ 13.45; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
(a) When premises are to be vacated, the Utility Commission shall be
notified in writing at once so that the meter may be read and removed if
necessary, and the water supply shut off at the curb box. The owner of
the premises shall be liable for damage to any property belonging to the
City by reason of failure to notify the Commission of the vacancy. A
change of tenants in any unit of service within any quarterly meter
reading period will not be construed as a vacancy, and the entire billing
for the period will be submitted to the owner. Any adjusting by way of
apportioning the amount of the bill between the outgoing and incoming
tenants shall be made by the owner.
(b) Premises which are entirely vacant, the service to which has been cut
off at the curb box by the Utility Commission, shall be considered
permanently vacant.
(a) Installation costs. Remote register or touch pad water meter
attachments will be installed by the Utility Commission. The costs shall
be borne by the utility.
Sec. 78-69 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-73
1:478
Sec. 78-74. through Sec. 78-90. (Reserved)
(b) Determination of priority of installations. The Utility Commission shall
determine the priority of such installations for the purpose of efficiency
as follows:
(1) All new construction.
(2) Presently difficult place to read.
(3) All other installations desirable for the benefit of the utility.
(4) Residences where occupants habitually or necessarily are absent.
(c) Location. The location of the remote register meter is to be determined
by the utility.
(d) Compliance with section. Each owner of any building constructed
hereafter which is or is required to be served by a public water utility
shall comply with the provisions of this section. Prior to final approval of
construction by the Building Inspector and issuance of any certificate of
completion or remodeling, the provisions of this section shall be
complied with.
(e) Installation of conduit by owner. Each owner of premises to whom this
section applies shall install or cause to be installed a conduit of at least
one-half-inch diameter from the present water meter if such is installed
upon the premises or from the area where a water meter would be
installed to the exterior of the building where gas meters are located or
to be located or where the utility designates. The requirements of this
section shall also apply to owners who remodel existing structures
when such remodeling takes place in an area as to permit installation of
the conduit as a part of the remodeling project. This determination shall
be made by the Building Inspector.
(f) Installation to be determined by Utility Commission. Owners of existing
structures shall permit installation as determined by representatives of
the Utility Commission.
Sec. 78-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-74
1:479

DIVISION 4
BILLING
Sec. 78-91. Quarterly rendering; penalty for unpaid bills. [Code
1992, § 13.31; Ord. No. 01-32, § I, 11-26-2001; amended 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 17-04]
All bills shall be rendered quarterly to the premises described in a clear
and definite manner, by house number when possible. All bills, except those
for special readings or special purposes, shall be dated on the last day of
the quarter in which such service is rendered, at the net rate. To each
bill remaining unpaid 20 days after the date of such bill, a penalty of 1%
per month shall be added, and the penalty shall be collectible in the same
manner as the original charge. When the 20th of the month falls on a legal
holiday or Sunday, the penalty rule shall apply on the next business day.
Sec. 78-92. Discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bill. [Code
1992, § 13.32; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Service to premises for which bills for service are not paid by 12:00 noon
20 days from the date of the bill will be discontinued and will not be turned
on again until the bill, including the penalty, plus a fee for turning the water
off and on, has been paid. If a bill for service remains unpaid at 12:00 noon
15 days from the date, the owner of the property shall be notified by mail at
his last known address that water will be turned off for nonpayment on the
date named.
Sec. 78-93. Estimated readings. [Code 1992, § 13.33; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Where meter readings cannot be obtained by reason of the premises being
closed, an estimated bill will be submitted, based upon the consumption for
the same quarter of the previous year or on such basis as may be deemed
fair and equitable by the Utility Commission. This estimated bill shall be
adjusted at the time the reading is obtainable in the course of the next
reading period. When billing for service is thus based on an estimate and
not on actual reading, each bill shall be accompanied by a notice from the
Utility Commission to that effect stating the reasons why actual readings
are not submitted. Where readings cannot be obtained because right of
access is unduly restricted, the rule in Section 78-182 shall apply.
Sec. 78-94. Computation of account when meter fails to register.
[Code 1992, § 13.34; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
If a meter fails to register, the account will be computed in the same manner
as provided in Section 78-93.
Sec. 78-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-95
1:481
Sec. 78-95. Charges for removing meter. [Code 1992, § 13.35;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
When a meter is removed from the premises for any reason other than
testing or repairing, or the premises is vacated, there will be a charge made
to the owner of the property to cover the cost of turning the water off and
on. Water will be turned off and on and meters installed and removed only
upon proper application signed by the owner of the property served, or his
authorized agent, and not upon the request of a tenant.
Sec. 78-96. Failure to receive bill. [Code 1992, § 13.36; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Failure to receive a bill does not relieve a customer of his obligation, nor
relieve him from payment of the penalty if such bill is not paid before the
close of business on the 20th of the month next following the quarter in
which service was rendered. Claims or complaints shall be made within five
days from the date of the bill.
Sec. 78-97. Deposits. [Code 1992, § 13.37; amended 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-04]
Where the utility is required to render services which in accordance with
the state statutes are not chargeable to the premises to which such services
are rendered or where for just or sufficient reason it is deemed advisable
not to do so, the utility may demand a deposit for a reasonable amount as
estimated by the utility to ensure prompt payment upon the date due. Such
deposit shall be uniform in all cases.
Sec. 78-98. Delinquent accounts. [Code 1992, § 13.38; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
On October 1 in each year the utility shall furnish to the City Clerk a list
of all lots or parcels of real estate to which water was furnished during the
preceding twelve-month period and the amount due for the same, including
the penalty, if the same has not been paid. The City Clerk shall spread
such delinquent bills upon the tax rolls in the manner provided in W.S.A.,
§ 66.069(1)(b), which section is hereby made a part of this division.
Sec. 78-99. through Sec. 78-115. (Reserved)
Sec. 78-95 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-99
1:482
DIVISION 5
CROSS CONNECTIONS
Sec. 78-116. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 13.46(1); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical connection or arrangement between
two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from
the City water system and the other water from a private source; water
of unknown or questionable safety; or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby
there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow
depending on the pressure differential between the two systems.
Sec. 78-117. Prohibited generally; exception. [Code 1992,
§ 13.46(2); Ord. No. 04-07, § I, 3-22-2004; amended 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-04]
Installation or replacement of cross-connections is prohibited.
Interconnections between the utility water supply system and another water
supply source (private; auxiliary; or emergency) is prohibited unless
approved and permitted by the Utility Commission and as well as the
Department of Natural Resources under § NR 811.07, Wis. Adm. Code.
Sec. 78-118. Inspections. [Code 1992, § 13.46(3); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The utility shall cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the
public water system where cross-connections with the public water system
are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based
on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the utility
and as approved by the state Department of Natural Resources.
Sec. 78-119. Right of entry. [Code 1992, § 13.46(4); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the utility shall have
the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property
served by a connection to the public water system of the City for crossconnections.
If entry is refused, such representative shall obtain a special
inspection warrant under W.S.A. § 66.0119. On request, the owner, lessee or
occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency
any pertinent information regarding the piping systems on such property.
Sec. 78-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-120
1:483
Sec. 78-120. Discontinuance — generally. [Code 1992, § 13.46(5);
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service to
any property wherein any connection in violation of this division exists, and
to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate
any danger of contamination of the public water system. Water service shall
be discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing
under W.S.A. Ch. 68, except as provided in Section 78-121. Water service
to such property shall not be restored until the cross-connection has been
eliminated in compliance with this division.
Sec. 78-121. Same — emergency. [Code 1992, § 13.46(6); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
If it is determined by the utility that a cross-connection or an emergency
endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action,
and a written finding to that effect is filed with the City Clerk and delivered
to the customer's premises, service may be immediately discontinued. The
customer shall have an opportunity for a hearing under Chapter 2 of this
Code within 10 days of such emergency discontinuance.
Sec. 78-122. Cross-connection control program. [Ord. No. 04-10,
§ I, 3-22-2004; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Pursuant to § NR 810.15, Wis. Adm. Code, the Utility Commission shall
develop and implement a cross-connection control program. The crossconnection
control program shall include at least the minimum
requirements of § NR 810.15(1)(a) through (f), Wis. Adm. Code. A record of
the cross-connection control program shall be kept current and available for
review by the public and the Department of Natural Resources.
Sec. 78-123. through Sec. 78-135. (Reserved)
Sec. 78-120 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-123
1:484
DIVISION 6
PRIVATE WELLS
Sec. 78-136. Purpose of division. [Code 1992, § 13.47(1); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The purpose of this division is to prevent unused and improperly
constructed wells from serving as a passage for contaminated surface or
near surface waters or other materials to reach the groundwater. These
wells shall be properly filled and sealed.
Sec. 78-137. Penalty for violation of division. [Code 1992, § 13.47;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Any well owner violating any provision of this division shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a forfeiture as provided in Section 1-12.
Sec. 78-138. Filling; exception. [Code 1992, § 13.47(2); Ord. No.
04-08, § I, 3-22-2004; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
All private wells located on any premises served by the utility water system
shall be abandoned and properly filled pursuant to Utility Commission rule
adopted under § NR 812.26, Wis. Adm. Code.
Sec. 78-139. Well operation permits. [Code 1992, § 13.47(3); Ord.
No. 04-09, § I, 3-22-2004; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
A permit may be granted to a well owner to operate a private well for a
period not to exceed 12 months if the well owner demonstrates compliance
with the following requirements:
Sec. 78-140. Methods. [Code 1992, § 13.47(4); amended 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 17-04]
Wells to be abandoned shall be filled according to the procedures outlined
in Ch. NR 112, Wis. Adm. Code. The pump and piping shall be removed and
the well checked for obstructions prior to plugging. Any obstruction or liner
shall be removed.
(1) The well construction and pump installation meet the requirements of
Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) Confirmation and/or certification that the Department of Natural
Resources has approved the well construction and pump installation.
(3) The well has a history of producing safe water and presently produces
bacteriological safe water as evidenced by three samplings two weeks
apart.
(4) The proposed use of the well can be justified as being necessary in
addition to water provided by the public water system.
Sec. 78-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-141
1:485
Sec. 78-141. Reports and inspection. [Code 1992, § 13.47(5);
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
A well abandonment report shall be submitted by the well owner to the DNR
on forms provided by that agency and available in the office of the utility.
The report shall be submitted immediately upon completion of the filling
of the well. The filling shall be observed by a representative of the Utility
Commission.
Sec. 78-142. Wellhead protection.
Per statutory authority granted pursuant to W.S.A. §§ 61.34, 61.35, 62.23
and 66.0415, any proposed new or proposed change in the size or character
of an existing business, commercial, residual or industrial use within 1,200
feet of any City groundwater supply well shall have, in addition to City
approvals, the written approval of the City Utility Commission. Any person
wishing to propose a new or changed use as described in this section
must make application to the Utility Commission to include the description
of the property to be used, description of use, drawing of the site and
measures proposed to minimize groundwater contamination risk, if any.
The City Utility Commission will review the application for compliance
with the provisions of this section and its wellhead protection policy. The
Utility Commission may withhold approval of a new or changed use for
cause if the proposed new or changed use violates the wellhead protection
policy. To assist in the review process, the Utility Commission must request
that the applicant cause to be conducted a detailed engineering study
at the applicant's cost to determine the potential for contaminating the
groundwater resource. Enforcement and penalty procedures are as
described in Section 78-227 in addition to state and federal remedies
available.
Sec. 78-143. through Sec. 78-155. (Reserved)
Sec. 78-141 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-143
1:486
DIVISION 7
WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
Sec. 78-156. Director of Utilities to have charge of work. [Code
1992, § 13.01(2); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The Director of Utilities shall have general charge of all work of extension
and improvement of the waterworks under the general direction of the
Utility Commission with additional approval when required under Section
78-8(5). All such work when let by formal contract, signed by the President
and Secretary of the Utility Commission and the Mayor and City Clerk,
shall be under the direction of the Director and shall be carried out as
may be directed by the Utility Commission. For any work of this nature
done without a formal contract, the Director shall have general supervision,
subject to such statutory requirements and such ordinance provisions as the
City may make, and shall purchase the necessary materials and employ the
necessary help and labor for such work.
Sec. 78-157. Inspection when laying mains. [Code 1992, § 13.05;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
When water mains are being laid, the Director shall make systematic
inspections of all hydrants, connections, sleeves, etc., to prevent poor or
careless work and later loss of water by leakage. Each main extension shall
be tested for tightness of joints before trenches are filled.
Sec. 78-158. Contract required prior to work. [Code 1992, § 13.03;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
All construction and extensions of the water system shall be performed
after the award of a contract by the Utility Commission, signed by the
President and Secretary of the Utility Commission and the Mayor and City
Clerk, unless otherwise provided, except that the Director upon approval
by the Utility Commission shall have authority to contract directly for
replacements and maintenance.
Sec. 78-159. Construction to proceed upon order of Commission;
provisions for fires; location of hydrants. [Code 1992, § 13.04;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Extension of mains shall be made whenever ordered by the Utility
Commission and as rapidly as can reasonably be done after approval by
Utility Commission action. When installing mains, the system shall be so
laid out as to provide ample water in time of fire. The location of hydrants
shall conform to the specifications of the American Waterworks Association.
Sec. 78-160. Rules for extensions. [Code 1992, § 13.06; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Rules for extension shall be as follows:
Sec. 78-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-160
1:487
(1) Initiation. Extensions to existing water mains shall be initiated by
application in writing to the Utility Commission. The Utility Commission
will authorize the preparation of the plans which will be prepared by
the engineer of the Utility Commission.
(2) Owners' agreement to pay share of costs. By signing the application,
the owner agrees to pay the proportionate share of the estimated cost
of making such extension. Application for a new main shall be made by
51% of the abutting benefited frontage.
(3) Billing. When the cost of a main extension has been determined, bills of
particulars shall be mailed to the abutting property owners at the
address appearing in the application. If such bills have not been paid by
October 1 of the year in which rendered, the amount of such bills shall
be certified to the City Clerk by the Director, and the Clerk shall charge
the amounts on the tax rolls of the City to the property described to be
collected according to law for the collection of general taxes.
(4) Assessment of costs. When the Utility Commission shall have ordered
the construction of any water main which shall become part of the
public water system, the cost of the improvement shall be assessed
against the lots, parts of lots or parcels of land which front upon the
proposed line of the water main and which are specifically benefited
thereby. On corner lots where water mains are constructed on both lot
sides, a credit of 125 feet against the total water assessment for both
sides shall be given. However, in no case shall such assessment be less
than 60 feet. Special assessments for water mains shall be in
accordance with the procedures under W.S.A. § 66.0703.
(5) Basis of assessment; size of mains. The amount assessed against any
property shall be computed on a front footage basis using the total cost
of the improvement, including the construction cost for the size of main
required to adequately serve and benefit the property as determined by
the City, but in no case shall such main be less than six inches nor more
than eight inches in a residential zone. In a commercial, business or
industrial zone, the size of the main shall be not less than eight inches
nor more than 12 inches, plus the costs of engineering and legal
services and any other item of direct or indirect cost which is attributed
to the improvement, not including the cost of that portion of the water
main in intersections of streets and alleys which shall be paid by the
City.
(6) Customer-financed basis in lieu of immediate assessment. Where the
density of prospective consumers does not warrant immediate
assessment for the mains, extensions will be made on a customerfinanced
basis. The property owner shall be notified by certified mail
that a deferred assessment will be levied and become payable when the
property is actually hooked up to the main or portions of the property
benefited by its hookup or connection thereto.
Sec. 78-160 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-160
1:488
Sec. 78-161. Maps. [Code 1992, § 13.07; amended 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-04]
The Director of Utilities shall cause to be prepared two maps showing the
locations, sizes and types of all mains, valves, service pipes and hydrants
and of the entire waterworks system and shall, from time to time, make such
additions and alterations as shall correspond to the changes in the physical
plant. He shall keep one of such maps in the office of the Utility Commission
and one in the office of the City Clerk.
a. The cost of the extension, including fire hydrants and street
intersection, will be determined and the total allocated to general
service. This amount will then be divided by the total assessable
footage requesting the service, and these amounts collected in
advance or when an extension is put in service.
b. As additional consumers are connected to a water main that was
originally paid for by customer contributions, the utility will require
a contribution from each new consumer. This contribution shall be
determined by the utility on a front-foot basis. The assessment rate
shall be calculated using current prices for whatever size main is
installed. This amount shall then be refunded pro rata to all
consumers along the extension whose remaining contribution
exceeds what would have been assessed under Subsections (4) and
(5) of this section. Main extensions, outlots and backlots and deadend
lots shall be assessed on the basis of a minimum lot which shall
be 60 feet in width. In areas where lot dimensions are not
proportionate, the utility shall make an assessment on the basis of
area benefited by the main extension.
c. When refunds have reduced the contribution of any customer to the
point where his contribution equals the amount that would have
been assessed under Subsections (4) and (5) of this section, no
premises that may connect will be assessed at the computed
amount per front foot abutting the main.
d. When extension of a customer-financed main is required to serve a
new customer and the cost per consumer exceeds the average
remaining contribution in the original extension, the new extension
will be considered as an entirely new project without refunds or
other connection with the original extension.
(7) Connection to transmission mains or connecting loops; assessment.
When customers connect to transmission mains or connecting loops
laid at the expense of the utility, there will be assessed on a front-foot
basis an amount equal to the average front-foot assessment in the area.
(8) New customers; basis of assessment. When the Utility Commission
extends water mains for new customers on the basis of Subsections (4),
(5) and (6) of this section, the Director of Utilities shall decide whether
the extension is to be a six-inch or larger pipe.
Sec. 78-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-162
1:489
Sec. 78-162. through Sec. 78-175. (Reserved)
Sec. 78-162 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-162
1:490
DIVISION 8
SERVICE CONNECTIONS
Sec. 78-176. Application. [Code 1992, § 13.08; amended 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 17-04]
Applications for water connections shall be made at the office of the Utility
Commission on forms provided for that purpose. The application shall state
the name of the owner; location of the property, designated by correct
house number; the name of the licensed plumber installing the fixtures,
exceptional features, if any, to be disclosed clearly; and the address of
the owner in case notice has to be given for discontinuance of service
for nonpayment. All applications shall be signed by the owner or his duly
authorized agent. Applications shall be accompanied by the fee schedule on
file in the office of the Utility Commission.
Sec. 78-177. Installation of service. [Code 1992, § 13.09; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
(a) Utility Commission responsibility. The Utility Commission shall furnish
all fittings, with and including the curb box, at a cost to the property
owner as approved by the Public Service Commission, but the City
reserves the right at all times to specify the kind of pipe and material to
be used, and to approve all work done up to and including the shutoff
cock at the meter upon the premises supplied. Such service and
connection, up to and including the curb box, shall remain the property
of the City at all times, and the applicant shall acquire no interest, right
or title to the same by virtue of the fact that he has paid the installation
costs and a fee giving him the privilege to receive water through such
pipe, subject to all conditions set forth in this article.
(b) Trenches. No water service shall be laid through any trench having
cinders, rubbish or any other material which may cause injury to or
deterioration of the service pipe, unless adequate means of protection
are provided by sand filling or such insulation as may be approved by
the utility. Service pipes passing through curb or retaining walls shall
be adequately safeguarded by the provision of a channel space or pipe
casing not less than twice the diameter of the service pipe, and the
space between the service pipe and the channel or pipe casing shall be
filled and lightly caulked with oakum, mastic cement or other resilient
material and made impervious to moisture.
(c) Backfilling. In backfilling the pipe trench, the service pipe shall be
protected against injury by carefully hand tamping the ground filling,
free from hard lumps, rocks, stones or other injurious material, around
and at least six inches over the pipe.
Sec. 78-176 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-178
1:491
Sec. 78-178. Service pipes — maintaining. [Code 1992, § 13.10;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The service pipe from the main to the curb box shall be maintained and kept
in repair at the expense of the Utility Commission. However, the consumer
shall maintain the service pipe from the curb box to the property, and
the City shall not make allowance for the loss of water which has passed
through the meter and has been wasted by leakage or defective pipes and
fixtures.
Sec. 78-179. Same — repairs. [Code 1992, § 13.11; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
In case of leakage in the service pipe between the curb box and the
property, notice shall be given to the owner or occupant to make necessary
repairs, and, if repairs are not commenced within 24 hours after notice, the
water will be shut off until repairs are made. In the case of minor leaks,
work must be commenced within three working days of notice. If not made
within a reasonable time thereafter, the City will repair the leakage at the
expense of the property owner, and an additional charge will be made for
turning on water after repairs have been made. The City shall not be liable
in damages due to failure to locate a stop box promptly and shut off water
in case of a leak on a consumer's premises.
Sec. 78-180. Same — record of locations. [Code 1992, § 13.12;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
A record of the location of each service shall be made and kept by the utility.
Sec. 78-181. Turning on water. [Code 1992, § 13.13; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
In no case may water be turned on by any person other than an employee
of the Utility Commission authorized to do this work, with the exception of
a licensed plumber who may do so only after being specially authorized to
do so by an officer of the Utility Commission and after having arranged for
means whereby consumption of water may be determined by so doing.
Sec. 78-182. Right of access to premises. [Code 1992, § 13.15;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Authorized employees of the Utility Commission shall have the right of
access during reasonable hours to premises supplied with water service for
the purpose of inspection or for enforcement of the rules and regulations
of the Utility Commission as provided in this article. Whenever, in the
opinion of the Director of Utilities, the right of access is unduly obstructed,
the Director shall cause notice to be given to the property owner that a
frostproof box of an approved design will be located outside the building at
a cost to the property owner of labor, material and expenses plus 10% to
cover overhead charges. If installed, the cost shall be billed to the owner
of the premises served, unless otherwise provided, and if such costs are
Sec. 78-178 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-182
1:492
not paid, they shall be collected in the manner provided by law. In lieu of
the above provisions, the Director of Utilities may, in his discretion, notify
the owner of the premises served that service will be discontinued unless
access is given at a reasonable time.
Sec. 78-183. Water service outside City. [Code 1992, § 13.41;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
(a) Conditions required for furnishing. Water service may be furnished to
applicants living outside City limits only when such service can be
furnished without adversely affecting the service inside the City and
then only upon the approval of the Utility Commission and City Council.
(b) Water mains; laying. Water mains laid outside the City limits shall be
under the supervision and specifications of the Utility Commission.
(c) Connection charge. If such main is laid at the instigation of the Utility
Commission and principally for its own use as a transmission main,
property owners abutting on such main who desire service shall pay a
connection charge negotiated between the parties, but no less than the
actual prorated cost.
(d) Costs of main installation. If a water main is laid or extended at the
request of a property owner, and is not a transmission or feeder main,
the entire cost of installation shall be borne by the property owner
desiring the service.
(e) Privately funded water mains; connection costs. When new customers
desire connection to a water main funded and constructed by other
than the Utility Commission, the new customer shall make a
contribution, and refunds shall be made to existing customers so that
the contributions of all will be equalized. The Utility Commission will
keep a separate record of each such water main extension.
(f) Further extensions of water mains; costs. Where a further extension of
a water main is desired, the estimated cost of the new extension will be
advanced to the Utility Commission by the new customer to be
benefited (adjustments to be made with each customer when the exact
cost is determined). The customer shall also be charged, in addition to
the cost of the special construction requirement to serve them, one
connection charge equal to the average investment in the main
extension to which this new main is attached. This latter connection
charge will be refunded by the Utility Commission as provided in
Subsection (e) of this section.
(g) Ownership of mains of supplied property. The applicant agrees that the
ownership of the water main laying within the property so affected shall
become the property of the Utility Commission upon acceptance of the
improvement without any compensation except that if the main benefits
property which has not previously borne a portion of the cost, this
property shall be assessed at the time of connection and the proceeds
Sec. 78-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-183
1:493
Sec. 78-184. Regulations for suburban service. [Code 1992, § 13.42;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The following regulations govern water service outside the City:
Sec. 78-185. through Sec. 78-200. (Reserved)
therefrom shall be refunded to the other property owners pro rata as
provided in this section.
(1) The applicant shall fully comply with all rules and regulations
prescribed for the installation, maintenance and use of the water
supply.
(2) The rates for suburban water service shall be in accordance with PSC
regulations.
(3) The applicant shall pay within the prescribed period the charges for
water used as indicated or computed on a meter basis. The first bill is
payable in advance and will be considered a deposit to guarantee future
bills. Subsequent payments will be based upon the meter reading for
the previous quarter; the initial bill or advance deposit will be fixed by
the Director of Utilities based upon the estimated normal consumption
of the type of customer being connected and will be retained by the
Utility Commission until the property involved is annexed to the City or
the service is permanently disconnected. In such cases the advance
payment less any unpaid water bill will be refunded.
(4) The urban rules and regulations except as modified specifically for
suburban use or as specifically applicable to urban service shall be
applicable in the suburban territory served.
Sec. 78-183 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-185
1:494
DIVISION 9
FIRE PROTECTION
Sec. 78-201. Service. [Code 1992, § 13.22; amended 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-04]
Sec. 78-202. Combination fire protection system. [Code 1992,
§ 13.23; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
A combination commercial and fire hydrant or sprinkler service shall consist
of a pipeline with a backflow preventor and either a meter on a bypass of
suitable size for commercial service required around the valve of the same
diameter as the pipe place on line, such valve to be closed and sealed so
as to divert all water through the meter and opened only in case of fire,
or a compound or detector meter of standard make which will register
accurately all water passing through it from a no-load to a fifty-percent
overload under varying pressures.
Sec. 78-203. Valves on automatic sprinklers. [Code 1992, § 13.24;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Automatic sprinkler service alone, as required by insurance companies,
with water supplied either direct to tank of a combination or tank and direct
pressure, shall have all manual valves sealed. Such seal shall be broken
only in case of fire. Any abuse or illegal connection for the use of water
through these services shall forfeit the right of the consumer to such service
for fire protection, and the Utility Commission, upon receipt of a report of
such illegal use, shall, at its discretion, have the power to require any such
service to be provided with a compound or meter to be installed at any time
the Utility Commission may prescribe and to make any change on just and
reasonable requirements as good service may from time to time require,
either as to such meter or to any other parts of such appliance pertaining to
the same.
Sec. 78-204. Private fire hydrant service. [Code 1992, § 13.25;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Private fire hydrant service, where it exists, shall consist of a pipeline
with hydrants on such pipeline. Such hydrants shall have hose threads and
(a) Fire protection service shall consist of connections for automatic
sprinkler systems, standpipes (where standpipes are connected
permanently or coterminously to mains) and private hydrants.
(b) Consumers who are regular users of City water service may be supplied
with larger water pipes with hydrants and hose couplings or a sprinkler
system under the rules of the American Waterworks Association, to be
used only in case of fire. Automatic sprinkler equipment shall be
provided with controlling valve, backflow preventor or indicator post
valve of a make and design to be approved by the Director of Utilities in
either a valve pit near the main in the street or at the curb.
Sec. 78-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-204
1:495
operating nuts as found on City hydrants. All such hydrants shall be closed
and sealed and opened only in case of fire. When the seal is opened on any
private hydrant, the Director of Utilities shall be notified at once and shall
cause the hydrant to be resealed. Private fire hydrants must be checked and
flushed no less often than every two years.
Sec. 78-205. Testing of unmetered connections for fire devices.
[Code 1992, § 13.26; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Consumers having unmetered connections used for fire protection may test
their fire apparatus at any time under the following conditions:
Sec. 78-206. Restrictions on private fire protection systems. [Code
1992, § 13.27; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Any private fire protection system which is supplied with water from the
City's system shall be supplied exclusively with City water, and no
connection will be allowed with any other system which draws any part
of its supply from another source whereby the City's water may be
contaminated by failure to close valves or by leaking check valves, etc., and
no auxiliary or secondary suction pipe to any pump taking water from a
stream or any other source will be permitted. Any private fire protection
system using water, in whole or in part, shall be kept separate from any
such system which is supplied from the City water system.
Sec. 78-207. Discontinuance of service for repairs. [Code 1992,
§ 13.28; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The Utility Commission reserves the right to shut off the water supply in
the mains temporarily for the purpose of making repairs, alterations and
additions. When circumstances will permit sufficient delay, the Director
of Utilities or Utility Commission will give notification by newspaper
publication or by written notice delivered to the premises of the
discontinuance of service and the approximate length of time service will
be discontinued. In such cases the utility shall not be liable for any rebate,
damages or inconveniences caused by such temporary suspension of supply.
(1) Upon notice given at the Utility Commission office that such test is
desired and the date and hour fixed when such test is to be made.
(2) When testing of fire service is made by a duly authorized insurance
representative or insurance inspector, no permit shall be required to
break any seals on the system, but in each instance the Director of
Utilities shall be notified at once before making the test, and such seals
shall be replaced by an employee of the Utility Commission. Such notice
shall be given by the property owner or his agent.
Sec. 78-204 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-208
1:496
Sec. 78-208. Consumer's risk. [Code 1992, § 13.29; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Consumers, in accepting water service for their requirements, agree to
accept such service at their own risk, and the City shall not be liable for
any damage caused by lack of pressure, failure to supply, leaks, breakage
of machinery or facilities or any cause beyond the control of the Utility
Commission.
Sec. 78-209. Controlling valve for hydrant nozzle. [Code 1992,
§ 13.43; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The City reserves the right and the Director of Utilities is authorized to
require a controlling valve to be placed upon the hydrant nozzle when water
is being used for any purpose other than for fires, in order to prevent
damage to fire hydrants and consequent impairment of fire protection.
Sec. 78-210. through § 78-225. (Reserved)
Sec. 78-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-210
1:497

ARTICLE III
SEWER SERVICE
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 78-226. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 13.50; amended 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 17-04]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20° C.,
expressed as milligrams per liter (mg/l). Quantitative determination of BOD
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — A sanitary sewer which begins immediately outside of
the foundation wall of any building or structure being served and ends at its
connection to the public sewer.
CATEGORY A — Those sanitary sewer users who discharge normal domestic
strength wastewater with concentrations of BOD no greater than 300 mg/
l and suspended solids no greater than 250 mg/l. Users whose wastewater
exceeds the concentrations for any one of these parameters shall be in
Category B.
CATEGORY B — Those sanitary sewer users who discharge wastewater with
concentrations in excess of 300 mg/l of BOD and 250 mg/l of suspended
solids.
CHLORINE REQUIREMENT — The amount of chlorine, in mg/l, which must
be added to sewage to produce a residual chlorine as specified in the
Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit.
CITY — Director of Utilities, his authorized representative, or the City
Building Inspector.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — BOD, suspended solids, phosphorus,
nitrogen, pH or fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified
in the City's WFDES permit for its wastewater treatment facility, provided
that such facility is designed to treat such additional pollutants and, in fact,
does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
DIRECTOR OF UTILITIES — The Director of Utilities for the City, or his
authorized representatives.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specified use of land owned
by others.
Sec. 78-226 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-226
1:499
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
GROUND GARBAGE — The residue from the preparation, cooking,
dispensing, handling, storage and sale of food products and produce that
has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried
freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — Wastewater with pollutants that will
adversely affect the wastewater collection and treatment facilities or
disrupt the quality of wastewater treatment if discharged to the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged
or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing or commercial
establishment. Such term includes any wastewater which is not sanitary
sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a
watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or
groundwater.
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER — Wastewater with
concentrations of BOD no greater than 300 mg/l and suspended solids no
greater than 250 mg/l.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — All costs associated with the
operation and maintenance of the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities, including administration and replacement costs, all as determined
from time to time by the Utility Commission.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of
solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7.0 and a hydrogen
ion concentration of 10-7.
PUBLIC SEWER — Any publicly owned sewer, storm drain or sanitary
sewer.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the
useful life of the wastewater treatment facility to maintain the capacity
and performance for which such facilities were designed and constructed.
Operation and maintenance costs include replacement costs.
SANITARY SEWAGE — A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries sewage or wastewater.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a person or community. The preferred term
is "wastewater."
Sec. 78-226 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-226
1:500
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — A charge levied on users of the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities for payment of operation and
maintenance expenses, debt service costs and other expenses or obligations
of such facilities.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentration of flows during normal operation and/or adversely
affects the wastewater collection system and/or performance of the
wastewater treatment facility.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures in the
most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association,
the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation.
STORM SEWER OR DRAIN — A drain or sewer for conveying water,
groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and that
is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods and
referred to as "nonfilterable residue."
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent of the wastewater treatment facilities or water that would not cause
violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted
by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community or person. From the
standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater
that may be present.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION FACILITIES OR WASTEWATER COLLECTION
SYSTEM — The structures and equipment required to collect and carry
wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater and sludge; also referred to as
"wastewater treatment plant."
WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (WPDES)
PERMIT — A document issued by the state Department of Natural
Resources which establishes effluent limitations and monitoring
requirements for the municipal wastewater treatment facility. WPDES
Permit No. WI-0021130 and modifications thereof pertain to the City
wastewater treatment facility.
Sec. 78-226 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-227
1:501
Sec. 78-227. Violations of article; penalties. [Code 1992, § 13.65;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Sec. 78-228. Appeals from decisions of Director of Utilities. [Code
1992, § 13.66; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Any user, permit applicant or permit holder affected by any decision, action
or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the Director
of Utilities interpreting the provisions of this article or in any permit issued
in this article, may appeal such action under the procedures of Chapter 2 of
this Code.
Sec. 78-229. Audit, notification and records. [Code 1992, § 13.67;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
(a) Written notice of violations. Any person found to be violating any
provision of this article shall be declared to be creating a public
nuisance and shall be served by the Utility Commission with a written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within
the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
(b) Abatement of nuisance without notice. If the Director of Utilities
determines that a public nuisance exists within the City and that there
is great and immediate danger to the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities or the public health, safety, peace, morals or
decency, the Director may cause the same to be abated and charge the
cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or
maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
(c) Accidental discharge. Any person found to be responsible for
accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewer system
which causes damage to the wastewater collection and treatment
facility, and/or receiving body of water shall, in addition to a forfeiture,
pay an amount to cover any damage, both values to be established by
the Director of Utilities.
(d) Continued violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the notice time limit provided in Subsection (a) of this section
shall, upon conviction, forfeit not more than $500, together with the
costs of prosecution. In default of payment of such forfeiture and costs,
such violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day in which a violation is continued beyond the
notice time limit in Subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(e) Liability to City for losses. Any person violating any provisions of this
article shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned by reason of such violation which the City may suffer as a
result.
Sec. 78-227 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-229
1:502
Sec. 78-230. Right of entry, safety and identification. [Code 1992,
§ 13.55; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
(a) Biennial audit. The Utility Commission shall review, at least every two
years, the wastewater contribution of its sewer users, the operation and
maintenance expenses of the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities and the sewer service charge system. Based on this review, the
Utility Commission shall revise the sewer service charge system, if
necessary, to accomplish the following:
(1) Maintain a proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance expenses among sewer users based on the
wastewater volume and pollutant loadings discharged by the users.
(2) Generate sufficient revenues to pay the operation and maintenance
expenses of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
(3) Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the
operation and maintenance expenses attributable to that class of
users for the next year and adjust the sewer service charge rates
accordingly.
(b) Annual notification. The Utility Commission shall notify its sewer users
annually about the sewer service charge rates. The notification shall
show what portion of the rates are attributable to the operation and
maintenance expenses and debt service costs of the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities. The notification may occur in
conjunction with a regular bill or by publication.
(c) Records. The Utility Commission shall maintain records regarding
wastewater flows and loadings, costs of the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities, sampling programs and other information which is
necessary to document compliance with 40 CFR 35, subpart E, of the
Clean Water Act.
(a) Right of entry. The Director of Utilities or other authorized employee of
the Utility Commission bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation or testing in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(b) Safety. While performing the necessary work on private premises
referred to in Subsection (a) of this section, the authorized Utility
Commission employee shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the person.
(c) Identification; right to enter easements. The Director of Utilities or
authorized employee of the Utility Commission, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds an easement for the purpose of,
but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within
such easement, subject to the terms of such easement.
Sec. 78-229 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-231
1:503
Sec. 78-231. through Sec. 78-245. (Reserved)
Sec. 78-231 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-231
1:504
DIVISION 2
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
Sec. 78-246. Sanitary sewers. [Code 1992, § 13.51(1); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters
such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or
cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
Sec. 78-247. Storm sewers; stormwater management. [Code 1992,
§ 13.51(2); Ord. No. 98-9, § I, 10-12-1998; amended 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-04; 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-02]
(a) Authority.
(1) This section is adopted by the Common Council under the authority
granted by § 62.234, Wis. Stats.
(2) This section supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously
enacted under § 62.23, Wis. Stats., that relate to stormwater
management regulations. Except as otherwise specified in
§ 62.234, Wis. Stats., § 62.23, Wis. Stats., applies to this section and
to any amendments to this section.
(3) The provisions of this section are deemed not to limit any other
lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body.
(4) The Common Council hereby designates the Building Inspector,
Zoning Administrator, and/or City Engineer to administer and
enforce the provisions of this section.
(5) The requirements of this section do not pre-empt more stringent
stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any
of the following:
a. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative
rules, permits or approvals, including those authorized under
§§ 281.16 and 283.33, Wis. Stats; and
b. Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated
in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
under § NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) Findings of fact. The Common Council acknowledges that uncontrolled,
post-construction runoff has a significant impact upon water resources
and the health, safety and general welfare of the community and
diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources.
Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can:
(1) Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank
erosion, increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater
Sec. 78-246 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:505
recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream
temperature;
(2) Diminish the capacity of Geneva Lake and streams to support fish,
aquatic life, recreational and water supply uses by increasing
pollutant loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy
metals, bacteria, pathogens and other urban pollutants;
(3) Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by
increasing pollutant loads;
(4) Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading;
(5) Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
overtaxing storm sewers, drainageways, and other minor drainage
facilities;
(6) Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by
increasing major flood peaks and volumes;
(7) Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the
incidence and levels of flooding; and
(8) Diminish the public enjoyment of natural resources.
(c) Purpose and intent.
(1) Purpose. The general purpose of this section is to establish longterm,
post-construction runoff management requirements that will
diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the
aquatic environment. Specific purposes are to:
a. Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
b. Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent
and control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution;
protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve
ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic
growth;
c. Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage
facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel
erosion; and control increases in the scouring and
transportation of particulate matter; and
d. Minimize the amount of pollutants discharged from the
separate storm sewer to protect the waters of the state.
(2) Intent. It is the intent of the Common Council that this section
regulate post-construction stormwater discharges to waters of the
state. This section may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The
Common Council recognizes, however, that the preferred method
of achieving the stormwater performance standards set forth in
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:506
this section is through the preparation and implementation of
comprehensive, systems-level stormwater management plans that
cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and
regional scale. Such plans may prescribe regional stormwater
devices, practices or systems, any of which may be designed to
treat runoff from more than one site prior to discharge to waters
of the state. Where such plans are in conformance with the
performance standards developed under § 281.16, Wis. Stats., for
regional stormwater management measures and have been
approved by the Common Council, it is the intent of this section
that the approved stormwater management plan be used to identify
post-construction management measures acceptable for the
community.
(d) Applicability.
(1) Except as provided under Subsection (d)(2), this section applies to:
a. A post-construction site whereupon one acre or more of landdisturbing
construction activity occurs during construction.
b. Those involving the implementation of a residential
development with a gross aggregate impervious area of 1.5
acres or greater.
c. Those involving the development plan other than residential
development with a gross aggregate area of 1.5 acres or more;
or any nonresidential land development which creates an
impervious area of 0.5 acre or more.
(2) A site that meets any of the criteria in this subsection is exempt
from the requirements of this section:
a. A post-construction site with connected imperviousness of less
than 10%, based on the area of land disturbance, provided that
the cumulative area of all impervious surfaces is less than one
acre. However, the exemption of this subsection does not
include exemption from the protective area standard of this
section;
b. Agricultural facilities and practices; and
c. Underground utility construction, but not including the
construction of any above ground structures associated with
utility construction.
(3) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection
(d)(1), this section applies to post-construction sites of any size
that, as determined by the Building Inspector, Zoning
Administrator, and/or City Engineer are likely to result in runoff
that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or
receiving body of water, causes undue channel erosion, or
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:507
increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of
particulate matter.
(e) Jurisdiction.
(1) This chapter applies to land-developing and land-disturbing
activities on lands situated within the corporate limits of the City of
Lake Geneva. This chapter also applies to all lands located within
the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the City of Lake
Geneva, even if plat approval is not involved.
(2) Exclusions. This section is not applicable to activities conducted by
a state agency, as defined under § 227.01(1), Wis. Stats.
(f) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADEQUATE SOD, OR SELF-SUSTAINING VEGETATIVE COVER —
Maintenance of sufficient vegetation types and densities such that the
physical integrity of the streambank or lakeshore is preserved. Selfsustaining
vegetative cover includes grasses, forbs, sedges and duff
layers of fallen leaves and woody debris.
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — A governmental employee, or a
regional planning commission empowered under § 62.234, Wis. Stats.,
that is designated by the Common Council to administer this section.
AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — Has the meaning
given in § 281.16(1), Wis. Stats.
AGRICULTURAL LAND USE — The use of land for planting, growing,
cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption
and pasturing or yarding of livestock.
APPLICANT — The landowner or one of the landowners and/or land
users of a site subject to this section.
ATLAS 14 — The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) Atlas 14 Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Volume 8 (Midwestern States), published in 2013.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A typical calendar year of
precipitation as determined by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources for users of models such as WinSLAMM, P8 or equivalent
methodology. The average annual rainfall is chosen from a department
publication for the location closest to the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP — Structural or
nonstructural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to
avoid or minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of
the state.
BUSINESS DAY — A day the office of the City of Lake Geneva is
routinely and customarily open for business.
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:508
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt landdisturbing
construction activity that is being conducted without the
required permit or in violation of a permit issued by the City of Lake
Geneva.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial constructed watercourse with a
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct the normal flow of water.
CLEAN FILL — Uncontaminated rock, stone, sand, soil, brick, building
stone, concrete, reinforced concrete, broken pavement, and unpainted
or untreated wood.
COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM — A system for conveying both sanitary
sewage and stormwater runoff.
CONNECTED IMPERVIOUSNESS — An impervious surface connected
to the waters of the state via a separate storm sewer, an impervious
flow path, or a minimally pervious flow path.
CONTROL MEASURE — A practice or combination of practices to
control erosion, stormwater and attendant pollution.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized
by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return
frequency and total depth of rainfall.
DETENTION BASIN — A type of stormwater basin which has a direct
outlet and serves to reduce water velocities and peak flows by
discharging at designed flow rates (to temporarily detain water flows).
A detention basin is considered wet if it is greater than three feet deep
from the permanent water level to the bottom of the basin.
DEVELOPMENT — Residential, commercial, industrial or institutional
land uses and associated roads.
DIRECT CONDUITS TO GROUNDWATER — Wells, sinkholes, swallets,
fractured bedrock at the surface, mine shafts, nonmetallic mines, tile
inlets discharging to groundwater, quarries, or depressional
groundwater recharge areas over shallow fractured bedrock.
DISTURBED AREA — A site which, due to land-developing or -
disturbing activities, has or will experience disturbance or destruction
of the existing land surface and/or vegetative cover.
EFFECTIVE INFILTRATION AREA — The area of the infiltration system
that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for
site access, berms or pretreatment.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by
the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
EXCEPTIONAL RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.11,
Wis. Adm. Code.
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:509
EXTRATERRITORIAL — The unincorporated area within three miles of
the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1 1/2
miles of a fourth class city or village.
FILTERING LAYER — Soil that has at least a three-foot deep layer with
at least 20% fines; or at least a five-foot deep layer with at least 10%
fines; or an engineered soil with an equivalent level of protection as
determined by the regulatory authority for the site.
FINAL STABILIZATION — That all land-disturbing construction
activities at the construction site have been completed and that a
uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established with a density
of at least 70% of the cover for the unpaved areas and areas not
covered by permanent structures or that employ equivalent permanent
stabilization measures.
FINANCIAL GUARANTY — A performance bond, maintenance bond,
surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guaranties
submitted to the City of Lake Geneva by the responsible party to assure
that requirements of the ordinance are carried out in compliance with
the stormwater management plan.
GOVERNING BODY — City Council.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff all or a
large portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen
soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, gravel or paved parking lots and
streets are examples of areas that typically are impervious.
IN-FILL — An undeveloped area of land located within an existing
urban sewer service area, surrounded by development or development
and natural or man-made features where development cannot occur.
INFILTRATION — The entry of precipitation or runoff into or through
the soil.
INFILTRATION SYSTEM — A device or practice such as a basin, trench,
rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but
does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns,
redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration
from practices, such as swales or road side channels designed for
conveyance and pollutant removal only.
LAND USER — Any person operating upon, leasing, or renting land, or
having made any other arrangements with the landowner by which the
land user engages in uses of land which are sites subject to this section.
LAND-DEVELOPING ACTIVITY — The construction or erection of
buildings, roads, parking lots, paved storage areas and other
structures.
LAND-DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography
or existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that may result in
runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:510
into waters of the state. Land-disturbing construction activity includes
clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering,
filling and grading activities.
LANDOWNER — Any person holding fee title, an easement or other
interest in property, which allows the person to undertake cropping,
livestock management, and/or land-disturbing construction activity or
maintenance of stormwater BMPs on the property.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legal document that provides for
long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — The highest level of
performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a performance
standard identified in this section as determined in accordance with
Subsection (g) of this section.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Development resulting from the conversion of
previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses.
NRCS MSE3 OR MSE4 DISTRIBUTION — A specific precipitation
distribution developed by the United States Department of Agriculture,
Natural Resources Conservation Service, using precipitation data from
Atlas 14.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the property boundary described in the
permit application.
ON-SITE — Located within the property boundary described in the
permit application.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — Has the meaning given in § NR
115.03(6), Wis. Adm. Code.
OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.10,
Wis. Adm. Code.
PERCENT FINES — The percentage of a given sample of soil which
passes through a No. 200 sieve.
PERFORMANCE SECURITY — A performance bond, maintenance
bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guaranties
submitted to the City by the permit holder to assure that requirements
of the section are carried out in compliance with the stormwater
management plan.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERMIT — A written authorization made by the City of Lake Geneva
to the applicant to conduct land-disturbing construction activity or to
discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEE — A sum of money paid to the City of
Lake Geneva by the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the
expenses incurred by the authority in administering the permit.
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:511
PERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff a small portion
of the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or
other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically
are pervious.
POLLUTANT — Has the meaning given in § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
POLLUTION — Has the meaning given in § 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE — A construction site following the
completion of land-disturbing construction activity and final site
stabilization.
PREDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — The extent and distribution of land
cover types present before the initiation of land-disturbing construction
activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are
managed in an environmentally sound manner.
PREVENTIVE ACTION LIMIT — Has the meaning given in § NR
140.05(17), Wis. Adm. Code.
PROTECTIVE AREA — An area of land that commences at the top of the
channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of
wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured
horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary
to the closest impervious surface.
REDEVELOPMENT — Areas where development is replacing older
development.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — The landowner or any other entity performing
services to meet the requirements of this section through a contract or
other agreement.
RETENTION BASIN — A type of stormwater basin which has no direct
outlet and empties by infiltration to the natural soil surface and by
evaporation (to retain all water).
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation, including rain, snow or ice
melt or similar water, that moves on the land surface via sheet or
channelized flow.
SEDIMENTATION BASIN — An artificially created holding pond or
other catchment for the purpose of capturing and retaining any
sediment flowing off of sites as a result of land-developing or landdisturbing
activities.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances,
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all
of the following criteria:
(1) Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff;
(2) Is not part of a combined sewer system;
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:512
SHEET FLOW RUNOFF — Water, usually storm runoff, flowing in a thin
layer of the ground surface; also called overland flow. (By convention
this distance does not exceed 300 feet.)
SILVICULTURE ACTIVITY — Activities including tree nursery
operations, tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning,
prescribed burning, and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of
an area of a construction site is not a silviculture activity.
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land-disturbing or land-development construction activity is
proposed to take place or has occurred.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the City of Lake Geneva
which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Precipitation runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff
and drainage.
STORMWATER BASIN — An artificially created holding pond or other
catchment for the purposes of retaining or detaining stormwater.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan
designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from stormwater, after
the site has undergone final stabilization, following completion of the
construction activity which shall include, but is not limited to, a plat of
survey setting forth a written description of the number, location, sizes,
and other pertinent data as to control measures designed to meet the
requirements of this section submitted by the applicant for review and
approval by the City.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A comprehensive
plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from
hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale.
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design,
predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications
for a material, device or method.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the farthest point in the watershed to the outlet point of the
watershed.
TOP OF THE CHANNEL — An edge, or point on the landscape landward
from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state,
where the slope of the land begins to be less than 12% continually for
at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less continually for the
initial 50 feet landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of
the channel is the ordinary high-water mark.
Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that
provides secondary or more stringent treatment; and
(3)
(4) Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:513
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD or TMDL — The amount of pollutants
specified as a function of one or more water quality parameters that
can be discharged per day into a water quality limited segment and still
ensure attainment of the applicable water quality standard.
TP-40 — Technical Paper No. 40, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the United
States, published in 1961.
TR-55 — The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service),
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical
Release 55, June 1986, which is incorporated by reference for this
chapter.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — A highway, a railroad, a public mass
transit facility, a public-use airport, a public trail or any other public
work for transportation purposes such as harbor improvements under
§ 85.095(1)(b), Wis. Stats. Transportation facility does not include
building sites for the construction of public buildings and buildings
that are places of employment that are regulated by the Department
pursuant to § 281.33, Wis. Stats.
TSS — Total suspended solids.
TYPE II DISTRIBUTION — A rainfall type curve as established in the
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Technical Paper 149, published in 1973.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Includes those portions of Lake Michigan
and Lake Superior within the boundaries of this state, and all lakes,
bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs,
marshes, watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or
groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within this state or
its jurisdiction.
(g) Applicability of maximum extent practicable. Maximum extent
practicable applies when a person who is subject to a performance
standard of this section demonstrates to the City of Lake Geneva's
satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable and that a
lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the assertion that
a performance standard is not achievable and that a level of
performance different from the performance standard is the maximum
extent practicable, the responsible party shall take into account the
best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and
other competing interests, such as protection of public safety and
welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and
preservation of historic properties.
(h) Design standards.
(1) The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality,
peak discharge, and infiltration components of stormwater
practices needed to meet the water quality standards of this
section:
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:514
a. Consistent with the technical standards identified, developed
or disseminated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources under Subchapter V of Chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm.
Code; and
b. Where technical standards have not been identified or
developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources,
other technical standards may be used, provided that the
methods have been approved by the City of Lake Geneva.
(2) Stormwater management plan. A written stormwater management
plan in accordance with Subsection (j) shall be developed and
implemented for each post-construction site.
(3) Maintenance of effort. For redevelopment sites where the
redevelopment will be replacing older development that was
subject to post-construction performance standards of Ch. NR 151
in effect on or after October 1, 2004, the responsible party shall
meet the total suspended solids reduction, peak flow control,
infiltration, and protective areas standards applicable to the older
development or meet the redevelopment standards of this section,
whichever is more stringent.
(4) Requirements. The stormwater management plan required under
Subsection (h)(2) shall include the following:
a. Total suspended solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and
maintained to control total suspended solids carried in runoff
from the post-construction site as follows:
1. BMPs shall be designed in accordance with Table 1 or to
the maximum extent practicable as provided in Subsection
(h)(4)a2. The design shall be based on an average annual
rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls.
2. Maximum extent practicable. If the design cannot meet a
total suspended solids reduction performance standard of
Table 1, the stormwater management plan shall include a
written, site-specific explanation of why the total
suspended solids reduction performance standard cannot
be met and why the total suspended solids load will be
reduced only to the maximum extent practicable.
Table 1
TSS Reduction Standards
Development Type
Total Suspended Solids
Reduction
New development 80%
In-fill development 80%
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:515
Table 1
TSS Reduction Standards
Development Type
Total Suspended Solids
Reduction
Redevelopment and roads 40% of load from parking
areas
3. Off-site drainage. When designing BMPs, runoff draining
to the BMP from off-site shall be taken into account in
determining the treatment efficiency of the practice. Any
impact on the efficiency shall be compensated for by
increasing the size of the BMP accordingly.
b. Peak discharge. BMPs shall be designed, installed and
maintained to control peak discharge from the postconstruction
site as follows:
1. By design, BMPs shall be employed to maintain or reduce
the one-year, twenty-four-hour, the two-year, twenty-fourhour,
the ten-year, twenty-four-hour, and the one-hundredyear,
twenty-four-hour post-construction peak runoff
discharge rates to the one-year, twenty-four-hour, the twoyear,
twenty-four-hour, the ten-year, twenty-four-hour, and
the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour predevelopment
peak runoff discharge rates respectively, or to the
maximum extent practicable.
2. The runoff curve numbers in Table 2 shall be used to
represent the actual predevelopment conditions. Peak
discharges shall be calculated using TR-55 runoff curve
number methodology, Atlas 14 precipitation depths, and
the appropriate NRCS Wisconsin MSE3 or MSE4
precipitation distribution. On a case-by-case basis, the City
of Lake Geneva may allow the use of TP-40 precipitation
depths and a Type II distribution.
Table 2
Maximum Predevelopment Runoff Curve Numbers
Hydrologic Soil Group
Predevelopment
Land Use A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Grassland 39 61 71 78
Cropland 55 69 78 83
3. Contribution runoff entering the project from off site may
be excluded from detention calculations if the water is
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:516
routed around disturbed areas by use of stable
watercourse(s).
4. All open channel stormwater conveyance systems shall
provide safe conveyance for peak flow from a twenty-fiveyear
frequency, twenty-four-hour rainfall event within the
defined channel banks.
5. Conveyance for the peak flow runoff from a one-hundredyear,
twenty-four-hour event shall be provided such that no
inundation of or damage to built structures shall occur.
6. Where feasible, all permanent storm sewer inlets must be
stenciled by the permit holder as part of the water quality
strategy for protection of surface waters and drainage to
Geneva Lake.
7. Drainage systems may not result in transfer of drainage
from one delineated natural drainage area to another if
reasonable alternatives exist which would preserve
natural drainage patterns. Drainage area delineations
must be shown on the stormwater plan.
8. All stormwater basins shall be permanent, aesthetically
pleasing, if practical, and safe. Subsurface bottoms of wet
basins must provide a safety ledge consistent with
required design criteria identified in Subsection (h)(1).
9. This subsection of the section does not apply to any of the
following:
[a] A post-construction site where the discharge is
directly into a lake over 5,000 acres or a stream or
river segment draining more than 500 square miles.
[b] Except as provided under Subsection (h)(3), a
redevelopment post-construction site.
[c] An in-fill development area less than five acres.
c. Infiltration.
1. Best management practices. BMPs shall be designed,
installed, and maintained to infiltrate runoff in accordance
with the following or to the maximum extent practicable:
[a] Low imperviousness. For development up to 40%
connected imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries,
and low-density residential development, infiltrate
sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at least 90% of the
predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an
average annual rainfall. However, when designing
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:517
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this
requirement, no more than 1% of the postconstruction
site is required as an effective infiltration
area.
[b] Moderate imperviousness. For development with
more than 40%, and up to 80% connected
imperviousness, such as medium- and high-density
residential, multifamily development, industrial and
institutional development, and office parks, infiltrate
sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at least 75% of the
predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an
average annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this
requirement, no more than 2% of the postconstruction
site is required as an effective infiltration
area.
[c] High imperviousness. For development with more
than 80% connected imperviousness, such as
commercial strip malls, shopping centers, and
commercial downtowns, infiltrate sufficient runoff
volume so that the post-development infiltration
volume shall be at least 60% of the predevelopment
infiltration volume, based on an average annual
rainfall. However, when designing appropriate
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more
than 2% of the post-construction site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
2. Predevelopment. The predevelopment condition shall be
the same as specified in Table 2 of the peak discharge
section of this section.14
3. Source areas.
[a] Prohibitions. Runoff from the following areas may not
be infiltrated and may not qualify as contributing to
meeting the requirements of this section unless
demonstrated to meet the conditions identified in
Subsection (h)(4)c6:
[i] Areas associated with a Tier 1 industrial facility
identified in § NR 216.21(2)(a), including storage,
loading and parking. Rooftops may be infiltrated
with the concurrence of the regulatory authority.
[ii] Storage and loading areas of a Tier 2 industrial
facility identified in § NR 216.21(2)(b).
14.Editor's Note: See Subsection (h)(4)b.
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:518
[iii] Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Runoff
from rooftops of fueling and vehicle maintenance
areas may be infiltrated with the concurrence of
the regulatory authority.
[b] Exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may be
credited toward meeting the requirement when
infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate runoff from
these source areas is optional:
[i] Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000
square feet for commercial development.
[ii] Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000
square feet for industrial development not subject
to the prohibitions under Subsection (h)(4)c3[a].
[iii] Except as provided under Subsection (h)(3),
redevelopment post-construction sites.
[iv] In-fill development areas less than five acres.
[v] Roads on commercial, industrial and institutional
land uses, and arterial residential roads.
4. Location of practices.
[a] Prohibitions. Infiltration practices may not be located
in the following areas:
[i] Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100
feet downgradient of direct conduits to
groundwater.
[ii] Areas within 400 feet of a community water
system well as specified in § NR 811.16(4) or
within the separation distances listed in § NR
812.08 for any private well or noncommunity well
for runoff infiltrated from commercial, including
multifamily residential, industrial and
institutional land uses or regional devices for oneand
two-family residential development.
[iii] Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined
in § NR 720.03(2), are present in the soil through
which infiltration will occur.
[b] Separation distances.
[i] Infiltration practices shall be located so that the
characteristics of the soil and the separation
distance between the bottom of the infiltration
system and the elevation of seasonal high
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:519
groundwater or the top of bedrock are in
accordance with Table 3:
Table 3
Separation Distances and Soil
Characteristics
Source Area
Separation
Distance
Soil
Characteristics
Industrial,
commercial
and
institutional
parking lots
and roads
5 feet or more Filtering layer
Residential
arterial roads
5 feet or more Filtering layer
Roofs draining
to subsurface
infiltration
practices
1 foot or more Native or
engineered soil
with particles
finer than
coarse sand
Roofs draining
to surface
infiltration
practices
Not applicable Not applicable
All other
impervious
source areas
3 feet or more Filtering layer
[ii] Notwithstanding Subsection (h)(4)c4[b],
applicable requirements for injection wells
classified under Ch. NR 815 shall be followed.
[c] Infiltration rate exemptions. Infiltration practices
located in the following areas may be credited toward
meeting the requirements under the following
conditions, but the decision to infiltrate under these
conditions is optional:
[i] Where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at
the proposed bottom of the infiltration system is
less than 0.6 inch per hour using a scientifically
credible field test method.
[ii] Where the least permeable soil horizon to five feet
below the proposed bottom of the infiltration
system using the United States Department of
Agriculture method of soils analysis is one of the
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:520
following: sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay
loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay.
5. Alternate use. Where alternate uses of runoff are
employed, such as for toilet flushing, laundry, or irrigation
or storage on green roofs where an equivalent portion of
the runoff is captured permanently by rooftop vegetation,
such alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the
infiltration volume required by this section.
6. Groundwater standards.
[a] Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this
section shall, to the extent technically and
economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants
infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain
compliance with the preventive action limit at a point
of standards application in accordance with Ch. NR
140. However, if site specific information indicates
that compliance with a preventive action limit is not
achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed
or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the
maximum extent practicable.
[b] Notwithstanding Subsection (h)(4)c6[a], the discharge
from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement
standard at the point of standards application.
7. Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment
shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from
new road construction in commercial, industrial and
institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system.
The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the
infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled
maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in
accordance with Subsection (h)(4)c6. Pretreatment
options may include, but are not limited to, oil and grease
separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales
or filter strips.
8. Maximum extent practicable. Where the conditions of
Subsection (h)(4)c3 and 4, limit or restrict the use of
infiltration practices, the performance standard of
Subsection (h)(4)c shall be met to the maximum extent
practicable.
d. Protective areas.
1. Definition. In this section, "protective area" means an area
of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes,
streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of
wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths,
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:521
as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or
delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious
surface. However, in this section, "protective area" does
not include any area of land adjacent to any stream
enclosed within a pipe or culvert, so that runoff cannot
enter the enclosure at this location.
[a] For outstanding resource waters and exceptional
resource waters: 75 feet.
[b] For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a
United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute series
topographic map, or a county soil survey map,
whichever is more current: 50 feet.
[c] For lakes: 50 feet.
[d] For wetlands not subject to Subsection (h)(4)d1[e] or
[f]: 50 feet.
[e] For highly susceptible wetlands: 75 feet. Highly
susceptible wetlands include the following types:
calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open and coniferous
bogs, low prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland
hardwood swamps, and ephemeral ponds.
[f] For less susceptible wetlands: 10% of the average
wetland width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than
30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include: degraded
wetland dominated by invasive species such as reed
canary grass; cultivated hydric soils; and any gravel
pits, or dredged material or fill material disposal sites
that take on the attributes of a wetland.
[g] In Subsection (h)(4)d1[d] to [f], determinations of the
extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands
shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff
susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the
standards and criteria in § NR 103.03.
[h] Wetland boundary delineation shall be made in
accordance with § NR 103.08(1m). This paragraph
does not apply to wetlands that have been completely
filled in compliance with all applicable state and
federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands
that have been partially filled in compliance with all
applicable state and federal regulations shall be
measured from the wetland boundary delineation
after a fill has been placed. Where there is a legally
authorized wetland fill, the protective area standard
need not be met in that location.
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:522
[i] For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas
greater than 130 acres: 10 feet.
[j] Notwithstanding Subsection (h)(4)d1[a] to [i], the
greatest protective area width shall apply where
rivers, streams, lakes and wetlands are contiguous.
2. Applicability. This section applies to post-construction
sites located within a protective area, except those areas
exempted pursuant to Subsection (h)(4)d4.
3. Requirements. The following requirements shall be met:
[a] Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective
area entirely or to the maximum extent practicable. If
there is no practical alternative to locating an
impervious surface in the protective area, the
stormwater management plan shall contain a written,
site-specific explanation.
[b] Where land-disturbing construction activity occurs
within a protective area, adequate sod or selfsustaining
vegetative cover of 70% or greater shall be
established and maintained where no impervious
surface is present. The adequate sod or self-sustaining
vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank
stability, maintenance of fish habitat, and filtering of
pollutants from upslope overland flow areas under
sheet flow conditions. Nonvegetative materials, such
as rock riprap, may be employed on the bank as
necessary to prevent erosion such as on steep slopes
or where high-velocity flows occur.
[c] BMPs, such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention
ponds, that are designed to control pollutants from
non-point sources, may be located in the protective
area.
4. Exemptions. This section does not apply to any of the
following:
[a] Except as provided under Subsection (h)(3),
redevelopment post-construction sites.
[b] In-fill development areas less than five acres.
[c] Structures that cross or access surface water such as
boat landings, bridges, and culverts.
[d] Structures constructed in accordance with
§ 59.692(1v), Wis. Stats.
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:523
[e] Areas of post-construction sites from which the runoff
does not enter the surface water, including wetlands,
without first being treated by a BMP to meet the local
ordinance requirements for total suspended solids and
peak flow reduction, except to the extent that
vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank
stability.
e. Fueling and maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas shall have BMPs designed, installed, and
maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, so that the
runoff that enters waters of the state contains no visible
petroleum sheen, or to the maximum extent practicable.
f. Swale treatment for transportation facilities.
1. Requirement. Except as provided in Subsection (h)(4)f2,
transportation facilities that use swales for runoff
conveyance and pollutant removal are exempt from the
requirements of local ordinance requirements for peak
flow control, total suspended solids control, and
infiltration, if the swales are designed to do all of the
following or to the maximum extent practicable:
[a] Swales shall be vegetated. However, where
appropriate, nonvegetative measures may be
employed to prevent erosion or provide for runoff
treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or check
dams.
[b] Swales shall comply with Sections V.F. (Velocity and
Depth) and V.G. (Swale Geometry Criteria) with a
swale treatment length as long as that specified in
Section V.C. (Pre-Treatment) of the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources Technical Standard
1005 "Vegetated Infiltration Swales," dated May 2007,
or a superseding document. Transportation facility
swale treatment does not have to comply with other
sections of Technical Standard 1005.
2. Other requirements.
[a] Notwithstanding Subsection (h)(4)f1, the City of Lake
Geneva may, consistent with water quality standards,
require that other requirements, in addition to swale
treatment, be met on a transportation facility with an
average daily traffic rate greater than 2,500 and
where the initial surface water of the state that the
runoff directly enters is one of the following:
[i] An outstanding resource water.
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:524
[ii] An exceptional resource water.
[iii] Waters listed in Section 303(d) of the Federal
Clean Water Act that are identified as impaired in
whole or in part, due to non-point source impacts.
[iv] Water where targeted performance standards are
developed pursuant to § NR 151.004, Wis. Adm.
Code.
[b] The transportation facility authority shall contact the
City of Lake Geneva to determine if additional BMPs
beyond a water quality swale are needed under this
subsection.
(5) General considerations for stormwater management measures. The
following considerations shall be observed in on-site and off-site
runoff management:
a. Natural topography and land cover features, such as natural
swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity,
and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved
and used, to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of
this section.
b. Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be
provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream
drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream
property or public safety.
(6) BMP location.
a. To comply with the performance standards required under
Subsection (h) of this section, BMPs may be located on-site or
off-site as part of a regional stormwater device, practice or
system, but shall be installed in accordance with § NR 151.003,
Wis. Adm. Code.
b. The City of Lake Geneva may approve off-site management
measures, provided that all of the following conditions are met:
1. The City of Lake Geneva determines that the postconstruction
runoff is covered by a stormwater
management system plan that is approved by the City of
Lake Geneva and that contains management requirements
consistent with the purpose and intent of this section.
2. The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
[a] The facility is in place.
[b] The facility is designed and adequately sized to
provide a level of stormwater control equal to or
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:525
greater than that which would be afforded by on-site
practices meeting the performance standards of this
section.
[c] The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible
for its long-term operation and maintenance.
c. Where a regional treatment option exists such that the City of
Lake Geneva exempts the applicant from all or part of the
minimum on-site stormwater management requirements, the
applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount
determined in negotiation with the City of Lake Geneva. In
determining the fee for post-construction runoff, the City of
Lake Geneva shall consider an equitable distribution of the
cost for land, engineering design, construction, and
maintenance of the regional treatment option.
(7) Additional requirements. The City of Lake Geneva may establish
stormwater management requirements more stringent than those
set forth in this section if the City of Lake Geneva determines that
the requirements are needed to control stormwater quantity or
control flooding, comply with federally approved total maximum
daily load requirements, or control pollutants associated with
existing development or redevelopment.
(i) Permitting requirements, procedures and fees.
(1) Permit required. No responsible party may undertake a landdisturbing
construction activity without receiving a postconstruction
runoff permit from the City of Lake Geneva prior to
commencing the proposed activity.
(2) Permit application and fees. Unless specifically excluded by this
section, any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the
City of Lake Geneva a permit application on a form provided by the
City of Lake Geneva for that purpose.
a. Unless otherwise excluded by this section, a permit application
must be accompanied by a stormwater management plan, a
maintenance agreement and a nonrefundable permit
administration fee.
b. The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet
the requirements of Subsections (h) and (j), the maintenance
agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of
Subsection (k), the financial guaranty shall meet the
requirements of Subsection (l), and fees shall be those
established by the Common Council as set forth in Subsection
(m).
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:526
c. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the
City or designee to enter the site to obtain information
required for the review of the control plan.
d. Submission of an application by one of several land users or
land owners of particular site shall constitute an affirmation by
said applicant of authority to act on behalf of the other land
users or land owners to so apply and, upon issuance of a
permit, to engage in land developing or disturbing activities on
the site. The City shall be under no obligation to ascertain the
legal authority of the applicant to so act.
(3) Permit application review and approval. The City of Lake Geneva
shall review any permit application that is submitted with a
stormwater management plan, maintenance agreement, and the
required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used:
a. Within 45 days of the receipt of a complete permit application,
including all items as required by Subsection (i)(2), the City of
Lake Geneva shall inform the applicant whether the
application, stormwater management plan and maintenance
agreement are approved or disapproved based on the
requirements of this section.
b. If the stormwater permit application, stormwater management
plan and maintenance agreement are approved, or if an agreed
upon payment of fees in lieu of stormwater management
practices is made, the City of Lake Geneva shall issue the
permit.
c. If the stormwater permit application, stormwater management
plan or maintenance agreement is disapproved, the City of
Lake Geneva shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval.
d. The City of Lake Geneva may request additional information
from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the
City of Lake Geneva shall have 30 days from the date the
additional information is received to inform the applicant that
the stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement
are either approved or disapproved.
(4) Permit requirements. All permits issued under this section shall be
subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued
under this section shall be deemed to have accepted these
conditions. The City of Lake Geneva may suspend or revoke a
permit for violation of a permit condition, following written
notification of the responsible party. An action by the City of Lake
Geneva to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in
accordance with Subsection (o).
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:527
a. Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible
party of the responsibility to comply with other applicable
federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
b. The responsible party shall design and install all structural and
nonstructural stormwater management measures in
accordance with the approved stormwater management plan
and this permit.
c. The responsible party shall notify the City of Lake Geneva at
least 72 hours before commencing any land-developing or
land-disturbing activity, and within 14 days upon completion of
the stormwater management practices. If required as a special
condition under Subsection (i)(5), the responsible party shall
make additional notification according to a schedule set forth
by the City of Lake Geneva so that practice installations can be
inspected during construction.
d. Practice installations required as part of this section shall be
certified as-built or record drawings by a licensed professional
engineer. Completed stormwater management practices must
pass a final inspection by the City of Lake Geneva or its
designee to determine if they are in accordance with the
approved stormwater management plan and ordinance. The
City of Lake Geneva or its designee shall notify the responsible
party in writing of any changes required in such practices to
bring them into compliance with the conditions of this permit.
e. The responsible party shall notify the City of Lake Geneva of
any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved
stormwater management plan. The City of Lake Geneva may
require that the proposed modifications be submitted to it for
approval prior to incorporation into the stormwater
management plan and execution by the responsible party.
f. The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater
management practices in accordance with the stormwater
management plan until the practices either become the
responsibility of the Common Council, or are transferred to
subsequent private owners as specified in the approved
maintenance agreement.
g. The responsible party authorizes the City of Lake Geneva to
perform any work or operations necessary to bring stormwater
management measures into conformance with the approved
stormwater management plan, and consents to a special
assessment or charge against the property as authorized under
Subch. VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats., or to charging such costs
against the financial guaranty posted under Subsection (l).
h. If so directed by the City of Lake Geneva, the responsible party
shall repair at the responsible party's own expense all damage
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:528
to adjoining municipal facilities and drainageways caused by
runoff, where such damage is caused by activities that are
not in compliance with the approved stormwater management
plan.
i. The responsible party shall permit property access to the City
of Lake Geneva or its designee for the purpose of inspecting
the property for compliance with the approved stormwater
management plan and this permit.
j. Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in
direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff
from a site, the City of Lake Geneva may require the
responsible party to make appropriate legal arrangements
with affected property owners concerning the prevention of
endangerment to property or public safety.
k. The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and
penalties detailed in Subsection (n) if the responsible party
fails to comply with the terms of this permit.
l. Keep a copy of the approved stormwater management plan on
the site.
(5) Permit conditions. Permits issued under this subsection may
include conditions established by the City of Lake Geneva in
addition to the requirements needed to meet the performance
standards in Subsection (h) or a financial guaranty as provided for
in Subsection (l).
(6) Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid
from the date of issuance for a period of 180 days, or the length of
the building permit or other construction authorizations, whichever
is longer. The City of Lake Geneva may extend the period for up to
an additional 180 days and may require additional control
measures as a condition of the extension if they are necessary to
meet the requirements. After final inspection, the City of Lake
Geneva notifies the responsible party that all stormwater
management practices have passed the final inspection required
under Subsection (i)(4)d.
(j) Stormwater management plan.
(1) Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater
management plan required under Subsection (h)(2) shall contain at
a minimum the following information:
a. Name, address, and telephone number for the following or
their designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for
practice design and certification; person(s) responsible for
installation of stormwater management practices; and
person(s) responsible for maintenance of stormwater
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:529
management practices prior to the transfer, if any, of
maintenance responsibility to another party.
b. A proper legal description of the property proposed to be
developed, referenced to the United States Public Land Survey
system or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land
subdivision plat.
c. Predevelopment site conditions, including:
1. One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet. The site maps shall show the following:
site location and legal property description; predominant
soil types and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type
and condition; topographic contours of the site at a
contour interval not to exceed two feet; topography and
drainage network including enough of the contiguous
properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from
the site; watercourses that may affect or be affected by
runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all
stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries
used in hydrology determinations to show compliance with
performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands,
channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and
immediately adjacent to the site; limits of the onehundred-
year floodplain; location of wells and wellhead
protection areas covering the project area and delineated
pursuant to § NR 811.16, Wis. Adm. Code; locations and
dimensions of utilities, structures, roads, highways and
paving.
2. Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed
to show compliance with performance standards. All major
assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be
clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the
required map(s).
d. Post-development site conditions, including:
1. Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural
topography and land cover features to minimize changes
in peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters
and wetlands.
2. Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater
management measures in the development area imposed
by wellhead protection plans and ordinances.
3. One or more site maps at a scale equal to the same scale
used on the predevelopment site conditions map showing
the following: post-construction pervious areas, including
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:530
vegetative cover type and condition; impervious surfaces,
including all buildings, structures, and pavement; postconstruction
topographic contours of the site at a contour
interval not to exceed two feet; post-construction drainage
network, including enough of the contiguous properties
to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site;
locations and dimensions of drainage easements; locations
of maintenance easements specified in the maintenance
agreement; flow path and direction for all stormwater
conveyance sections; location and type of all stormwater
management conveyance and treatment practices,
including the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area;
location and type of conveyance system that will carry
runoff from the drainage and treatment practices to the
nearest adequate outlet, such as a curbed street, storm
drain, or natural drainageway; watershed boundaries used
in hydrology and pollutant-loading calculations and any
changes to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches,
and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to
the site.
4. Hydrology and pollutant-loading computations as needed
to show compliance with performance standards. The
computations shall be made for each discharge point in the
development, and the geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the
required map(s).
5. Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required
for the placement and design of stormwater management
measures. Detailed drawings including cross sections and
profiles of all permanent stormwater conveyance and
treatment practices.
e. A description and installation schedule for the stormwater
management practices needed to meet the performance
standards in Subsection (h).
f. A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater
management practice including the required maintenance
activities and maintenance activity schedule.
g. Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and
maintenance of each stormwater management practice.
h. Other information requested in writing by the City of Lake
Geneva to determine compliance of the proposed stormwater
management measures with the provisions of this section.
i. All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and
drawings shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:531
to be prepared in accordance with accepted engineering
practice and requirements of this section.
(2) Alternate requirements. The City of Lake Geneva may prescribe
alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an
exemption to on-site stormwater management performance
standards under Subsection (h)(5).
(k) Maintenance agreement.
(1) Maintenance agreement required. The maintenance agreement
required under Subsection (i) for stormwater management
practices shall be an agreement between the City of Lake Geneva
and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of
stormwater practices beyond the duration period of this permit.
The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the County Register
of Deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding upon all
subsequent owners of the land served by the stormwater
management practices.
(2) Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain
the following information and provisions and be consistent with the
maintenance plan required by Subsection (j)(1)f:
a. Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of
the drainage area served by the facilities.
b. A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the
stormwater management system consistent with the
stormwater management plan required under Subsection
(i)(2).
c. Identification of the responsible party(s), organization or city,
county, town or village responsible for long-term maintenance
of the stormwater management practices identified in the
stormwater management plan required under Subsection
(i)(2).
d. Requirement that the responsible party(s), organization, or
city, county, town or village shall maintain stormwater
management practices in accordance with the schedule
included in Subsection (k)(1)b.
e. Authorization for the City of Lake Geneva to access the
property to conduct inspections of stormwater management
practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being
maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement.
f. A requirement for the City of Lake Geneva to maintain public
records of the results of the site inspections, to inform the
responsible party responsible for maintenance of the
inspection results, and to specifically indicate any corrective
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:532
actions required to bring the stormwater management practice
into proper working condition.
g. Agreement that the party designated under Subsection (k)(1)c,
as responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater
management practices, shall be notified by the City of Lake
Geneva of maintenance problems which require correction.
The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken within a
reasonable time frame as set by the City of Lake Geneva.
h. Authorization of the City of Lake Geneva to perform the
corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the
responsible party designated under Subsection (k)(1)c, does
not make the required corrections in the specified time period.
The City of Lake Geneva shall enter the amount due on the tax
rolls and collect the money as a special charge against the
property pursuant to Subch. VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
(l) Financial guaranty.
(1) Establishment of the guaranty. The City of Lake Geneva may
require the submittal of a financial guaranty, the form and type of
which shall be acceptable to the City of Lake Geneva. The financial
guaranty shall be in an amount determined by the City of Lake
Geneva to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated
cost of maintenance of the stormwater management practices
during the period which the designated party in the maintenance
agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial guaranty
shall include all phases of the plan from the clearing and
stockpiling operations to final grading and landscaping, including a
maintenance guaranty for a period of not less than two years from
the recording of the document or commencement of construction,
whichever occurs first. An agreement will be a part of the financial
guaranty, which shall give the City of Lake Geneva the
authorization to use the funds to complete the stormwater
management practices if the responsible party defaults or does not
properly implement the approved stormwater management plan,
upon written notice to the responsible party by the City of Lake
Geneva that the requirements of this section have not been met.
This agreement shall be received by the City prior to issuance of
any permits and shall be effective for a sufficient time period to
perform the activities required, make the appropriate inspections,
and approve the final installation. The City may extend the
agreement beyond its original expiration date if necessary due to
unexpected or unforeseen circumstances beyond the control of the
responsible party. A performance bond shall be replaced with a
maintenance guaranty for a stated period of time and in an amount
equal to a percentage of the cost of the construction of the
improvements and a cost overrun of 15%.
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:533
(2) Conditions for release. Conditions for the release of the financial
guaranty are as follows:
a. The City of Lake Geneva shall release the portion of the
financial guaranty established under this section, less any
costs incurred by the City of Lake Geneva to complete
installation of practices, upon submission of as-built plans or
record drawings by a licensed professional engineer. The City
of Lake Geneva may make provisions for a partial pro rata
release of the financial guaranty based on the completion of
various development stages.
b. The City of Lake Geneva shall release the portion of the
financial guaranty established under this section to assure
maintenance of stormwater practices, less any costs incurred
by the City of Lake Geneva, at such time that the responsibility
for practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an
approved maintenance agreement.
(m) Fee schedule.
(1) The fees referred to in other subsections of this section shall be
established by the City of Lake Geneva and may from time to time
be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the
City of Lake Geneva shall be available for review in City Hall. The
processing fees shall be related to costs involved in processing
permit applications, conditional use petitions, appeals to the Board
of Appeals and zoning amendments and changes.
(2) The City of Lake Geneva shall charge a double fee if work is started
before a permit is applied for and issued. Such double fee shall not
release the applicant from full compliance with this section nor
from prosecution for violation of this section.
(n) Enforcement.
(1) Any land-disturbing construction activity or post-construction
runoff initiated after the effective date of this section by any
person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the ordinance
provisions shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
(2) The City of Lake Geneva shall notify the responsible party by
certified mail of any noncomplying land-disturbing construction
activity or post-construction runoff. The notice shall describe the
nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for
remedial action, and additional enforcement action which may be
taken.
(3) Upon receipt of written notification from the City of Lake Geneva
under Subsection (n)(2), the responsible party shall correct work
that does not comply with the stormwater management plan or
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-247
1:534
other provisions of this permit. The responsible party shall make
corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule
set forth by the City of Lake Geneva in the notice.
(4) If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this section are
likely to result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters
of the state, the City of Lake Geneva may enter the land and take
emergency actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs
incurred by the City of Lake Geneva plus interest and legal costs
shall be billed to the responsible party.
(5) The City of Lake Geneva is authorized to post a stop-work order on
all land-disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this
section, or to request the City Attorney to obtain a cease and desist
order in any court with jurisdiction.
(6) The City of Lake Geneva may revoke a permit issued under this
section for noncompliance with ordinance provisions.
(7) Any permit revocation, stop-work order, or cease and desist order
shall remain in effect unless retracted by the City of Lake Geneva
or by a court with jurisdiction.
(8) The City of Lake Geneva is authorized to refer any violation of this
section, or a stop-work order or cease and desist order issued
pursuant to this section, to the City Attorney for the
commencement of further legal proceedings in any court with
jurisdiction.
(9) Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply
with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture in
accordance with the City for each violation. Each day that the
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(10) Compliance with the provisions of this section may also be enforced
by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary
to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before
resorting to injunction proceedings.
(11) When the City of Lake Geneva determines that the holder of a
permit issued pursuant to this section has failed to follow practices
set forth in the stormwater management plan, or has failed to
comply with schedules set forth in said stormwater management
plan, the City of Lake Geneva or a party designated by the City of
Lake Geneva may enter upon the land and perform the work or
other operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into
conformance with requirements of the approved stormwater
management plan. The City of Lake Geneva shall keep a detailed
accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this work.
These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial
security posted pursuant to Subsection (l) of this section. Where
such a security has not been established, or where such a security
Sec. 78-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-247
1:535
Sec. 78-248. Prohibited wastes and waters. [Code 1992, § 13.51(3);
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to
any public sewer:
is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be
entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and
collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which
the work is completed.
(o) Appeals.
(1) Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals, created pursuant to
Section 98-934 of the City of Lake Geneva ordinances pursuant to
§ 62.23 (7)(e), Wis. Stats., shall hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination
made by the City of Lake Geneva in administering this section. The
Board shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers
authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals. Upon
appeal, the Board may authorize variances from the provisions of
this section that are not contrary to the public interest, and where
owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the ordinance
will result in unnecessary hardship.
(2) Who may appeal. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by
any aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board, or
bureau of the City of Lake Geneva affected by any decision of the
City of Lake Geneva.
(p) Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this section is
judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected
by such judgment.
(1) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
(2) Waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases
in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
that could injure or interfere with any waste treatment or sludge
disposal process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create a
public nuisance in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
facility.
(3) Waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or in excess of 9.0 or
having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities.
Sec. 78-247 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-248
1:536
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in public sewers or other interference
with the proper operation of the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
(5) The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be
limited in discharges to sanitary sewer systems to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either the sanitary sewers, wastewater
treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream or groundwater, or will not otherwise endanger lives,
limbs, public property or constitute a nuisance. The Director of Utilities
may set limitations more stringent than those established in this
subsection if such limitations are necessary to meet the objectives in
this subsection. The Director of Utilities will give consideration to the
quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sanitary sewers, the
wastewater treatment facility and other pertinent factors. Wastes or
wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewers shall not exceed the
following limitations:
a. Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
b. Wastewater containing more than 25 mg/l of petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral oil origin.
c. Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or
grease.
d. Any unground garbage. Garbage grinders may be connected to
sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants,
hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose
of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
e. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
other toxic and nonconventional pollutants to such degree that the
concentration exceeds levels specified by federal, state and local
authorities.
f. Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by the Director of
Utilities or limits established by any federal or state statute, rule or
regulation.
g. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Director of Utilities in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
Sec. 78-248 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-248
1:537
Sec. 78-249. WPDES permit. [Code 1992, § 13.51(4); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
No person shall cause or permit a discharge into the sanitary sewers that
would cause a violation of the City's WPDES permit and any modifications
of such permit.
Sec. 78-250. Special arrangements. [Code 1992, § 13.51(5);
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting
any special agreement between the Director of Utilities and any person
whereby a waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to
the wastewater collection and treatment facilities, either before or after
pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities by reason of the admission
of such wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the City without
h. Any waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment
process employed or are amenable to treatment only to such
degree that the wastewater treatment facility effluent cannot meet
the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
i. Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other waters or
wastes in the sanitary sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form
suspended solids which interfere with the collection system or
create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment
processes.
j. Materials which exert or cause:
1. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the wastewater treatment facility.
2. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs.
3. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues or
of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium sulfate.
4. Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
k. Incompatible pollutants in excess of the allowed limits as
determined by City, state and federal laws and regulations in
reference to pretreatment standards developed by the
Environmental Protection Agency, all categorical DNR standards
and as contained in 40 CFR 403, as amended from time to time.
Sec. 78-248 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-250
1:538
recompense by the person, and provided that all rates and provisions set
forth in this article are recognized and adhered to.
Sec. 78-251. New connections. [Code 1992, § 13.51(6); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
New connections or extensions to the City's sanitary sewer system will
be allowed only if there is available capacity in all of the downstream
wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
Sec. 78-252. Sewer connection required. [Code 1992, § 13.51(7);
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
All owners of property to which sanitary sewers are available, as
determined by the Director of Utilities, shall connect with the sanitary
sewer system and properly abandon their private disposal system. At such
time as the Director of Utilities determines that sewer service is available,
he shall serve a notice upon the owner of the property to make the
connection to the sanitary sewer within 30 days from the date of the notice.
If the owner finds it difficult to comply with the terms of the notice, he
shall file with the Director of Utilities a statement from a licensed plumber
or other person authorized to do such work that such property owner has
contracted to have such work done within a stated period of time, not to
exceed six months from the expiration of the thirty-day period set forth in
the notice.
Sec. 78-253. through Sec. 78-265. (Reserved)
Sec. 78-250 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-253
1:539

DIVISION 3
SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND CONNECTIONS
Sec. 78-266. Work to be authorized. [Code 1992, § 13.56(1);
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb the public sewers, laterals or
appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Utility Commission.
Sec. 78-267. Cost of sewer connections. [Code 1992, § 13.56(2);
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Sec. 78-268. Permit charges. [Code 1992, § 13.56(3); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
In addition to the costs outlined in Section 78-267, there shall be a charge
for the issuing of the permit by the utility, such charge to assist in funding
past and future capital improvements to the sewer system and treatment
facility. Charges shall be as set from time to time and are on file in the office
of the Director of Utilities. Credit shall be given for drainage units in use at
that time. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director may appeal
the decision under the procedures of Chapter 2 of this Code.
Sec. 78-269. Permit issuance to licensed master plumber. [Code
1992, § 13.56(4); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
A permit shall only be issued to a licensed master plumber.
Sec. 78-270. Use of old building sewers. [Code 1992, § 13.56(5);
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found on examination and test by the Utility Commission to
meet all requirements for this article.
(a) All building sewers and laterals located in the public right-of-way or
easement from the point of connection to the sewer main and all
facilities throughout the premises served shall be maintained free of
defective conditions by and at the expense of the owner of the property
being served thereby.
(b) All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the person making the connection,
including impact fees, as applicable.
Sec. 78-266 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-271
1:541
Sec. 78-271. Materials and methods of construction. [Code 1992,
§ 13.56(6); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of
the City. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification of such codes,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
ASTM, Department of Commerce Section 83 and WEF Manual of Practice
No. 9 shall apply. All construction material products must be approved in
writing by the Director of Utilities prior to use.
Sec. 78-272. Building sewer grade; lifting of sewage. [Code 1992,
§ 13.56(7); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
Sec. 78-273. Stormwater and groundwater drains. [Code 1992,
§ 13.56(8); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Sec. 78-274. Conformance to plumbing codes. [Code 1992,
§ 13.56(9); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The connection of the building sewer into the sanitary sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM or WEF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials shall be approved by the Director of
Utilities before installation.
Sec. 78-275. Inspection of connection. [Code 1992, § 13.56(10);
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The person making connection to a public sewer shall notify the City when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be inspected and approved by the City.
(a) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which is connected
directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer.
(b) All existing downspouts or groundwater drains, etc., connected directly
or indirectly to a sanitary sewer shall be disconnected within 30 days of
the date of an official written notice from the Director of Utilities.
Sec. 78-271 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-276
1:542
Sec. 78-276. Guarding of excavations; restoration of surfaces.
[Code 1992, § 13.56(11); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
All excavations for a building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. The City may
require slurry backfill in high traffic areas or when time is of the essence.
Sec. 78-277. Waiver of sewer service connection fees. [Code 1992,
§ 13.56(12); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Sewer service connection fees shall be waived with respect to any home,
residence or unit as described in Section 78-268 in existence as of October
1, 1972, and held in fee simple ownership by the same individual or his or
her heir from October 1, 1972, to the date of the ordinance from which this
subsection is derived.
Sec. 78-278. through Sec. 78-295. (Reserved)
Sec. 78-276 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-278
1:543

DIVISION 4
RATES AND CHARGES
Subdivision I
In General
Sec. 78-296. through Sec. 78-310. (Reserved)
Subdivision II
Basis for Sewer Service Charges
Sec. 78-311. Sewer users served by water utility meters. [Code
1992, § 13.53(1); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
There is hereby levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building
or premises having a connection with the wastewater collection system and
being served with water solely by the water utility, a wastewater treatment
service charge based, in part, on the quantity of water used as measured by
the water utility meter used upon the premises.
Sec. 78-312. Sewer users served by private wells. [Code 1992,
§ 13.53(2); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
(a) If any person discharging wastewater into the sanitary sewers procures
any part or all of his water from sources other than the water utility, all
or part of which is discharged into the sanitary sewers, the person shall
have water meters installed by the water utility at such person's
expense for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained
from these sources. Where sewer meters are already installed, water
meters will not be required. The water meters shall be furnished by the
water utility and installed under its supervision, all costs being at the
expense of the person requiring the meter.
(b) The water utility will charge for each meter a rental charge set by the
water utility to compensate for the cost of furnishing and servicing the
meter. The rental charge shall be billed at the time the sewer service
charge is billed.
(c) For users where, in the opinion of the Director of Utilities, it is
unnecessary or impractical to install meters, the quantity of wastewater
may be based upon an estimate prepared by the Utility Commission.
This estimate shall be based upon a rational determination of the
wastewater discharged and may consider such factors as the number of
fixtures, seating capacity, population equivalent, annual production of
goods and services or such other determinants of water use necessary
to estimate the wastewater volume discharged.
Sec. 78-296 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-313
1:545
Sec. 78-313. Deduct meters. [Code 1992, § 13.53(3); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
If a person feels that a significant amount of metered water does not reach
the sanitary sewer, he can, at his own expense with the approval of the
Director of Utilities, install such additional meters or metered services
as are necessary to calculate the volume of water not discharged to the
sanitary sewer. Metered water not discharged to the sanitary sewers shall
not be subject to sewer service charges. Requests to install additional
meters shall be made in writing to the Director of Utilities.
Sec. 78-314. Sewer service charges. [Code 1992, § 13.53(4);
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
A sewer service charge is hereby imposed upon each lot, parcel of land,
building or premises served by the sewer system or otherwise discharging
sewage, including industrial wastes, into the sewer system. Such sewer
service charge shall be payable as provided in this section and in an amount
determined as follows: The sewer service charge for any lot, parcel of land,
building or premises within the corporate limits and for any lot, parcel of
land, building or premises outside the corporate limits which is connected
to the sanitary sewer system shall be based upon the quantity of water used
therein or thereon and quality of wastewater generated, as measured by
the water meter or sewage meter in use. Sewer service charges shall be set
from time to time and are on file in the offices of the Director of Utilities and
City Clerk.
Sec. 78-315. Private supply water customers. [Code 1992,
§ 13.53(5); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
For any parcel of land having a private supply, in addition to the City supply,
the sewage charge shall consist of the sewer demand charge based upon
the size of the water meter or meters used to measure such private supply.
Such demand charges shall be used the same as those set forth in Section
78-314.
Sec. 78-316. Reassignment of sewer users. [Code 1992, § 13.53(6);
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The Utility Commission will reassign sewer users into appropriate sewer
service charge categories if wastewater flow monitoring and sampling
programs, or other related information, indicate a change of categories is
necessary.
Sec. 78-317. Operation, maintenance and replacement fund
accounts. [Code 1992, § 13.53(7); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No.
17-04]
(a) All sewer service charge revenues collected for replacement costs shall
be deposited in a separate and distinct fund to be used solely for
replacement costs. All sewer service charge revenues collected for
Sec. 78-313 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-317
1:546
Sec. 78-318. Charge for toxic pollutants. [Code 1992, § 13.53(8);
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Any person discharging toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost
of managing the effluent or sludge from the City's wastewater treatment
facility shall pay for such increased costs, as may be determined by the
Director of Utilities.
Sec. 78-319. through Sec. 78-335. (Reserved)
Subdivision III
Building Practices
Sec. 78-336. Sewer service charge billing period. [Code 1992,
§ 13.54(2); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Sewer service charges shall be billed by the Utility Commission to the sewer
users on a quarterly or monthly basis.
Sec. 78-337. Payment of sewer service charges. [Code 1992,
§ 13.54(3); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Those persons billed by the Utility Commission for sewer service charges
shall pay such charges by the due date shown on the bill. After the due date,
a penalty of 1 1/2% per month will be added to all unpaid charges.
Sec. 78-338. Penalties. [Code 1992, § 13.54(4); amended 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 17-04]
Sec. 78-339. through § 78-355. (Reserved)
other operation and maintenance expenses, and for payment of
principal and interest on general obligation bonds, shall also be
deposited in a separate and distinct fund.
(b) All revenues for the replacement fund and for operation and
maintenance of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities shall
be used solely for the replacement fund and operation and maintenance
of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
(a) Such sewer service charges levied by the Utility Commission against
the sewer users in accordance with this division shall be a debt due to
the Utility Commission and shall be a lien upon the property. If this debt
is not paid within 20 days after it shall become due, it shall be deemed
delinquent and may be placed on the next year's tax roll and collected
as other taxes are collected.
(b) Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall
not be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties.
Sec. 78-317 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-339
1:547

DIVISION 5
SEWER EXTENSIONS
Sec. 78-356. Additions to public sewer system. [Code 1992, § 13.57;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Sec. 78-357. Utility district extensions. [Code 1992, § 13.58;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
(a) Levy and collection of special assessments. Whenever the City Council
shall by resolution require sewer service pipes to be extended in any
area, the Council may levy and collect special assessments upon the
property on which such sewer benefits are conferred as provided by the
state statutes. The amount assessed against any property shall not
exceed the value of the benefits accruing to the property from the
installation of the sewers.
(b) Preliminary cost estimates. The City Council may also, upon written
request and submittal of a preliminary development plan by a
developer, authorize engineers to prepare a preliminary cost estimate
of required utilities for the purpose of determining the amount of cash
deposit required of the developer for additional work.
(a) Preliminary cost estimate. Following the City Council's resolution, the
Director of Utilities will authorize the preparation of a preliminary cost
estimate of the required utilities. The cost of any work or improvement
to be paid, in whole or in part, by special assessment on property may
include the direct and indirect cost thereof, the damages occasioned
thereby, the interest on bonds or notes issued in anticipation of the
collection of the assessments, a reasonable charge for the services of
the administrative staff of the Director of Utilities and the cost of any
architectural, engineering and legal services and any other item of
direct or indirect cost which may reasonably be attributed to the
proposed work or improvement in accordance with state statutes.
(b) Amount assessed apportioned by Council. The amount to be assessed
against all property for any such proposed work or improvement shall
be apportioned among the individual parcels in the manner designated
by the City Council.
(c) Notice of hearing; contents. The Director of Utilities shall then cause
notice of a public hearing to be given stating the nature of the proposed
work or improvement, the general boundary lines of the proposed
assessment area, including, in the discretion of the Director of Utilities,
a small map thereof, the place and time at which the preliminary cost
estimate may be inspected and the place and time at which all
interested persons may appear before the City Council and be heard.
(d) Approval, disapproval or modification; Council resolution upon
approval. After the hearing, the Council may approve, disapprove or
modify the proposed sewer extension or assessment determinations.
Sec. 78-356 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-357
1:549
Sec. 78-358. Developer extensions. [Code 1992, § 13.59; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
When the City Council determines to proceed with the improvement,
it will approve the plans and specifications and adopt a resolution
directing such improvement be carried out in accordance with the
report as finally approved and providing for the terms of payment.
(e) Amendment, cancellation or confirmation of prior assessments.
Whenever the actual cost of any project, upon completion or after the
receipt of bids, varies materially from the estimate or whenever any
assessment is void or invalid for any reason, the City Council may, after
public hearing, amend, cancel or confirm the prior assessment.
(f) Grinder pump installations; permit. For those single users who are to be
serviced by means of grinder pump installations, the user shall furnish
a grinder pump station in accordance with requirements of the Director
of Utilities. If the Director of Utilities approves the grinder pump
station supplied by the user, a permit for services may be issued. The
grinder pump shall be installed on private property in accordance with
the applicable section of Ch. 62, Wis. Adm. Code.
(a) Preliminary cost estimate; deposit by developer. Upon deposit with the
Director of Utilities of 10% of a preliminary cost estimate prepared by
the developer's engineer, the Director of Utilities shall authorize the
City Engineer to review detailed plans and specifications for the
required utilities. Upon completion of the plans and specifications,
copies will be forwarded to all state approving agencies, the City
Council and the developer.
(b) Construction bids; advertisement. Following approval of the plans, the
City Council may authorize advertising the project for construction bids
and shall receive such bids all in accordance with state statutes.
(c) Developer to be informed of lowest responsible bidder. Upon receipt of
construction bids and the determination of the lowest responsible
bidder, the Director of Utilities shall inform the developer of the amount
of such bid and the name of the contractor to whom the contract shall
be awarded should the project proceed.
(d) Developer's response to bid; costs for City's expenses deducted from
developer's deposit. Should the developer determine that the cost of the
proposed project is over that which he wishes to invest, all bids will be
rejected, the contract will not be awarded and the project dropped. All
costs incurred by the City for engineering, legal and administrative
expenses up to this point shall be deducted from the developer's deposit
of 10%, and any monies remaining shall be returned to the developer. If
the costs incurred by the City are greater than the developer's deposit
of 10%, the developer shall make appropriate payment to the City.
Sec. 78-357 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-358
1:550
Sec. 78-359. through Sec. 78-375. (Reserved)
(e) Developer's election to proceed; deposit of 120% of bid; form of deposit.
If the developer elects to proceed with construction of a sewer or water
project, he shall deposit with the City a total of 120% of the
construction bid. This may be made in the form of a cash deposit or an
irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the City attorney at the City
Council's option.
(f) Awarding of project to contractor. Following deposit of the necessary
funds to cover construction of the project and expenses to be incurred
by the City, including engineering, legal, administrative and
contingencies, the City Council shall award the project to the lowest
responsible bidder and enter into a contract with the successful
contractor in accordance with state statutes.
(g) Completion; refund to developer or additional deposit of funds. Upon
completion of the construction project and the determination of final
costs based on the as-built quantities, any monies remaining on deposit
shall be returned to the developer. If sufficient funds for payment of all
costs are not available from the deposited funds, the developer shall
deposit the required additional amounts upon demand by the City.
(h) Grinder pump installations; permit. For single users who are serviced
by means of grinder pump installations, the developer shall furnish a
grinder pump station for each user in accordance with requirements of
the Director of Utilities. If the Director of Utilities approves the
proposed grinder pump station installations supplied by the developer,
a permit for services may be issued. The grinder pump shall be installed
on private property in accordance with the applicable section of Ch.
ILHR 82, Wis. Adm. Code.
Sec. 78-358 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-359
1:551

DIVISION 6
PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
Sec. 78-376. Enumeration. [Code 1992, § 13.60(1); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, leaked, leached or
spilled upon any public street, alley or public property or onto the ground,
surface waters, subsurface waters or aquifers or on any private property
within the City, except those areas specifically licensed for waste disposal
or landfill activities and to receive such materials, any explosive, flammable
or combustible solid liquid or gas; any radioactive material at or above
nuclear regulatory restriction levels; etiologic agents or any solid, liquid or
gas creating a hazard, potential hazard or public nuisance; or any solid,
liquid or gas having a deleterious effect on the environment.
Sec. 78-377. Containment, cleanup and restoration. [Code 1992,
§ 13.60(2); Ord. No. 99-13, § 1, 8-9-1999; amended 5-29-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-08; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08; amended 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 17-04]
Any person in violation of Section 78-376 shall, upon direction of the Police
Chief, Fire Chief, Director of Utilities, Finance Director/Treasurer or their
designees, begin immediate actions to contain, clean up and remove to
any approved repository the offending material and restore the site to
its original condition, with the offending person being responsible for all
expenses incurred. Should any person fail to engage the necessary men and
equipment to comply or to complete the requirements of this division, the
office of emergency government or City may order the required actions to
be taken by public or private resources and allow the recovery of any and
all costs incurred by the City from any violating party.
Sec. 78-378. Site access. [Code 1992, § 13.60(3); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Access to any site, public or private, where a prohibited discharge is
indicated or suspected will be provided to emergency government officers
or the City evaluating the threat to the public and monitoring containment,
cleanup and restoration activities.
Sec. 78-379. Public protection. [Code 1992, § 13.60(4); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Should any prohibited discharge occur that threatens the life, safety or
health of the public at, near or around the site of a prohibited discharge and
the situation is so critical that immediate steps must be taken to protect life
and limb, the Coordinator of Emergency Government, his assistant or the
senior City police, fire or public works official on the scene of the emergency
may order an evacuation of the area or take other appropriate protective
steps for a period of time until the City Council can take appropriate action.
Sec. 78-376 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-380
1:553
Sec. 78-380. Enforcement of division. [Code 1992, § 13.60(5);
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The Coordinator of Emergency Government and his deputies, as well as
the City police officers, shall have authority to issue citations or complaints
under this division.
Sec. 78-381. Civil liability. [Code 1992, § 13.60(6); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Any person in violation of this division shall be liable to the City for any
expenses incurred by the City or loss or damage sustained by the City by
reason of such violation.
Sec. 78-382. Penalty for violation of division. [Code 1992,
§ 13.60(7); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Any person in violation of this division shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in Section 1-12.
Sec. 78-383. through Sec. 78-395. (Reserved)
Sec. 78-380 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-383
1:554
DIVISION 7
INDUSTRIAL WASTE CONTROL
Sec. 78-396. Submission of basic data as to waste characteristics.
[Code 1992, § 13.52(1); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The City and its Director of Utilities may require each person who
discharges or seeks to discharge industrial wastes to a public sewer to
prepare and file with the City, at such times as he determines, a report that
shall include pertinent data relating to the quantity and characteristics of
the wastes discharged to the wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
In the case of a new connection, the City may require that this report be
prepared prior to making the connection to the public sewers.
Sec. 78-397. Industrial discharges with deleterious effects;
response by City and Director. [Code 1992, § 13.52(2); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers which contain substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in Section 78-248 and which, in the judgment of the City, have
a deleterious effect upon the wastewater collection and treatment facilities,
processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a
hazard to life, health or constitute a public nuisance, the City, Director of
Utilities and staff may:
Sec. 78-398. Control manholes. [Code 1992, § 13.52(3); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
(1) Reject the wastes.
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of this article.
(a) Each person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer shall, at
the discretion of the City or its Director of Utilities, construct and
maintain one or more control manholes or access points to facilitate
observation, measurement and sampling of wastes, including sanitary
sewage.
(b) Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a
manner acceptable to the City. If measuring and/or sampling devices
are to be permanently installed, they shall be of a type acceptable to the
Director of Utilities.
Sec. 78-396 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-398
1:555
Sec. 78-399. Measurement of flow. [Code 1992, § 13.52(4); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
The volume of flow used for computing sewer service charges shall be the
metered water consumption of the person as shown in the records of meter
readings maintained by the water utility, except as noted in Section 78-400.
Sec. 78-400. Metering of waste. [Code 1992, § 13.59(5); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by
the Utility Commission if this volume cannot otherwise be determined from
the metered water consumption records. Metering devices for determining
the volume of waste shall be installed, owned and maintained by the person
discharging the wastewater. Following approval and installation, such
meters may not be removed without the written consent of the Utility
Commission.
Sec. 78-401. Waste sampling. [Code 1992, § 13.52(6); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
(c) Control manholes, access facilities and related equipment shall be
installed by the person discharging the waste, at such person's
expense, and shall be maintained by the person so as to be in safe
condition, accessible and in proper operating condition at all times.
Plans for installation of the control manholes or access facilities and
related equipment shall be approved by the City prior to the beginning
of construction.
(a) Industrial wastes discharged into the public sewers shall be subject to
periodic inspection and a determination of character and concentration
of such wastes. The determination shall be made by the industry as
often as may be deemed necessary by the Utility Commission.
(b) Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of
the composition of the wastes. The sampling may be accomplished
either manually or by the use of mechanical equipment acceptable to
the Utility Commission.
(c) Installation, operation and maintenance of the sampling facilities shall
be the responsibility of the person discharging the waste and shall be
subject to the approval of the Utility Commission. Access to sampling
locations shall be granted to the Utility Commission at all times. Every
care shall be exercised in the collection of samples to ensure their
preservation in a state comparable to that at the time the sample was
taken.
Sec. 78-398 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-402
1:556
Sec. 78-402. Pretreatment. [Code 1992, § 13.52(7); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Persons discharging industrial wastes into any public sewer may be
required to pretreat such wastes, if the Utility Commission determines
pretreatment is necessary to protect the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities or prevent the discharge of incompatible pollutants. In
that event, such person shall provide at his expense such pretreatment
or processing facilities as may be determined necessary to render wastes
acceptable for admission to the sanitary sewers.
Sec. 78-403. Grease, oil and sand interceptors. [Code 1992,
§ 13.52(8); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Utility Commission, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing floatable grease in amounts in excess of those specified
in this article, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients.
Such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the City and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. In maintaining these interceptors, the owner
shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate
means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and
means of disposal which are subject to review by the Director of Utilities.
Disposal of the collected materials performed by the owner's personnel
or currently licensed waste disposal firms shall be in accordance with
currently acceptable DNR rules and regulations.
Sec. 78-404. Analyses. [Code 1992, § 13.52(9); amended 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 17-04]
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined
in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods and with the
federal regulations, 40 CFR 136, Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures
for Analysis of Pollutants, as amended from time to time. Sampling methods,
location, time, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an
individual basis, subject to approval by the City.
Sec. 78-405. Submission of pertinent information by discharger.
[Code 1992, § 13.52(10); amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed flow equalization, pretreatment or grease and/or sand interceptor
facilities shall be submitted for review and approval of the Director of
Utilities prior to the start of their construction if the effluent from such
facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers. No construction of such
facilities shall commence until such approval has been granted.
Sec. 78-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-406
1:557
Sec. 78-406. Review fees. [Code 1992, § 13.52(11); amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
Any fees that are incurred by the Utility Commission for review of plans
and specifications, compliance reports, operational reports or other analysis
and any costs associated with taking and analyzing samples shall be the
responsibility of the person discharging the waste. The Director of Utilities
or his or her designee will advise the owner regarding the anticipated
fees prior to the performance of the work. Any such fees incurred and not
paid shall become a lien upon the property upon which such services were
rendered.
Sec. 78-406 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-406
1:558
ARTICLE IV
[Added 3W-1A2T-E20R1 S2OBFyTOENrdE. RNSo. 12-05]
Sec. 78-407. Regulation in new construction. [Amended 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 17-04]
All water softeners installed in residential and commercial buildings after
April 1, 2012, shall regenerate water based upon a metering device or
sensor, or be equipped with a regeneration tank within the contents of the
tank that can be removed and disposed of off-site. Water softeners which
regenerate based on a time clock are prohibited.
Sec. 78-407 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 78-407
1:559
Chapter 82
VEGETATION
Sec. 78-407 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 78-407
1:560
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 82-1. Control of weeds and grasses. [Code 1992, § 15.10]
Sec. 82-2. Penalty for violation of chapter. [Code 1992, § 15.15]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any regulation,
rule or order made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in section 1-12.
Sec. 82-3. Regulations for lawn fertilizer application and sale. [Ord.
No. 07-10, 9-10-2007]
(a) Mowing required. No person owning, leasing or otherwise controlling
property within the city shall permit to grow noxious weeds and grasses
as defined in W.S.A., § 66.96. To prevent such growth and pollination,
every property owner, lessee or person in control of property shall mow
or cause to be mowed upon such premises all grasses or weeds
exceeding one foot in height, regardless of such weeds' nature or effect
on the environment.
(b) Mowing by city; costs; collection. The weed commissioner shall enforce
this section, and if any person fails to comply, the commissioner shall
after five days' written notice to the owner, lessee or person in control
of such property cause the premises to be mowed and report the cost in
writing to the city clerk in the manner provided in W.S.A., § 66.98. Such
charge shall be spread on the tax roll as a special tax to be collected in
the same manner as other taxes, unless such lands are exempt from
taxation.
(a) Authority. This chapter is recommended by the Geneva Lake
Environmental Agency and is adopted by the city under the authority of
W.S.A. § 62.04.
(b) Purpose and intent. The city finds that Geneva Lake and its streams are
a natural asset which enhance the environmental, recreational, cultural
and economic resources of the area and contribute to the general
health and welfare of the public. The city further finds that regulating
the amount of nutrients and contaminants, including phosphorus
contained in fertilizer, entering the surface waters will improve and
maintain lake and stream water quality.
(c) Applicability. This section applies in all areas of the City of Lake
Geneva.
(d) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) Agricultural use — Beekeeping; dairying; egg production;
floriculture; fish or fur farming; forest and game management;
Sec. 82-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 82-3
1:561
grazing; livestock raising; orchards; plant greenhouses and
nurseries; poultry raising; raising of grain; mint and seed crops;
raising of fruits; nuts berries, sod farming and vegetable raising.
(2) Fertilizer has the meaning set forth in W.S.A., § 94.64(1)(e).
(3) Lawn fertilizer — Any fertilizer, whether distributed by property
owner, renter or commercial entity, distributed for nonagricultural
use, such as for lawns, golf courses, parks and cemeteries. Lawn
fertilizer does not include fertilizer products intended primarily for
garden and indoor plant applications.
(e) Regulation of the use and application of lawn fertilizer.
(1) Effective January 1, 2008, no person shall apply any lawn fertilizer
within the city that is labeled as containing more than 0%
phosphorus or other compound containing phosphorus, such as
phosphate, except as provided in the exemptions in this section.
(2) No lawn fertilizer shall be applied when the ground is frozen.
(3) No person shall apply fertilizer to any impervious surface including
parking lots, roadways, and sidewalks. If such application occurs,
the fertilizer must be immediately contained and either legally
applied to turf or placed in an appropriate container.
(f) Exemptions. The prohibition against the use of fertilizer under
subsection (e) shall not apply to:
(1) Newly established turf or lawn areas during their first growing
season.
(2) Turf or lawn areas that soil tests, performed within the past three
years by a state-certified soil testing laboratory, confirm are below
phosphorus levels established by the University of Wisconsin
Extension Service. The lawn fertilizer application shall not contain
an amount of phosphorus exceeding the amount and rate of
application recommended in the soil test evaluation.
(3) Agricultural uses, vegetable and flower gardens, or application to
trees or shrubs.
(4) Yard waste compost, bio-solids or other similar materials that are
primarily organic in nature and are applied to improve the physical
condition of the soil.
(g) Sale of fertilizer containing phosphorus.
(1) Effective January 1, 2008, no person shall sell or offer for sale any
lawn fertilizer within the city that is labeled as containing more
than 0% phosphorus, or other compound containing phosphorus,
such as phosphate, except such fertilizer may be sold for use as
provided in the exemptions of this section.
Sec. 82-3 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 82-3
1:562
Sec. 82-4. through Sec. 82-30. (Reserved)
(2) Effective January 1, 2008, no person shall display lawn fertilizer
containing phosphorus. Signs may be posted advising customers
that lawn fertilizer containing phosphorus is available upon request
for uses permitted by the exemptions of this section.
(3) Effective January 1, 2008, a sign containing the regulations set
forth in this section and the effects of phosphorus on Geneva Lake
and its streams must be prominently displayed where lawn
fertilizers are sold.
(h) Enforcement. Violations of this section will be enforced by the city
building inspector or code enforcement officer.
(i) Penalty. Any person who violates this section in the application of
fertilizer at his or her residences shall be subjected to a forfeiture of
$25 per violation. Any commercial fertilizer applicator, residential or
commercial developer, industrial or commercial owner, or other person
who violates subsection (e), and any person who violates subsection (g)
shall be subject to a forfeiture of $50 for the first violation within a
twelve-month period, $150 for the second violation within a twelvemonth
period, and $300 for the third and each subsequent violations
within a twelve-month period.
(j) Severability clause. If any section, provision or portion of this section is
ruled invalid by a court, the remainder of the section shall not for that
reason be rendered ineffective or invalid.
Sec. 82-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 82-4
1:563

ARTICLE II
TREE DISEASES
Sec. 82-31. Dutch Elm Disease. [Code 1992, § 10.06(1); Ord. No.
08-05, § 1, 4-28-2008]
The city council, having determined that the health of the elm trees within
the city is threatened by a fatal disease known as Dutch elm disease, hereby
declares the following to be public nuisances:
Sec. 82-32. Oak wilt disease.
Oak Wilt Disease, defined as follows:
Sec. 82-33. Emerald ash borer. [Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 4-28-2008]
Emerald Ash Borer infestation defined as follows:
Sec. 82-34. through Sec. 82-60. (Reserved)
(1) Any living or standing elm tree or part of an elm tree infected with
Dutch elm disease fungus or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles
Scolytus multistriatus (Eichh) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh).
(2) Any dead elm tree or part of a dead elm tree, including logs, branches,
firewood, stumps or other elm material from which the bark has not
been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle
destroying pesticide.
(1) Any living or standing tree or part thereof in the Red Oak family
(Quercus rubra) including Pin Oak, Northern Pin Oak, Scarlet Oak, and
Black Oak colonized to any degree with the Oak Wilt Fungus
(Ceratocystis fagacearum).
(2) Any living or standing tree in the White Oak family (Quercus alba)
including Burr Oak, Bicolor Oak, colonized to any degree by the Oak
Wilt Fungus, that poses a threat of transmission of the Oak Wilt Fungus
to other trees of the same species through root graftin.
(3) Any parts of colonized oaks that do not have bark removed, including
logs, branches, stumps, and firewood.
(1) Any living or standing Ash tree species or cultivars of these species;
including Green Ash (Fraxinus pennsylvancia), White Ash (F.
Americana), Black Ash (F. Nigra), and Blue Ash (F. Quadragulata)
infested with Emerald Ash Borer (Agrilus palnipennis) or the larva of, as
evidenced by D-shaped exit holes in the bark and/or die back in the
branches and epicormic growth along its trunk.
(2) Any parts of infested Ash trees that do no have bark removed, including
logs, branches, and firewood.
Sec. 82-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 82-34
1:565

ARTICLE III
FORESTRY
Sec. 82-61. City forester. [Ord. No. 97-7, § 34.03, 5-27-1997]
(a) Designation. The city may employ a city forester, or designate its street
superintendent to perform the duties thereof, who, under the
supervision of the director of public works and utilities and the park
board or its designated tree board committee, shall exercise designated
powers and duties. City forester selection shall be based upon skills and
certifications as set forth in the most recent job description for the
position. The city forester shall generally receive direction from the
street superintendent where the city forester is different than the street
superintendent.
(b) Duties. The city forester shall have the following duties:
(1) Exercising the duties conferred in W.S.A., § 27.09.
(2) Administering and enforcing this article.
(3) Preparing an annual forestry plan to be submitted to the board, and
implementing such program as adopted and amended from time to
time. The forestry program shall include a comprehensive plan
including maintenance, inventory and new planning with budget
projections for annual and long range implementation.
(4) Supervising subordinates, overseeing other employees and
administering contracts related to the forestry program and this
article.
(5) Conducting or authorizing inspections, tests, planting,
replacements, pruning, emergency removal, treatments and
maintenance, and issuing permits as necessary to implement the
forestry program and this article. Inspections of private property,
defined as lands not owned, controlled or leased by the city, shall be
at reasonable times with the consent of the owner or person in
charge or by special inspection warrant. The annual tree removal
list shall be subject to approval of the park board.
(6) Assisting any person having a permit to move a building, structure
or oversized load upon a public right-of-way, defined as the part of
every street between the lot line and the curb, pavement or street
line, and shall include sidewalks and lawn parks, in selecting a
route which will cause minimal potential damage to trees.
(7) Promulgating written guidelines for permitted work, to be filed in
the department of public works and utilities.
(c) Plan. The city forester, under the direction of the director of public
works and utilities, shall prepare a forestry plan which shall include one
or more of the following programs: A city lawn park beautification
Sec. 82-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 82-61
1:567
Sec. 82-62. Forestry permit. [Ord. No. 97-7, §§ 34.04, 34.07,
5-27-1997]
program to provide for tree plantings and replacement in lawn parks.
The program shall provide for the cost of tree planting to be borne
jointly by the abutting property owner and the city, as determined by
the board.
(a) Required; associated costs. No person shall plant, replace, prune, alter,
do surgery on a tree or disturb the land within the dripline of any tree
on public property, defined as public rights-of-way, city lawn parks,
boulevards, parks and other lands owned, controlled or leased by the
city, or cause such work to be done by others, without first obtaining a
written permit for such work from the city forester as provided in this
section. The permit holder shall be responsible for paying for the cost of
all work performed, unless acting under contract with the city or its
subunits.
(b) Exemptions. No person shall be required to obtain a permit to fertilize,
water or mulch trees in a lawn park, defined as the area of public rightof-
way between the street and sidewalk or private property line if a
sidewalk doesn't exist, abutting their property.
(c) Application. Any person who applies for a permit shall make the
application in writing, on city forms.
(d) Issuance, fee. When the city forester determines that any proposed
work described in an application for a permit is in accordance with the
provisions of this article, taking into account the public health, safety
and welfare, the location of utilities above and below ground, public
sidewalks, driveways, street lights and signs, the general character of
the area in which the tree is located or proposed to be located, the type
of soil, the characteristics and physiological need of the genus, species
and variety of the tree, then a permit may be issued or denied as
appropriate under the circumstances, with conditions or limitations,
without a fee therefor. The applicant shall contract Digger's Hotline
prior to causing any excavation.
(e) Description of intended work; duration. Every permit issued by the city
forester shall include a description of the work to be done and shall
specify, in the case of plantings, the genus, species and variety, size,
nursery grade and location of trees to be planted. Any work done under
such permit issued under this section shall expire nine months after the
date of issuance.
(f) Permit violation. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to
perform work under a permit contrary to the permit terms and
provisions of this article. A permit violator shall be responsible for the
repair and replacement of any tree, defined as tree or shrub, damaged
or destroyed due to defective work or noncompliance with this article
for two full growing seasons following performance of work.
Sec. 82-61 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 82-62
1:568
Sec. 82-63. Trees in lawn parks and public rights-of-way. [Ord. No.
97-7, § 34.05, 5-27-1997]
The following regulations respecting trees in lawn parks and public rightsof-
way shall apply, unless a variance is granted for just cause by the city
forester:
(g) Annual public utility and contractor permits. Public utilities and
contractors shall apply for and, if approved, may obtain, in accordance
with this article, an annual forestry permit subject to the following
additional conditions, unless waived for just cause by the city forester:
(1) Provide the city forester with 15 days' advanced, written notice of
work to be performed.
(2) Perform the work in conformance with this article and written
guidelines and directives of the city forester.
(h) Revocation. Any permit granted under authority of this article may be
revoked by the city forester for just cause upon 10 days' advanced,
written notice and an opportunity to be heard. The revocation of any
permit may be appealed to the board within 10 days of receipt of
written notice of revocation.
(1) Genus, species, variety, size and manner of planting. The city forester
shall approve the genus, species, variety, size and manner of planting of
trees planted in any lawn park or public right-of-way. All trees shall be
selected, cared for, and planted in accordance with ANSI A300-1995,
NAA standards, and all other standards as applicable. All trees,
shrubbery and planting material set out or planted in lawn parks and
public rights-of-way shall be under the order, direction and supervision
of the city forester.
(2) Tall growing trees under utility wires. Planting of tall growing tree
species under utility wires is hereby prohibited. Tall growing trees are
any tree that may grow larger than 20 feet in height. A determination as
to the anticipated size of a tree species can be made by comparing
mature trees of the same species within the city area and review of the
city forester's lowgrowing tree approval list.
(3) Minimum size. The minimum size of any tree planted in a lawn park or
public right-of-way shall be 1 1/2 inches in caliper measured at six
inches above the ground.
(4) Distance limitations. No tree shall be planted in a lawn park or public
right-of-way within 15 feet of a street corner, alley, street light, traffic
sign or traffic signal or within 30 feet of another tree located in the lawn
park or public right-of-way. No more than one tree shall be planted in a
lawn park or public right-of-way abutting a lot having a frontage at the
street of less than 75 feet, unless specifically approved by the city
forester.
Sec. 82-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 82-63
1:569
(5) Required pruning. Trees planted within any lawn park or public rightof-
way shall be trimmed so that any branches or foliage projecting over
any public right-of-way which is the subject of vehicular traffic provide
a clearance of not less than 12 feet from the pavement and any
branches or foliage projecting over any public right-of-way which is the
subject of pedestrian traffic provide a clearance of not less than eight
feet from the pavement or ground. This work shall typically be
performed by the city. Trees shall be pruned in such a manner as to
preserve their health and maintain a natural shape.
(6) Visual clearance. Visual clearance, as defined in the zoning ordinance,
shall be maintained.
(7) Tree removal. The park board or director of public works and utilities,
on approval from the board, shall approve all nonemergency tree
removals. Trees which are cut down shall be removed with the root
stump grubbed or ground out to a depth at least nine inches below
grade. Surface roots beyond the main stump are to be removed to a
depth at least five inches below grade. All wood and debris shall be
removed from the site and no wood or debris shall be permitted to
remain on the street or sidewalk when work on any day is concluded.
Holes must be safeguarded by a barricade if not immediately filled. The
city will fill holes as soon as practicable, which shall be topped with a
minimum of two inches of topsoil and seeded. The site shall be
barricaded to protect the public at any time work is in progress. A
permit may be issued by the board or the director, with concurrence of
the board chairman, to an abutting property owner to remove a lawn
park tree having a diameter in excess of six inches measured 54 inches
from grade, shall also be conditioned upon proof of liability insurance
covering death and personal injury and property loss or damage in the
amount of $250,000. Trees shall be dropped away from the parkway or
street to protect all other public trees. A permit may be issued by the
city forester without proof of insurance for removal of trees less than
six inches in diameter.
(8) Sidewalks. Sidewalks, paving and other surfaces impervious to water
shall not be constructed within two feet of the base of any tree without
approval of the city forester. It is the property owner's responsibility to
maintain sidewalks adjacent to trees.
(9) Roots. Roots greater than two inches in diameter shall not be severed
without the permission of the city forester. When removed from "live"
trees, all roots shall be cut cleanly. The city may grind roots interfering
with sidewalk replacement upon seven days' advanced notice. The
critical root zone, defined as 12 times the tree diameter at breast height
(DBH), shall also be protected from activity which could result in
damage. This includes heavy vehicle and construction equipment
traffic. Protection may include placement of 12 inches of mulch or other
measures as required by the city forester.
Sec. 82-63 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 82-63
1:570
Sec. 82-64. Public nuisances on private premises. [Ord. No. 97-7,
§ 34.06, 5-27-1997; Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 4-28-2008]
(10) Boring. Boring shall be done under a tree only when necessary, and at a
minimum depth of 30 inches below grade to avoid the roots of trees.
Refer to the city construction manual for additional information.
(11) Sidewalk excavation. Sidewalk excavation shall be allowed to a
maximum depth of six inches.
(12) Curb excavation. Curb excavation shall be allowed to a maximum depth
of 18 inches.
(13) Notice of planting and removal. Whenever the city forester proposes
the planting or removal of any tree, he shall give two weeks' advance
written notice to the owner of record or person in charge of the lot or
parcel of land adjacent to the land on which such tree stands or will
stand. The written notice shall advise that written, detailed objections
may be sent or served upon the city forester within the two-week
period. The notice shall specify in detail the street, avenue or boulevard
from which trees are proposed to be planted or removed and the
general nature and character of the changes and improvement
contemplated. After reviewing any written objections which may be
submitted, the city forester may modify planting plan or forward
objections to removals to the board for final decision. No prior notices
by the city forester are required for the trimming of living trees or for
the emergency removal of dead or dangerous trees. The absence of a
timely notice shall not render any work performed invalid.
(14) Sanitary sewers clogged with tree roots. Abutting property owners
shall be responsible for cleaning and repairing sanitary sewer laterals
which are clogged with the roots from lawn park trees. The abutting
property owner, when performing any work within the dripline of a
healthy tree, shall take such measures as directed by the city forester to
protect trees from injury and damage, up to and including tunneling.
Cost for removal of any tree to accommodate a sanitary sewer repair
shall be the property owner's responsibility.
(a) Notice to abate public nuisance. Whenever the city forester shall find
that any tree or part thereof growing or located upon private property,
defined as a private tree, is a public nuisance, defined as any tree or
part thereof which by reason of its condition interferes with the use of
any public area including as defined in subsection 82-63(5) for public
trees; or which is infected with a plant disease, or which is infested with
injurious insects or pests which threaten public or private property,
particularly Dutch Elm Disease, Oak Wilt Disease, and Emerald Ash
Borer infestation, or which endangers the public health, safety and
welfare, he shall notify the owner thereof, in writing, that the nuisance
must be abated as directed in the notice the time specified, which time
shall not be less than 30 days, unless the city forester shall determine
that immediate action is necessary to preserve the public health, safety
Sec. 82-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 82-64
1:571
and welfare, in which event a lesser period of time for abatement shall
be provided.
(b) Service of notice. Notice shall be served on the owner of record of the
lot identifying those conditions which constitute a public nuisance and
demanding abatement by a time certain in the manner and to the extent
prescribed by the notice. Service shall be by personal service or by
certified mail-return receipt. If the owner cannot be served or if there is
no certified mail-return receipt, the order may be served by posting it
on the main entrance of the building or structure, if any, or where no
building or structure is present, by posting a sign on each side of the
lot, and by publishing as a class 1 notice under W.S.A., ch. 985.
(c) Failure to abate. If the owner fails to remedy or improve the public
nuisance described in the written notice, then the city forester shall,
after the expiration of the period specified in the written notice, cause
the nuisance to be abated.
(d) Abatement by city. The abatement may be performed by city personnel
or by a contractual agreement with others entered into by the city and
cost charged to the owner as described under section 82-68.
(e) Hearing. The owner, upon written request to the city forester, served
and postmarked during the notice period, shall be granted a hearing
before the city forester. Where possible, the hearing should be within
10 days following the request therefor. The hearing shall give the owner
the opportunity to contest the existence of facts sufficient to form the
basis for the finding of a public nuisance as described in this section.
Following the hearing, a written statement of the findings of the city
forester shall be sent by regular mail to the owner at the address given
by the owner at the hearing. The city forester may, for good cause,
extend the period of time for abatement of the nuisance.
(f) Appeal. The written order of the city forester, where a hearing has been
held, may be appealed to the park board upon written request to the
city forester, served or postmarked within 10 days of the date of the
written order. Where possible, the appeal should be heard at the next
scheduled meeting of the board, provided that the request for review is
received by the city forester at least seven days prior to the next
scheduled meeting of the board.
(g) Special assessment. Following abatement of the public nuisance, the
city forester shall bill the owner for the cost of abatement. If such bill is
not paid within 30 days, the bill shall be processed as a special
assessment against the property.
(h) Emergency procedure. The notice procedure specified in subsection (b)
of this section does not apply when circumstances arise which require
immediate action to protect the public from imminent harms, such as
sickness, disease or personal injury. In determining imminent harm,
there must be a balancing of the rights of the landowner to notice and
appeal procedures with the right of the public to be protected from a
Sec. 82-64 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 82-64
1:572
Sec. 82-65. Injury to trees. [Ord. No. 97-7, § 34.09, 5-27-1997]
No person, upon public property, shall:
Sec. 82-66. Administrative remedies. [Ord. No. 97-7, § 34.11,
5-27-1997]
Until the provisions of this article, including the conditions on any permits
issued pursuant to this article, have been fully met, the city shall withhold
issuance of any conditional use permit, building permit, certificate of
occupancy or inspection required under the current city building code or
issue stop-work orders for any land development or activity involving tree
removal.
Sec. 82-67. Penalty for violation of article. [Ord. No. 97-7, § 34.12,
5-27-1997]
Sec. 82-68. Special assessment. [Ord. No. 97-7, § 34.13, 5-27-1997]
risk of harm which could be avoided by prompt action. However, where
possible, the landowner should be given a minimum of 24 hours' written
or oral notice prior to city abatement action. This article shall otherwise
apply, except for the notice and appeal procedures, which shall be as
stated in this section.
(1) Injure, destroy, damage, mutilate, top, deface or commit any act which
will prevent the growth or cause the death of any tree.
(2) Secure, attach, fasten, nail or run through any rope, cable, wire, sign or
fixture to, around or through any tree.
(3) Deposit, place or permit the deposit of any toxic or hazardous substance
on or about any tree. This includes construction-related activity which
could adversely impact upon public trees, either chemical in nature or
placement of poles of excavated material, topsoil, etc., within the
critical root zone.
(a) Any city department which observes a violation of this article shall
bring the violations to the attention of the city forester.
(b) Any person who by himself or by his/her agent or employee shall violate
any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-12. A separate offense shall be deemed to have
been committed on every day on which a violation occurs or continues.
(a) Pursuant to W.S.A., § 27.09(5), the entire or any part of the costs of
forestry for trees and shrubs in front of each lot or parcel of land
abutting may be chargeable to and assessed upon such lots or parcels
of land.
Sec. 82-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 82-68
1:573
(b) Prior to assessment, a public hearing shall be held on the proposed
assessment and notice given by publication of a class 2 notice under
W.S.A., ch. 985.
Sec. 82-68 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 82-68
1:574
Chapter 86
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Sec. 82-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 82-68
1:575

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 86-1. through Sec. 86-25. (Reserved)
Sec. 86-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 86-1
1:577

ARTICLE II
TAXICABS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 86-26. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 12.13(1)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
TAXICAB — All vehicles carrying passengers for hire for which public
patronage is solicited, except the following: vehicles which operate on
established routes and are regulated by the public service commission, renta-
cars and vehicles operated solely as funeral cars or ambulances.
Sec. 86-27. License fees. [Code 1992, § 12.01(11)]
Fees for taxicab licenses and taxicab drivers' licenses are as set from time
to time by the Council.
Sec. 86-28. Rates posted. [Code 1992, § 12.13(7)]
Every person operating a taxicab shall have at all times prominently posted
and displayed in such taxicab so as to be visible to the passengers therein
the rates or fares for the use of such cab.
Sec. 86-29. Marking of vehicles. [Code 1992, § 12.13(8)]
Every vehicle used for the carrying of passengers for hire shall be
conspicuously marked on the right and left sides with the name of the owner
of the vehicle or the business name under which he operates, together
with the number of the vehicle. Such letters and numbers shall be not less
than three inches in length and of a light color on a dark background or
dark color on a light background. No vehicle shall be used for carrying
passengers until this section has been complied with.
Sec. 86-30. Effect of delinquent taxes, assessments and claims.
[Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
No license, certificate, or permit shall be granted for any premises for which
taxes, assessments or other claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid
or to any person delinquent in payment of such claims to the City. In the
event a premises or person is delinquent in payment of such claims to the
City, at times other than initial granting or renewal of a license, the Council
may, in its discretion, suspend or revoke said license(s). "Delinquent" for
the purposes of this section shall mean the claim remains unpaid for 30
days after it became due. Being delinquent hereunder shall be grounds for
suspension or revocation of the license, permit, or certificate applicable
hereunder.
Sec. 86-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 86-31
1:579
Sec. 86-31. through Sec. 86-45. (Reserved)
Sec. 86-31 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 86-31
1:580
DIVISION 2
TAXICAB LICENSE
Sec. 86-46. Required. [Code 1992, § 12.13(2)]
No person shall transport for hire passengers in a taxicab within the City,
nor shall any person solicit passengers to be transported for hire or reward
within the City without a license therefor.
Sec. 86-47. Application; contents. [Code 1992, § 12.13(3)]
Application for a taxicab license shall be made in writing to the City Clerk,
stating the applicant's full name and address, the make, model and year of
manufacture, engine and serial number, capacity for passengers and state
certificate of title number and license number of the vehicles he proposes
to operate. The applicant shall further state in his application whether he
has been previously licensed to operate a taxicab and, if so, where and
whether the license to operate a taxicab has ever been revoked, and if so,
for what cause. Application for renewal of existing licenses shall be made in
the same manner as for an original license. No license shall be granted until
the applicant shall present a City treasurer's receipt for the license fees and
the policy or certificate of liability insurance as required in this article to
the City Clerk.
Sec. 86-48. Application consideration; hearing; determination of
convenience and necessity. [Code 1992, § 12.13(3)(b)]
The application shall be referred by the City Clerk to the Council which shall
set a date for a hearing on the same not more than 20 days after filing of the
application, which hearing shall be open to the public. The City Clerk shall
notify the applicant of the time and place of the hearing. At the time set by
the Council, the applicant shall appear and present such evidence as he may
desire to establish that the public welfare, convenience and necessity will
be served by the granting of his application for a taxicab license and that
the applicant is a fit person to furnish with adequate equipment to fulfill the
taxicab needs of the City. After the hearing the Council shall recommend
whether the public welfare, convenience and necessity will be served as
proposed in the application for license, and the Council may hold such
further hearings or meetings and take such further evidence as it may deem
necessary or advisable in making such determination. This section shall not
apply to an application for the renewal of an existing license.
Sec. 86-49. Transfer. [Code 1992, § 12.13(3)(d)]
No taxicab license issued under Section 86-50 shall be transferable either
from the vehicle described in the original application to another vehicle
or from the original licensee to another person without a permit from the
Council previously granted upon application therefor by the licensee.
Sec. 86-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 86-50
1:581
Sec. 86-50. Issuance. [Code 1992, § 12.13(3)(e)]
The taxicab license shall be issued by the City Clerk after approval of the
Council and filing with the Clerk of the treasurer's receipt, required liability
insurance and inspection certificate described in this article.
Sec. 86-51. Insurance. [Code 1992, § 12.13(4)]
Sec. 86-52. Inspection. [Code 1992, § 12.13(5)]
An annual license shall not be issued for any vehicle until the applicant has
filed with the City Clerk a certificate of inspection signed by a reputable
automobile mechanic or public garage owner certifying that the vehicle
sought to be licensed is mechanically sound and in a thoroughly safe
condition for the transportation of passengers and in clean, fit and good
appearance. A similar certificate of inspection shall be filed with the City
Clerk every six months during the license year.
Sec. 86-53. Revocation. [Code 1992, § 12.13(6)]
The Council may revoke such license for failure of the licensee to maintain
his equipment as required by W.S.A., § 347.01 et seq.; for more than three
convictions of traffic laws or ordinances within any six-month period by the
licensee, or by persons driving vehicles under such license; or for conduct
by the licensee, or by persons driving vehicles under such license, which
is prejudicial to the public safety, welfare, morals or good order of the
community.
Sec. 86-54. through Sec. 86-70. (Reserved)
(a) No taxicab license shall be issued until the applicant deposits with the
City Clerk a policy of liability insurance covering all vehicles to be
included under the license. Such policy shall describe each vehicle by
make, model and serial number, number of passengers capable of being
accommodated therein at one time and the number of the state motor
vehicle license. Such policy shall be issued by a company licensed to do
business in the state and shall insure the licensee against loss from
liability to the amount of $300,000 for the injury or death of one or more
persons in any one accident and in the amount of $100,000 for damage
to the property of others for any one accident due to the negligent
operation of such vehicle.
(b) The policy of insurance shall be approved by the City Attorney as to
legal form before it is filed and shall contain a provision that the policy
may not be cancelled except upon 10 days' written notice to the City.
(c) Cancellation or termination of any insurance policy issued in
compliance with this section shall automatically revoke all licenses
issued for vehicles covered by such policy, unless another policy has
been filed and approved pursuant to this section and is in effect at the
time of such cancellation or termination.
Sec. 86-50 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 86-54
1:582
DIVISION 3
TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE
Sec. 86-71. Driver requirements. [Code 1992, § 12.13(9)(a); Ord.
No. 03-14, § I, 10-27-2003]
Every person driving a taxicab, except the owner, shall be licensed as
such, and each applicant for a driver's license shall fulfill the following
requirements:
(1) At least 18 years of age.
(2) Of sound physique with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which
might render him unfit for the safe operation of the vehicle.
(3) Able to speak, read and write the English language.
(4) Clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of alcohol
beverages or habit forming drugs.
(5) Fill out, upon a form provided by the City Clerk, a statement giving his
full name, residence or places of residence for the three years previous
to his present address; age, color, height, color of eyes and hair, place of
birth, length of time he has resided in the City; whether a citizen of the
United States; place of previous employment; whether he has ever been
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor; whether he has been previously
licensed as a driver or chauffeur and, if so, when and by what authority;
whether his license has ever been revoked or suspended and, if so, for
what cause. Such statement shall be signed and sworn to by the
applicant and filed with the City Clerk and kept as a permanent record.
Each licensed driver shall, upon demand of a police officer or
passenger, exhibit his license for inspection.
(6) Each applicant shall be subject to a background investigation
conducted by the Chief of Police to ensure that such license shall not be
granted to any person who has been convicted by a court of competent
jurisdiction, or has charges pending against her or him, of any offense,
the circumstances of which substantially relate to the circumstances of
taxicab or other public passenger vehicle operation. Such offenses
include, but are not limited to, crimes against persons or property or
driving a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicants or controlled
substances; provided, however, that the Chief of Police shall grant a
license to such convicted person if the conviction is reversed or if the
person is granted a pardon for the offense in question. In determining
whether or not the circumstances of a conviction or a pending charge
are substantially related to the circumstances of taxicab or other public
passenger vehicle operation, the Chief of Police shall consider the
number of convictions, the nature and seriousness of the crime or
crimes, whether they involved violence, whether they involved theft or
other evidence of lack of trustworthiness with money, whether the
Sec. 86-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 86-71
1:583
Sec. 86-72. Renewal. [Code 1992, § 12.13(9)(b)]
The City Clerk may renew a driver's license from year to year by
appropriate endorsement. A driver applying for a renewal of this license
shall make application upon a form furnished by the Clerk entitled
"Application for Renewal of License" which shall be filled out with the full
name and address of the applicant, together with a statement of the date
upon which his original license was granted and the number of such license.
Sec. 86-73. Recordkeeping. [Code 1992, § 12.13(9)(c)]
The City Clerk shall keep a complete record of each license issued to a
driver and all renewals, suspensions and revocations which shall be kept on
file with the original application of the driver for a license.
Sec. 86-74. Revocation and suspension. [Code 1992, § 12.13(10)]
A taxicab driver's license may be suspended or revoked at any time for
a violation of any provision of this division or for any cause deemed
reasonable by the Council, after affording such driver a hearing thereon,
or by a judge of a court of competent jurisdiction. When the license is
suspended or revoked by an authority other than the Council, the taxicab
driver's license and a record of such revocation or suspension shall
immediately be forwarded to the Council. If the penalty is suspension
of license, the license shall be returned to the driver at the expiration
of the suspension period. A second suspension for the same reason and
a third suspension for any reason shall be cause for revocation of the
driver's license. A driver whose license has once been revoked may again
be licensed as a driver in the City, provided that a new license is granted by
crime involved driving, the age and maturity of the individual at the
time of the conviction, the amount of time elapsed since the last
conviction, and any evidence of personal rehabilitation. [Added
7-23-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1415]
(7) Photocopy of driver's license.
(8) Upon compliance with all of the provisions of this section, the City Clerk
shall issue a taxicab driver's license to each applicant therefor, which
shall be in force for one year or less, expiring on June 30.
(9) Appeals. If the City Clerk denies a public passenger vehicle driver
permit, he or she shall notify the applicant in writing, and shall state the
reasons for the denial. The applicant may appeal the denial by notifying
the City Clerk within 15 days of the date of the written denial. The
appeal proceeding shall be held within 45 days after the date of the
appeal and shall be conducted by the City Council. [Added 7-23-2012
by Ord. No. 12-14]
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former subsections (6) and (7) as
Subsections (7) and (8), respectively.
Sec. 86-71 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 86-74
1:584
the Council. Where a license has been suspended or revoked by a court, the
approval of such court shall be necessary for the restoration or reissue of
such license. Where any driver's license shall be suspended or revoked by
the Council, the Chief of Police shall be immediately notified.
Sec. 86-75. Fraud in obtaining. [Code 1992, § 12.13(11)]
It shall be grounds for revocation for any person to give any fictitious
information or practice any fraud, misrepresentation or subterfuge to
secure any license provided by this division.
Sec. 86-76. through Sec. 86-90. (Reserved)
Sec. 86-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 86-76
1:585

ARTICLE III
PUBLIC PASSENGER VEHICLES
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 86-91. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 12.18(1)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
PUBLIC PASSENGER VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle which is used
for the transportation of passengers for hire, except taxicabs which are
regulated by Article II of this chapter. Horse-drawn vehicles are included
within this article.
Sec. 86-92. Enforcement of article. [Code 1992, § 12.18(3)(a)]
The verification of annual inspection of public passenger vehicles and
enforcement of this article shall be under the supervision and control of the
License and Judicial Committee, with ultimate appeal to the City Council.
Sec. 86-93. Licenses and permits subject to additional restrictions.
[Code 1992, § 12.18(3)(k)]
Any license, public passenger vehicle permit or operator's permit issued
under this article shall be subject to such further regulations and
restrictions as may be imposed at any time by the City Council. Notice shall
be provided by certified letter to those affected prior to any amendment
being adopted by the City Council.
Sec. 86-94. through Sec. 86-110. (Reserved)
Sec. 86-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 86-94
1:587

DIVISION 2
VEHICLE OPERATOR'S PERMIT
Sec. 86-111. Required. [Code 1992, § 12.18(7)(a)]
No person shall operate any vehicle for the transportation of passengers for
hire pursuant to this article until he shall have obtained a public passenger
vehicle operator's permit from the Chief of Police. Such permit shall be
issued or denied by the Chief of Police within seven days.
Sec. 86-112. Reasons for refusal to grant. [Code 1992,
§ 12.18(7)(b)]
Such permit shall not be granted by the Chief of Police or his designee
to any person under the age of 18 years, nor to any person who has
pending against him, or who has been convicted by a court of competent
jurisdiction, of any offense, the circumstances of which substantially relate
to the nature of taxicab or other vehicle operation including, but not limited
to, driving a motor vehicle as a conveyance of persons for hire while under
the influence of intoxicants or controlled substances, while such conviction
remains of record and is not reversed; provided, however, that the Chief of
Police may grant a permit to such convicted person after granting of any
complete pardon and restoration of civil rights or after one year from the
date of conviction or the completion of any sentence for the first offense
and after five years have elapsed following any offense thereafter, including
the payment of any fine or probation or parole imposed as a result of such
conviction, whichever is sooner, provided the applicant is not prohibited
from holding an operator's license under W.S.A., § 343.06, in which case
such section shall apply if, after an investigation, it shall be established that
such convicted person has, since such conviction, led an exemplary life.
Sec. 86-113. Revocation; causes. [Code 1992, § 12.18(7)(c)]
Any public passenger vehicle operator's permit issued under this article
may be revoked by the Chief of Police for any one or more of the following
causes:
Sec. 86-114. Issuance; form; display. [Code 1992, § 12.18(7)(d)]
Upon granting of such permit pursuant hereto, such applicant shall receive
from the Chief of Police a written permit to which shall be attached a
(1) When such operator has been once convicted by a court of competent
jurisdiction of an offense, the circumstances of which substantially
relate to the nature of taxicab operation including, but not limited to,
reckless driving or for driving under the influence of intoxicants or
controlled substances when such sentence remains of record and
unreversed.
(2) When any person while on duty shall consume or be under the influence
of alcohol or controlled substances.
Sec. 86-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 86-114
1:589
photograph of such applicant, which permit shall be placed in a location
visible to all passengers in the vehicle driven by such operator. Such permit
shall state the name of the licensee by whom such operator is employed,
and such permit shall not allow such operator to operate a taxicab or other
vehicle for hire for any other than the licensee named therein.
Sec. 86-115. Fees. [Code 1992, § 12.18(7)(e)]
An applicant for such permit shall pay a fee as set from time to time by the
Council. A fee as set from time to time by the Council will be charged for a
change of employer. A fee will also be charged for a duplicate permit.
Sec. 86-116. through Sec. 86-130. (Reserved)
Sec. 86-114 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 86-116
1:590
DIVISION 3
SELF-PROPELLED VEHICLES
Subdivision I
In General
Sec. 86-131. Consent of Council required to operate on street.
[Code 1992, § 12.18(2)]
Sec. 86-132. Additional operating requirements. [Code 1992,
§ 12.18(5)]
(a) No person shall operate any common motor carrier of passengers
within or through any street in the City, except in compliance with
action taken by the City Council in relation to such street and route.
Such action shall be evidenced by resolution of the City Council.
(b) No public passenger vehicle shall operate within or through any street
in the City after permission for such use has been withdrawn or
rescinded by action of the City Council.
(a) Carrying passengers. No person employed or engaged in the business
of conveying passengers for hire shall refuse to carry passengers as
required by state law or unless a prospective passenger engages in
violent, abusive or indecent behavior.
(b) Radios and tape players; consumption of alcohol beverages. No person
in a licensed public passenger vehicle within the jurisdictional limits of
the City shall:
(1) Play radios, tape players or other similar devices, except if a device,
such as an earphone, is used by the listener. The use of a PA system
by the operator is excepted.
(2) Consume any food and/or beverage, except for a licensed operator
while taking a break from duty.
(3) Dispose of any litter, garbage or refuse.
(c) Display of prohibitory sign. A sign bearing, in substance, the words "no
radio or tape playing, consumption of food and/or beverages or littering
. . . City ordinance" shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in each
licensed vehicle.
(d) Routes. Licenses must adhere to the routes specified in the City traffic
schedules maintained in the Police Department and City Clerk's office.
Any change from approved route must be approved by the Mayor.
(e) Obstruction of operator's view. The operator's view is not to be
obstructed as follows:
Sec. 86-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 86-132
1:591
Sec. 86-133. through Sec. 86-145. (Reserved)
Subdivision II
License
Sec. 86-146. Application. [Code 1992, § 12.18(3)(g)]
Any person not licensed under this article wishing to obtain a license to
engage in the business of conveyance of persons within the City under
the provisions of this division shall present to the City Clerk a written
application therefor stating the name and address of the applicant, the
number and type of vehicles proposed to be operated, the method of
charging and schedule of rates to be adopted and such other pertinent
information as the License and Judicial Committee may require.
Sec. 86-147. Determination of public convenience and necessity.
[Code 1992, § 12.18(3)(i)]
The License and Judicial Committee shall have the authority to establish a
quota or limit every five years on the total number of licenses to be granted.
Sec. 86-148. Fees; certificate of insurance to be presented. [Code
1992, § 12.18(3)(j); amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08;
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
Before any such application is accepted by the City Clerk, the applicant
shall pay to the Treasurer the amount of money fixed by the Council from
time to time for such license or modified license prior to the issuance of
public passenger vehicle permits. The applicant shall also present to the
City Clerk the policy or certificate of liability insurance as required in
Section 86-155, each such insurance policy and certificate to be approved.
Sec. 86-149. Inspection. [Code 1992, § 12.18(3)(b)]
An annual license shall not be issued for any vehicle until the applicant has
filed with the City Clerk a certificate of inspection signed by a reputable
(1) No operator of a public passenger vehicle shall operate the vehicle
when it is so loaded as to obstruct the view of the operator to the
front or to the sides.
(2) No passenger in a public passenger vehicle shall ride in such a
position as to interfere with the operator's view.
(3) The driver's view will be deemed to be obstructed when any
passenger is standing forward of a line parallel to and extending
through the rear edge of the operator's or driver's seat. Such line
shall be clearly marked on the floor of each public passenger
vehicle.
Sec. 86-132 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 86-149
1:592
automobile mechanic, certifying that the vehicle sought to be licensed is
mechanically sound and in safe condition.
Sec. 86-150. Period of validity; expiration. [Code 1992,
§ 12.18(3)(e)]
All licenses issued under this article shall be for a five-year period and
expire on January 31 of the fifth year following their issue.
Sec. 86-151. Renewals. [Code 1992, § 12.18(3)(f)]
All applications for license renewal shall be submitted to the City Clerk
on or before November 1 preceding the renewal license year and shall
state the name and address of applicant, the number and type of vehicles
proposed to be operated, the method of charging and schedule of rates to
be adopted and such other pertinent information as the License and Judicial
Committee may require. Advanced written notice must be given by either
side to each agreement or license of any anticipated changes.
Sec. 86-152. Revocation; transferral. [Code 1992, § 12.18(3)(1)]
No license issued pursuant to this division shall be transferable without
approval from the License and Judicial Committee. All licenses can be
immediately revoked for just cause by the License and Judicial Committee.
Violation of federal or state laws or operating a vehicle in an unsafe manner
or in an unsafe condition shall be deemed to be a just cause situation.
Sec. 86-153. Fees collected for enforcement of division. [Code 1992,
§ 12.18(3)(c)]
Such moneys as are needed for the proper enforcement of this division shall
be collected by the City Clerk at the time of application.
Sec. 86-154. Additional vehicle permits. [Code 1992, § 12.18(3)(h)]
Any person licensed under this article wishing to receive authorization
to change the number of vehicles operated under the provisions of their
license during the license year may do so by listing such vehicle with the
City Clerk, obtain a permit tag from the City Clerk and certify that it will be
operated in compliance with the ordinances of the City.
Sec. 86-155. Insurance required. [Code 1992, § 12.18(4)]
The licensee shall provide the City with a certificate of insurance for at least
$300,000/$100,000 single limit for liability and property damage with the
City named as the additional insured.
Sec. 86-156. through Sec. 86-170. (Reserved)
Sec. 86-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 86-156
1:593

DIVISION 4
HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES
Sec. 86-171. License required; fee. [Ord. No. 94-8, § I(12.01),
4-11-1994]
A license for the operation of horse-drawn carriages is required. A license
fee shall be set from time to time by the Council for each company operating
such horse-drawn carriage business.
Sec. 86-172. Rules for operation. [Code 1992, § 12.18(6)]
Horse-drawn carriages shall be operated according to the following:
(1) Routes. Licensees must adhere to the routes specified in their
application for an operating license. New or temporary routes must be
applied for and approved by the License and Judicial Committee and
filed with the City Clerk before a licensee may use the new or
temporary routes. Any deviance from these applications without the
approval of the License and Judicial Committee and filing with the City
Clerk shall be a violation of this division.
(2) Operator driving time limit. No operator shall be allowed to drive a
horse-drawn vehicle for more than a period of 10 hours in any twentyfour-
hour day.
(3) Sanitation requirements. Licensees shall comply with the following
sanitation requirements:
a. All horses, mules and other animals shall be equipped with
adequate devices to prevent manure and other excrement from
falling upon the streets of the City. If any such manure and other
excrement should fall upon the streets, then it shall be removed at
the expense of the licensee.
b. All animal waste for disposal shall be promptly transported to sites
or facilities legally empowered to accept it for treatment or
disposal. The City reserves the right to approve or disapprove sites
taking into account routes within the City and the rules and
regulations of the governmental body having jurisdiction over such
sites or facilities.
(4) Feeding and care of animals. Licensees shall ensure adequate rest
periods, feeding schedules, health and related animal performance and
well-being for each animal under the licensee's ownership, care or
control. This responsibility shall include carriage load limits, hours of
operation and daily hours of animal usage, except that no animal shall
be required to work more than 10 hours per day. No animal shall be left
unattended while in service.
(5) Certificate of soundness required. For each animal that will be pulling a
permitted vehicle, licensees shall provide a certificate of soundness
Sec. 86-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 86-172
1:595
issued by a veterinarian licensed in the state, finding such animal to be
free from infectious disease, in good health and fit for hack and carriage
service under this division. Each animal shall thereafter be reinspected
at intervals of no more than six months, and a certificate of soundness
shall be issued by a veterinarian and filed with the City in order for each
animal to remain in service. No animal shall be used to draw a horsedrawn
vehicle without such certificate of soundness, certified and dated
within any preceding six-month period.
Sec. 86-172 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 86-172
1:596
Chapter 90
WATERWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General provisions — See Ch. 1
Sec. 86-172 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 86-172
1:597

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 90-1. through Sec. 90-30. (Reserved)
Sec. 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-1
1:599

ARTICLE II
LAKES AND BEACHES
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
[Adopted 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 17-1216]
Sec. 90-31. Applicability and enforcement.
Sec. 90-32. Water Safety Patrol.
Sec. 90-33. through Sec. 90-50. (Reserved)
(a) The provisions of this article are adopted in the interest of public health
and safety and shall apply to persons, boats and other objects upon, in
and under the waters and ice of Geneva Lake within the jurisdictions of
the City, villages and towns above named, which are all such
municipalities surrounding, riparian to, and having jurisdiction over
said lake.
(b) This article shall be enforced by the officers, employees and agents of
the Geneva Lake Law Enforcement Agency, and by the properly
designated and authorized officers and agents of said municipalities.
(a) The Geneva Lake Water Safety Committee, Inc., through its Water
Safety Patrol, shall:
(1) Promote water safety upon Geneva Lake in Walworth County,
Wisconsin, including water rescue, promulgating and encouraging
practices conducive to the safety of persons and property incident
to the use and enjoyment of water traffic, pleasure and sports.
(2) Educate in promoting water safety in all of its aspects.
16.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Division 1, Generally, adopted by Code
1992, as amended; and Division II, Lake Regulations, adopted by Code 1992, as amended.
Sec. 90-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-33
1:601

DIVISION 2
LAKE REGULATIONS
[Adopted 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 17-12]
Sec. 90-51. State boating and water safety laws; administrative
orders and rules adopted.
(a) The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with
respect to water and ice traffic, boats, boating and related water and
ice activities in the following enumerated Sections 30.50 through 30.81,
inclusive, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and by reference made a part
of this article as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be
performed or prohibited by the provisions of any statute incorporated
by reference herein is required or prohibited by this article.
(b) All rules and orders created by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources designated Chapter NR 5 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, modifying or supplementing the foregoing provisions of the state
law or which may be adopted or made in the future are hereby
incorporated in and made a part of this article by reference to the same
as if they are or were to be set out herein verbatim.
(c) All deletions, additions and amendments which may be made to the
sections of the State laws enumerated under Subsection (a) above are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as of the time of
their respective effective dates, as if they were to be set out herein
verbatim.
(d) Speed limits.
(1) No person shall operate any boat powered by an engine, or any
other boat, in or upon the waters of Geneva Lake at a speed in
excess of 45 miles per hour between sunrise and sunset; nor at a
speed in excess of 15 miles per hour between sunset and sunrise,
except as noted in Subsection (d)(2), below.
(2) On weekends (from 12:01 p.m. every Friday to 12:00 midnight
Sunday) and on Memorial Days, July 3 through 5, and Labor Day of
each year, no person shall operate any boat powered by an engine,
or any other boat, in or upon the waters of Geneva Lake at a speed
in excess of 35 miles per hour between sunrise and sunset.
(3) The speed limit set forth in Subsection (d)(1) shall not apply to
police patrol boats in situations involving emergencies, or while
engaged in law enforcement, nor to boats participating in a duly
authorized race, regatta or water ski meet duly authorized by a
permit while operating in the designated area authorized by said
permit. The speed limit set forth in Subsection (a) shall not apply to
Water Safety Patrol boats in situations involving emergencies.
Sec. 90-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-51
1:603
Sec. 90-52. Zones, areas and restrictions.
Sec. 90-53. Additional safety regulations and rules.
(e) Careless, negligent, or reckless operators. No person shall operate or
use any boat powered by an engine or any other boat, or manipulate any
water skis, aquaplane or similar device in or upon the waters of Geneva
Lake in a careless, negligent, or reckless manner so as to endanger
another person’s life, safety or property of another.
(a) Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SWIMMING ZONES — All areas marked by buoys and/or regulatory
markers and properly permitted by the DNR and local municipalities
are so designated.
TRAFFIC AREA — Beyond 200 feet distant and parallel to the shoreline,
and 100 feet from any dock, raft, pier, structure, mooring area or
buoyed restricted area.
(b) Restrictions.
(1) Traffic lights. Any municipality may install and operate boat traffic
lights, and when so installed and operating they must be obeyed by
all boat or other watercraft operators using such traffic area.
(2) No water traffic outside the traffic area shall exceed the "slow-nowake"
speed limit.
(a) Swimming regulations.
(1) Swimming from boats. No person shall swim from any boat unless
such boat is anchored or the boat is manned by a competent
person.
(2) Swimming in traffic area. No person shall swim in the traffic area
unless accompanied by a boat manned by a competent person.
Such boat shall stay within 50 feet of and guard such swimmer. This
subsection is subject to the provisions set forth in Subsection
(a)(3), below.
(3) Hours limited. No person shall swim in the traffic area from sunset
to sunrise.
(b) Water skiing.
(1) All water skiing is limited to the traffic area.
(2) No watercraft which shall have in tow a person or persons on water
skis, surfboards, or similar devices shall be operated upon Geneva
Lake unless such watercraft shall be occupied by at least two
competent persons. One person shall operate the boat and observe
Sec. 90-51 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 90-53
1:604
Sec. 90-54. Littering or polluting.
No person shall deposit, place or throw any cans, bottles, debris, refuse,
garbage, solid or liquid waste, sewage or effluent into the waters of the lake
or upon the ice when formed or cause or permit the same to be done by any
agent or employee.
Sec. 90-55. Markers and navigation aids.
Sec. 90-56. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article
is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, by reason of any
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or
portion thereof. The Board or Council hereby adopting this article declares
that they would have passed this article and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any
boat traffic at all times, and the second shall observe the towed
person.
(3) The drivers or operators of all watercraft by means of which
aquaplanes, water skis, or similar devices are being towed, and the
riders of such devices, must conform to the same rules and
clearance as provided in this article for motor boats.
(4) Any person using water skis, an aquaplane or a similar device, or
any person who is towed in any manner by a watercraft or other
means shall wear a United States Coast Guard approved personal
flotation device.
(c) Spearfishing. Under- or in-water spear fishing is prohibited within 100
feet of municipal piers, harbors (Lake Geneva/Riviera, Williams Bay,
Fontana, Linn Pier/Trinke Estates, Abbey Harbor) and marinas.
[Amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 17-12]
(d) Bouys to be out by the first day of winter.
(1) All buoys shall be removed from the water by the first day of winter
of each year.
(2) Every municipality or the Water Safety Patrol may remove all
buoys, regulatory markers or aids to navigation being privately
owned or placed which are not removed before the first day of
winter of each year.
(a) Standard markers. All regulatory markers, navigation aids and other
waterway markers placed upon the waters of the lake shall comply with
the regulations of the Department of Natural Resources and approval of
the designee of the local government.
Sec. 90-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-56
1:605
one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions
thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
Sec. 90-57. Violations and penalties.
Sec. 90-58. through Sec. 90-120. (Reserved)
(a) Any person who shall violate § 30.67(1), Wis. Stats., which are adopted
as local ordinances in § 90-34 of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit and be subject to the penalties as set forth in § 30.80,
Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time and as set forth in the bond
schedule as it is amended from time to time, on file with the court
having jurisdiction for the enforcement of this Joint Uniform Lake Law
Ordinance for Geneva Lake.
(b) Any person violating § 30.67(2), Wis. Stats., shall forfeit the amounts
set forth in § 30.80, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time and as set
forth in the bond schedule as it is amended from time to time, on file
with the court having jurisdiction for the enforcement of the Joint
Uniform Lake Law Ordinance for Geneva Lake.
(c) Any person who shall violate §§ 30.681(1)(a) or (b) or 30.684(5), Wis.
Stats., which are adopted as local ordinances in § 90-34 of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit and be subject to the applicable
penalties as set forth in § 30.80(6)(a) through (e) as amended from time
to time and as set forth in the bond schedule as it is amended from time
to time, on file with the court having jurisdiction for the enforcement of
the Joint Uniform Lake Law Ordinance for Geneva Lake.
(d) Any person who shall violate those provisions set forth in § 90-34 of this
article and for which penalties are not specifically provided for herein
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as set forth in the bond
schedule as it is amended from time to time, on file with the court
having jurisdiction for the enforcement of the Joint Uniform Lake Law
Ordinance for Geneva Lake.
(e) Any person violating any provision of the Joint Uniform Lake Law
Ordinance for which a penalty is not provided for herein or which is not
provided for in the bond schedule as it is amended from time to time, on
file with the court having jurisdiction for the enforcement of the Joint
Uniform Lake Law Ordinance of Geneva Lake, shall forfeit not more
than $500 for the first offense and shall forfeit not more than $1,000
upon conviction of the same offense a second or subsequent time within
one year.
Sec. 90-56 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 90-58
1:606
DIVISION 3
LAKE SHORE AND BEACHES
Subdivision I
In General
Sec. 90-121. Shoreline and bulkhead lines.
All ordinances, including but not limited to, Sections 20.20 through 20.22,
inclusive, of the City's 1992 Code, are excepted from this Code but saved
from repeal.
Sec. 90-122. Structure on lake shore. [Code 1992, § 20.24]
Sec. 90-123. Boat launching facility. [Code 1992, § 20.28; Ord. No.
94-12, § I, 7-11-1994]
(a) No person shall build or maintain without a permit from the Council any
wharf, dock, boathouse, bathhouse or other structure or sign of any
kind upon the lake shore adjoining to or in front of any street, park or
public ground, either above or below the water mark, whether resting
on the ground or floating on the water, within the City.
(b) Upon conviction of any person for violation of this section, the Chief of
Police shall cause the removal of such unlawful structure.
(c) An application for a building permit for a proposed pier or wharf on
Geneva Lake shall be considered a special use and shall be submitted to
the Plan Commission for its approval before such permit is issued.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CANOE — A light narrow boat with both ends sharp that is propelled
by one or two occupants with single-bladed paddles.[Added 5-10-2010
by Ord. No. 10-06]
DINGHY — A small boat used as a tender or lifeboat.[Added
2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-06]
FISHING BOAT — Any motor-powered boat used and equipped
primarily for fishing.
KAYAK — A covered canoe with an opening in the middle for an
occupant which is propelled by a double-bladed paddle.[Added
5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-06]
POWER BOAT — Any boat more than 14 feet in length, propelled by a
motor, used and equipped primarily for pleasure boating or uses other
than fishing.
SAILBOAT — Any boat which is principally propelled by sails.
Sec. 90-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-123
1:607
Sec. 90-124. Docking boats. [Code 1992, § 20.29]
(b) Maintenance by City; use fee. The City may maintain the launching
facility located on the shore of Geneva Lake at the south end of Center
Street and may charge a reasonable fee for the use of such launching
facility.
(c) Rules for use and maintenance. Reasonable rules and regulations with
regard to use and maintenance of such launching facility shall be made
from time to time by the Council.
(d) Number of daily launches. The number of boats to be launched daily
from the City controlled and operated boat launching site on Geneva
Lake shall not exceed that of available parking spaces in designated
areas, which shall be determined by the authorized operator of the
launch area.
(e) Launching of boat fee. The fees charged for launching boats shall be
determined by the City.
(f) Enforcement of parking violations and penalties for failure to pay
launch ramp fees. Police officers and parking meter personnel are
empowered to enforce parking violations at designated boat trailer
parking lots, and enforce penalty provisions, as provided for under
Section 90-33, for failure to pay established launch ramp fees. It shall
be a parking violation under this section for any vehicle other than a
motor vehicle connected to a boat trailer to be parked in the City boat
launch parking lot F. [Amended 5-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-10]
(g) Powering motorboats on or off trailers at launch site. No person shall
engage in the act of powering a motorboat on or off a trailer at the
municipal boat launch site in the City with the engine being operated at
greater than idle speed. No person shall continue to operate the engine
while engaged in the act of launching or retrieving a motorboat after
the motorboat is at rest on the trailer. A sign shall be posted at the
municipal boat launch site advising of the requirements of this
subsection as follows: "No driving onto trailers with motor operating
above idle speed. Minimum $100 forfeiture."
(h) Kayaks and canoes may be launched at dinghy pads located on the east
and west end of Library Park. [Added 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-06]
(a) On piers, docks or catwalks. No person shall place, deposit or permit
any boat or other object to remain upon any pier, dock or catwalk in
such a manner as to interfere with the free passageway of any person
desiring to use or walk upon or along such pier, dock or catwalk.
(b) Parking, anchoring or fastening to stalls; fee required. No person shall
park, anchor or fasten a boat to any stall owned by the City unless the
owner of the boat shall first have paid the required rental fee and
received a receipt from the City.
Sec. 90-123 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 90-124
1:608
Sec. 90-125. Launch ramp corridor; established; description. [Code
1992, § 20.30]
A launch ramp corridor for boats entering and exiting Geneva Lake is
hereby established which is located in the SE1/4 of S36, T2N, R17E, in
Geneva Bay, City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, being more particularly
described as follows:
Commencing at the point of intersection of the center line of the bridge
over the White River with the center line of Wrigley Drive; thence run
southeasterly along the center line of Wrigley Drive, 640 feet more or less
to a point; thence southwesterly 40 feet to an iron post and the point
of beginning; thence southwesterly 500 feet more or less to a point of
intersection with a reference line which is described as beginning at the
southeast corner of the south end of Riviera Dock B, such point being 262
feet south of the south face of the Riviera Building as it now exists; thence
southeasterly to a point of intersection with the center line of Campbell
Street extended, such point being 200 feet west of the low-water line of
the east shoreline of Geneva Lake; such point of intersection between the
above-described reference line and the launch ramp corridor being 620
feet, more or less, from the southeast corner of Riviera Dock B as measured
along such reference line; thence northwesterly along such reference line
54 feet more or less to a point; thence northeasterly parallel to and 50 feet
northwesterly of the previously described southerly line of the launch ramp
corridor 500 feet, more or less, to a point on the shore of Geneva Lake;
thence southeasterly to the point of beginning.
The ramp will be eliminated upon completion of the Big Foot Beach Ramp.
(c) Fastening or tying to west or ice house pier. No person shall fasten or
tie any boat or craft to the southerly side of the wooden pier commonly
known and referred to as the "West" or "Ice House" pier where
southerly winds may carry such boat or craft against the pier and do
damage thereto.
(d) Fishing on west pier. The west pier is used for mooring of boats. No
person shall fish on west pier. [Amended 8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
19-12]
(e) Parking of boats on west pier. No person shall park a boat on west pier
in areas other than rented mooring spaces except for the purposes of
loading and unloading passengers and loading and unloading gear for
boating. Boats shall not be left alone on the pier in undesignated
mooring spaces for periods longer than five minutes without the
permission of the boating authority. [Amended 8-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-12]
Sec. 90-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-126
1:609
Sec. 90-126. through Sec. 90-140. (Reserved)
Subdivision II
Pier and Wharf Regulations
Sec. 90-141. Definitions. [Code 1992, § 20.23(1)]
The definitions as set forth in W.S.A., § 30.01 are incorporated in this section
by reference as though fully set forth. Any future amendment, revision or
modification of the statutes incorporated in this section are intended to be
made a part of this section. Also, any structure placed on the bed of the lake
or on the shore (boat lift) built or maintained for the purpose of providing
a berthing or mooring place for watercraft or for loading or unloading of
cargo or passengers onto or from watercraft shall be considered a pier and
shall be subject to regulations set forth in this subdivision.
Sec. 90-142. Establishment of pier head line. [Code 1992,
§ 20.23(2)]
Sec. 90-143. Wharves and piers creating unlawful obstruction.
[Code 1992, § 20.23(3)]
(a) Pursuant to W.S.A., § 30.31(3), and in the interest of the preservation
and protection of the public's rights in the waters of Geneva Lake, the
City, within its respective boundaries, does hereby establish a pier head
line on Geneva Lake which shall be at a distance of 100 feet waterward
from the shoreline. The shoreline, for the purpose of this section, shall
be the bulkhead lines described in the documents on file in the Clerk's
office.
(b) The shoreline, for purposes of this subdivision, for areas in the
adjoining Geneva Lake and not described in the bulkhead line
descriptions shall be at the elevation of the spillway crest on the Geneva
Lake Dam, which is at the elevation of 864.3 feet mean sea level datum.
The pier head line shall run parallel to the shoreline.
(c) The map pursuant to W.S.A., § 30.11, approved by the Department of
Natural Resources, indicating the existing shore and pier head line
established in Subsection (a) of this section, is incorporated in this
section and made a part of this subdivision.
(a) Interference with public rights. A wharf or pier which interferes with
public rights in navigable waters constitutes an unlawful obstruction of
navigable waters unless a permit is issued for the wharf or pier by the
Department of Natural Resources under W.S.A., § 30.12, or unless
authorization for the wharf or pier is expressly provided.
(b) Interference with riparian rights. A wharf or pier which interferes with
rights of other riparian proprietors constitutes an unlawful obstruction
of navigable waters unless a permit is issued for the wharf or pier by
Sec. 90-126 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 90-143
1:610
Sec. 90-144. Removal of unlawful obstructions. [Code 1992,
§ 20.23(4)]
The City Council may remove a wharf or pier which constitutes an unlawful
obstruction of navigable waters as set forth in Section 90-143, as provided
under W.S.A., § 66.0495.
Sec. 90-145. Dilapidated structures in navigable waters. [Code
1992, § 20.23(5)]
the DNR under W.S.A., § 30.12, or unless authorization for the wharf or
pier is expressly provided.
(c) Extension beyond pier head line; exception. A wharf or pier which
extends into navigable waters beyond the pier head line established in
Section 90-142 constitutes an unlawful obstruction of navigable waters
unless a valid permit, license or authorization for the wharf or pier is
granted or unless it is a permissible preexisting wharf or pier. A wharf
or pier is a permissible preexisting wharf or pier if it existed prior to the
establishment of the pier head line, if it is not extended or expanded
after that date, and if the ownership of the land to which it is attached
did not change after that date, except that a wharf or pier continues its
status as a permissible preexisting wharf or pier for one year after the
date of the change of ownership is recorded. The seasonal removal of a
wharf or pier does not affect its status as a permissible preexisting
wharf or pier if it is reestablished in substantially the same form. The
owner of a wharf or pier may submit evidence to the City that it is a
permissible preexisting wharf or pier at any time after the effective date
of the ordinance from which this section is derived.
(d) Free movement of water. Any wharf or pier shall be constructed so as to
allow the free movement of water underneath and in a manner which
will not cause the formation of land upon the bed of the water.
(e) Location of wharves and piers. No wharf or pier shall be located, built,
constructed or maintained on a lot or parcel within a distance of 12 1/2
feet from a riparian proprietor's property line, where such property line
intersects the shoreline, as defined in Section 90-142. This restriction
shall not apply to permissible preexisting wharves or piers as defined in
Subsection (c) of this section.
(a) Any wharf or pier in navigable waters which is so old, dilapidated or in
need of repair that it is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for use may be
proceeded against by the City Council or designated officer of the
Council, under the procedure provided in W.S.A., § 66.0495.
(b) Any wharf or pier in navigable waters which is declared so old,
dilapidated or in need of repair that it is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for
use under W.S.A., § 66.0495(1)(b), or repair is determined to be
unreasonable under that section, is a public nuisance and may be
proceeded against under W.S.A., ch. 823.
Sec. 90-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-146
1:611
Sec. 90-146. Permit. [Code 1992, § 20.23(6), (7)]
(a) Required. Riparian proprietors who construct or place a wharf or pier
or cause the same to be done, shall, prior thereto, obtain a permit
therefor from the Council. Once a permit is issued by the Council, no
future permit is required so long as the structure remains in
substantially the same form and location. This subsection shall not
apply to a permissible preexisting wharf or pier as defined in Section
90-143(c). Any extension or modification to a permissible preexisting
wharf or pier, however, shall require a permit as provided in this
subsection. No person shall erect, construct, place, extend or maintain
any wharf or pier in such a manner that it violates any of the provisions
of this subdivision or any applicable laws of the state or any rule, order
or regulation of the DNR. However, any permit granted to a riparian
proprietor by the DNR under W.S.A., § 30.12 shall be deemed
compliance with this subdivision, to the extent of the permit so granted.
A copy of any application for a permit from the DNR under W.S.A.,
§ 30.12, shall be filed with the City Clerk at the same time such
application is filed with the DNR.
(b) Application; contents. The application for such permit shall describe the
real estate and the location of the wharf or pier, or extension or
modification thereof, in detail with regard to the real estate, shoreline
and pier head line, and setting forth the distances of the wharf or pier to
the property lines of any abutting riparian lands, giving the details of
the dimensions and kinds of materials to be used in the construction of
the same, together with any additional details and specifications which
the Council may require. Such application shall also state the name and
permanent residence or post office address of the applicant.
(c) Filing of application; investigation and report; recommendation. Upon
filing of the application, the City Clerk shall refer the same immediately
to the Building Inspector, or person designated by the Council, for
investigation and report, which report shall indicate that all of the
requirements of this subdivision, applicable laws of the state and rules
and orders of the DNR will be complied with. The Building Inspector, or
designated official, shall thereafter file with the City a report of his
findings together with a recommendation and the reasons therefor.
(d) Grant or denial. After filing and review of the application by the
Building Inspector, or designated person, the Council shall act on the
application. No permit shall be granted until the Council determines all
requirements of this subdivision, applicable laws of the state and rules
and orders of the DNR have been complied with. The reasons for
granting or denial of the permit shall be stated in the minutes.
(e) Revocation; other legal remedies. If the wharf or pier for which a permit
has been granted is not erected in accordance with the application and
specifications submitted by the applicant, or if the wharf or pier violates
any of the provisions of this subdivision, applicable laws of the state or
rules or orders of the DNR, the Council may revoke the permit. The
Sec. 90-146 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 90-146
1:612
Sec. 90-147. Marinas and lagoons. [Code 1992, § 20.23(8)]
No lagoon or marina shall be constructed or expanded unless a permit for
the same has been obtained from the DNR as provided by law. At the time
an application is filed with the DNR, a copy of such application shall be filed
with the City Clerk.
Sec. 90-148. Riviera docks and other municipal piers excepted from
subdivisions provisions. [Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 7-11-2005]
It is specifically intended that this subdivision not apply to the facilities
known as Riviera Docks or any other municipal piers.
Sec. 90-149. through Sec. 90-165. (Reserved)
Subdivision III
Swimming Beaches
Sec. 90-166. Purpose of subdivision. [Code 1992, § 20.25(1)]
It is declared that all beaches, public and quasi-public, upon Geneva Lake
within the City limits, all of which are used and patronized by large numbers
of people, are affected by the public interest and for the public welfare
and safety; the safety of the life and limb of persons using such beaches
requires regulation to promote the public welfare and safety; and it is
the policy of the Council to join with the other cities, towns and villages
which include, within their respective boundaries, parts of Geneva Lake, in
establishing and enforcing uniform ordinances and regulations to promote
the objects and purposes of this section and to aid in reducing the hazards
and nuisances incident to the use of the lake by large numbers of people
assembled together.
Sec. 90-167. Floats. [Code 1992, § 20.25(3)]
All public and quasi-public swimming beaches and areas shall be marked
upon the water by floats painted or colored white, which may bear the
emblem consisting of the red cross of the American Red Cross painted
provisions of this subsection shall not affect the Council's rights to
pursue any other legal remedies it may have as provided in this
subsection, or otherwise by law.
(f) Review of Council decision. Any person having a substantial interest
which is adversely affected by a decision of the Council or an officer,
employee or agent of the Council relating to the issuance, denial or
revocation of a permit, as provided in this section, may have such
determination reviewed under Chapter 2 of this Code.
(g) Fee. The Council may provide for the payment of a reasonable fee for
the issuance of a permit under this section.
Sec. 90-146 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-167
1:613
thereon. Such floats shall be securely anchored to the bottom of the lake
at intervals of not less than 300 feet between the ends of such beaches or
areas, parallel to the direction of such beach and not more than 200 feet
on the lakeward side of and parallel to the life lines upon such beaches or
areas. There shall be similarly anchored not less than one float, marked as
described in this section, between the mean water level of such beach and
the float at each end of the above-described floats marking the length of
such beach parallel to the shore.
Sec. 90-168. Trash. [Code 1992, § 20.25(4)]
No person shall place, deposit or leave upon any public beach within the
City any paper, garbage, refuse, trash or other discarded thing, substance
or article.
Sec. 90-169. Boats in swimming area. [Code 1992, § 20.25(5)]
Except as provided in this article, no person shall moor, anchor, operate,
propel or cause to be moored, anchored, operated or propelled any boat
in any manner within or upon any part of Geneva Lake lying within the
boundaries of the City designated and marked as a swimming beach, as
provided in Section 90-167. This does not prohibit any boat under the
control and jurisdiction of the Geneva Lake water safety patrol from
entering the swimming areas at any time.
Sec. 90-170. Official boats. [Code 1992, § 20.25(6)]
Every boat assigned to or used by any officer, employee or life guard of the
Geneva Lake water safety patrol upon any beach within the City shall have
conspicuously painted or marked thereon the words "water safety patrol"
or similar words designating that such boat is in the use or control of the
Geneva Lake safety patrol, and no unauthorized person shall use, operate
or occupy any such boat.
Sec. 90-171. Swimming in lake. [Code 1992, § 20.25(7)]
Except as provided in this section, no person shall swim in the waters
of Geneva Lake within the corporate limits of the City except within the
limits of a public or quasi-public beach or area as marked and designated
pursuant to the provisions of Section 90-167. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to the owner, occupant, licensee, lessee or guests of the
same, of any privately owned real estate abutting on the lake, the frontage
of which is not marked and designated as a quasi-public beach nor to any
lifeguard acting in the line of duty.
Sec. 90-172. Soaps and detergents. [Code 1992, § 20.25(8)]
No person shall use any soap or detergent product for bathing or any other
purpose which would cause such product to enter the waters of Geneva
Lake.
Sec. 90-167 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 90-173
1:614
Sec. 90-173. Smoking prohibited. [Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 5-23-2005]
No person shall smoke tobacco products while using designated swimming
beaches and swimming areas.
Sec. 90-174. through Sec. 90-190. (Reserved)
Subdivision IV
Docking Facilities Rental
Sec. 90-191. Season rental. [Code 1992, § 20.27(1); amended
5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-06; 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-06]
The boat docking, mooring and storage facilities shall be leased to
individual boat owners from May 15 to October 15 each year, and such
facilities shall be identified by number and location. There shall be leased
only one docking, mooring or storage facility per individual boat owner
except for possible dinghy space and kayak rack space. Only individual boat
owners who lease a mooring buoy from the City shall be permitted to lease
a dinghy space during that corresponding rental season. Only a dinghy not
exceeding 10 feet in length shall be placed in a dinghy space.
Sec. 90-192. Fees. [Code 1992, § 20.27(2); Ord. No. 02-37, § I,
2-11-2002; amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
The rental fee for each year shall be set by the Council no later than
the first Council meeting in February, and payment for such facilities shall
be made on or before March 15 of each year. No refunds shall be made,
except as otherwise provided. Renters not making payment by March 15
will be allowed a ten-day grace period to pay rental fees. Renters shall pay
a penalty set from time to time by the Council, per day, paid after March
15. Delinquent renters will be notified of the grace period and penalty by
certified mail on March 16 of each year.
Sec. 90-193. Boat ownership and state registration required. [Code
1992, § 20.27(3)]
All renters shall be the owners of a boat and shall give evidence of such
ownership to the rental authority who will be designated by the Council
from time to time. All boats requiring registration shall be registered with
the DNR and proof of state registration shall be provided at the time of
the application. The rental shall be a personal privilege running to the
renter so long as he retains ownership of a boat and uses the rental facility
assigned to him for purposes of docking, mooring or storing his own boat.
If the renter sells or otherwise disposes of the boat he owned at the time
of application for rental facilities and does not replace his former boat with
another one, the rental of the facility shall terminate, and the City may
rerent the space for the balance of the season. In the event of rerental, the
full season rate for new rentals shall apply to and including July 15 of each
year. After July 15, 50% of the rental fee shall be charged for the balance
Sec. 90-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-193
1:615
of the rental season. Rental privileges are not transferable, except between
spouses.
Sec. 90-194. Use of facilities. [Code 1992, § 20.27(4)]
Only renters of such facilities may use and occupy such facilities. If any
facility is unoccupied for any two-week period after June 15 or is occupied
by an unauthorized boat, the renter shall be notified that unless good cause
is shown, the rental facility shall be deemed abandoned and, after one week,
from the mailing of such notice, the City may rent the facility for the balance
of the season.
Sec. 90-195. Boats for hire. [Code 1992, § 20.27(5)]
No boats used for hire or for rental shall be permitted to use these docking,
mooring and storage facilities, except for fishing guides licensed by the
state.
Sec. 90-196. Unauthorized use. [Code 1992, § 20.27(6)]
If an unauthorized boat is found in a docking, mooring or storage facility
or on other property of the City without specific permission of the City, the
City may take possession of the boat, remove the same and store it. The City
may contract with a private entrepreneur for such services and charge the
owner of the boat for such services and any other expenses incidental to the
removal and storage incurred by the City.
Sec. 90-197. Riviera docks excepted from subdivision provisions.
[Code 1992, § 20.27(7)]
It is specifically intended that this subdivision shall not affect the present
and existing facilities located at the area known as the Riviera and Riviera
Docks.
Sec. 90-198. Rental authority. [Code 1992, § 20.27(8); amended
6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 18-06]
The Council hereby designates the City Administrator or his/her designee
as the rental authority for the purposes of carrying out this section, and the
City Council, prior to the first meeting in March, shall establish the rates to
be in force during the following rental period.
Sec. 90-199. Classifications for rental of boat stalls and buoys.
[Code 1992, § 20.27(9)]
The rental authority shall rent boat stalls and buoys to applicants in the
following order:
(1) Renters of boat stalls and buoys.
Sec. 90-193 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 90-199
1:616
Sec. 90-200. Limit on size of boats. [Code 1992, § 20.27(10)]
Sec. 90-201. Violations of subdivision. [Code 1992, § 20.27(11)]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this subdivision shall be
deemed to have abandoned the rental facility, and the City may terminate
their privileges under the rental for the balance of the season and may
remove boats as provided in Section 90-196. The City shall be under no
obligation to refund any rental fee paid.
Sec. 90-202. Replacement fund for west pier. [Ord. No. 07-05,
4-23-2007]
(2) City residents on the waiting list. Resident means a person who has
maintained his place of permanent abode in the City for a period of 30
days immediately preceding his application for an approval. Domiciliary
intent is required to establish that a person is maintaining his place of
permanent abode in the City. Mere ownership of property is not
sufficient to establish domiciliary intent. Evidence of domiciliary intent
includes, without limitation, the location where the person votes, pays
personal income taxes or obtains a driver's license.
(3) Nonresident property owners of the City on the waiting list.
(4) Nonresidents of the City on the waiting list.
(a) The rental authority shall establish a written policy as to the size and
weight of boats that shall be permitted to use the City's docking,
mooring and storage facilities.
(b) The policy on size and weight shall be reviewed at the beginning of each
rental season.
(c) Persons denied permission to dock or moor their boat due to this policy
may appeal the decision to the rental authority.
(d) The purpose of this limitation on size is to promote the safety of the
public and the safekeeping of all boats utilizing the City's facilities.
(a) A repair and replacement fund shall be established and separately held
for major repairs and replacement of the West Pier to be constructed in
2007.
(b) From each pier rental fee the sum of $533 shall be removed and
segregated into the West Pier Replacement Fund.
(c) The amount of the pier and replacement fee to be transferred to the
fund maybe adjusted upward or downward or eliminated by the
Common Council in future years.
(d) The fund shall be used for major repairs and replacement of the West
Pier as needed and as decided and ordered by the Common Council.
Sec. 90-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-202
1:617
Sec. 90-203. through Sec. 90-220. (Reserved)
Subdivision V
Mooring Zones and Areas
Sec. 90-221. Limited time mooring zones. [Code 1992, § 20.26]
(e) The fees in to the replacement fund for the West Pier shall begin the
first full year of rentals after construction.
(a) Mooring zone limits. The following described parts of the City piers
extending into Geneva Lake are established as limited time mooring
zones:
(1) West side of the east pier extending southeasterly for a length of
197 feet from the Riviera Building. A fee schedule shall be based
upon time and the length of the boat.
(2) No parking on the south side of the Riviera base pier located
between the east pier and center pier 64 feet and between the
center pier and the west pier 64 feet.
(3) The pier located at the boat launch ramp at Center Street and
Wrigley Drive, parking while launching or recovering boat only.
(4) The pier located at the west end of Library Park, ten-minute
parking for loading or unloading only.
(5) The east end of the pier located directly east of the Riviera Building
containing boat slips, ten-minute parking for loading and unloading
only.
Such limited time mooring as set forth in this subsection shall
apply from May 1 to September 30 of each year.
(b) Signs. Signs shall be erected in each limited time mooring zone, giving
notice of the time limit for mooring in the limited time mooring zone.
(c) Penalty for violation of section. Owners or operators of boats or
watercraft shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $50 and/or
removal and storage of the vessel at the owner's expense.
(d) Mooring fee. Mooring at the west side of the east pier of the Riviera
shall be subject to a mooring fee based upon the size of the boat or
watercraft and the length of time moored at the pier. City personnel or
designated agents shall collect the mooring fees as authorized by the
Council. A schedule of fees shall be determined annually by the City.
(e) Use for commercial purposes. Limited time mooring zones shall not be
used for commercial purposes, such as loading of passengers,
prearranged or walk on, whereby the owner or operator of a boat or
watercraft charges a fee for such service.
Sec. 90-202 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 90-222
1:618
Sec. 90-222. Designated mooring areas. [Code 1992, § 20.31]
(a) Intent of section. The intent of this section is to provide safe and
healthful conditions for the enjoyment of aquatic recreation consistent
with public rights and interests and the capability of the Geneva Lake
water resource.
(b) State mooring and safety laws adopted. State mooring regulations and
regulations applicable to moorings, as found in the following sections of
the state statutes, are adopted by reference:
W.S.A., § 30.15. Penalty of unlawful obstruction of navigable waters.
W.S.A., § 30.16. Removal of obstructions to navigation.
W.S.A., § 30.772. Placement and use of moorings; restrictions;
permits.
W.S.A., § 30.773. Designated mooring areas.
W.S.A., § 30.74(2). Uniform navigation aids.
(c) Establishment. The City may establish designated mooring areas as
provided by state statutes, as follows:
(1) Requests for a designated mooring area shall be reviewed by the
Piers and Harbors Committee of the City Council.
(2) The description of the proposed designated mooring area shall
meet the requirements of W.S.A., §§ 30.11 and 30.773(2).
(3) The proposed designated mooring area shall meet all the standards
provided by W.S.A., § 30.773(3).
(4) The Piers and Harbors Committee shall cause a waterway markers
application form 8700-58 to be submitted to the Department of
Natural Resources. The application shall specify the proposed
designated mooring area.
(5) The City Council may approve or disapprove the establishment of a
designated mooring area. A designated mooring area is not
established until an approved waterway markers application form
8700-58 is on file with the Department of Natural Resources
marking the mooring area.
(d) Open to public. Designated mooring areas approved by the City and the
Department of Natural Resources shall be open to the public. The
regulations of the City may provide for the orderly use of the mooring
area by the public.
(e) Placement or removal of moorings. Placement or removal of moorings
in the designated mooring area shall be subject to Subdivision VI of this
division.
Sec. 90-222 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-222
1:619
Sec. 90-223. Outer mooring line. [Code 1992, § 20.32]
An outer mooring line is established for the designated mooring area which
is described as that portion of the reference line described in Section
90-222(c) which lies between the launch ramp corridor and a point 210 feet
southeasterly of Riviera Dock B, as measured along such reference line.
Sec. 90-224. through Sec. 90-240. (Reserved)
Subdivision VI
Mooring Buoys
Sec. 90-241. Intent of subdivision. [Code 1992, § 20.33(1)]
The intent of this subdivision is to provide safe conditions for the mooring of
boats within 200 feet from the bulkhead line and/or the ordinary high-water
mark consistent with the requirements of W.S.A., § 30.772.
Sec. 90-242. State mooring and safety laws adopted. [Code 1992,
§ 20.33(2)]
State mooring regulations and regulations applicable to moorings as found
in the state statutes are adopted by reference.
(f) Rules and regulations. The City shall establish a system of rules and
regulations for use of the mooring area. The rules and regulations may
provide for, but not be limited to:
(1) Use of moorings, applications, waiting lists and fees.
(2) Placement of moorings, type of mooring, weight and size of anchor
and attachment of boats.
(g) Designated mooring areas; established and described. Designated
mooring areas are hereby established which are described as follows:
(1) Designated mooring area No. 1. That area lying northwesterly of
the launch ramp corridor and northeasterly of the outer mooring
line and extending to the shore of Geneva Lake, excepting
therefrom that area lying southeasterly of the Riviera docks which
is bounded on the southeasterly by a line drawn from a point 210
feet southeasterly of Dock B as measured along the reference line
and extending northeasterly through a point which is 70 feet
southeasterly of the southeasterly end of Dock D, as measured
along the center line of the access walk to Dock D extended
southeasterly.
(2) Designated mooring area no. 3. Embracing the waters of Geneva
Lake extending 380 feet in a southerly direction from the east and
west boundaries of Library Park to a line parallel to and 380 feet
distant from the shore of Library Park.
Sec. 90-222 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 90-243
1:620
Sec. 90-243. Enforcement of subdivision. [Code 1992, § 20.33(9)]
The provisions of this subdivision may be enforced by:
Sec. 90-244. Penalty for violation of subdivision. [Code 1992,
§ 20.33(10)(b)]
Any mooring, mooring anchor or mooring buoy which is placed or used in
City waters in violation of this subdivision constitutes a public nuisance
subject to W.S.A., § 30.15, and Chapter 46 of this Code.
Sec. 90-245. Permits—required; application and issuance procedure
generally. [Code 1992, § 20.33(3)]
Sec. 90-246. Same—filing of application; contents of application;
investigation and report; grant or denial; fee. [Code 1992,
§ 20.33(4)(a)—(d)]
(1) City officials and issuance of a municipal citation.
(2) City Police Department.
(3) Geneva Lake law enforcement agency law officers.
(a) No mooring buoy shall be installed or maintained in the navigable
waters of Geneva Lake within the jurisdiction of the City, unless a
permit is issued for the placement and use of the mooring buoy by the
City or the state Department of Natural Resources.
(1) Moorings located within 200 feet of the bulkhead line shall require
a permit from the City.
(2) Permits for mooring buoys over 200 feet distant from shore shall be
applied for as specified in this subdivision. In addition, the
applicant shall complete and submit the applicable application for
the state Department of Natural Resources for waterway marker
placement. Upon receipt of both applications and appropriate fees,
the designated official shall investigate and submit his report and
recommendation to the Piers and Harbors Committee. The Piers
and Harbors Committee shall consider the applications, reports
and recommendations and make its report and recommendation.
The applications, Committee report and recommendation shall be
submitted to the DNR for its action in accordance with state
statutes and DNR rules and orders.
(b) Once a permit is issued by the City, no future permit is required so long
as the mooring buoy remains in substantially the same location and is
used in the same way as described on the original permit.
(a) Application; contents. An application for permit may be filed with the
City Clerk and shall include the following:
(1) Name and address of property owner.
Sec. 90-243 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-246
1:621
Sec. 90-247. Same—denial; revocation. [Code 1992, § 20.33(6), (7)]
(2) Name, address and telephone numbers of the applicant.
(3) Description of real estate in front of which buoys are to be placed,
including frontage on lake, legal description of property, tax key
number and address.
(4) Authorization of the property owner.
(5) Sketch or chart showing the proposed location of the mooring
buoys. The total number of mooring buoys, location of the buoys,
distance between buoys, distance from piers and shore, property
frontage, location of buoys and piers on the properties adjacent on
each side and the distance to any rafts, swimming areas or other
markers. The riparian rights of the property owner as determined
by the knitter method shall be on the sketch or chart.
(6) The size of the boat to be placed on the mooring.
(7) Such other information as the City may require to process and
evaluate the application.
(b) Filing application; investigation and report; recommendations. The City
Clerk, upon filing of the application accompanied by the appropriate
fee, shall refer the application to the person designated by the Council
for investigation and report. The designated official shall thereafter file
his report and recommendations with the City.
(c) Action; grant or denial. The Piers and Harbors Committee shall
consider the application together with the report and recommendations
and shall act on the application. No permit shall be granted until the
Piers and Harbors Committee determines that all requirements of this
subdivision, applicable laws of the state and rules and orders of the
DNR have been complied with. The reasons for granting or denial of the
permit shall be stated in the minutes and on the application. The Piers
and Harbors Committee may place restrictions or conditions on any
permit issued under this subdivision.
(d) Fee. The City Council may provide for the payment of a reasonable fee
for the issuance of a permit under this subdivision.
(a) Denial. Denied permits may be appealed to the City Council in
accordance with Chapter 2 of this Code.
(b) Revocation. The City may revoke a permit if the mooring subsequently:
(1) Violates any provision of this Code.
(2) Violates any applicable law of the state.
(3) Violates any applicable rule of the Department of Natural
Resources.
Sec. 90-246 LAKE GENEVA CODE Sec. 90-247
1:622
Sec. 90-248. Buoy numbering system. [Code 1992, § 20.33(4)(e)]
The City Council may provide for a system of buoy numbers for all mooring
buoys. If a number system is established, the numbers must conform to the
state marking system. The number system shall provide for attaching or
affixing the numbers to the mooring buoys.
Sec. 90-249. Mooring restrictions. [Code 1992, § 20.33(5)]
No mooring may be placed in the navigable waters of Geneva Lake within
the jurisdiction of the City if:
Sec. 90-250. Removal of moorings. [Code 1992, § 20.33(8)]
(4) Violates any condition or provision of the applicable mooring
permit.
(5) Becomes a hazard or obstruction to navigation.
(1) The mooring obstructs or interferes with public rights or interests in
the navigable waters.
(2) The riparian owner does not grant written permission to a nonriparian
owner for the placement and use of the mooring.
(3) The mooring or use of the mooring interferes with the rights of other
riparian owners.
(4) The mooring or use of the mooring adversely affects critical or
significant fish or wildlife habitat.
(a) In addition to or as an alternative to the penalties specified in Section
90-244, the City may remove unlawful moorings pursuant to W.S.A.,
§ 66.0495.
(b) If the state Department of Natural Resources or the City revokes a
mooring permit, the mooring shall be subject to removal as provided in
W.S.A., § 30.15.
(c) Nonapproved moorings may be removed as provided in W.S.A., § 20.16.
Sec. 90-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 90-250
1:623

CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-001 Title through Section 98-005 Purpose
CHAPTER 98: ZONING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
Section 98-001 Title
This Chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING
ORDINANCE except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this Chapter".
Section 98-002 Authority
This Chapter, being Chapter 98 of the Municipal Code and consisting of Articles 0 through 9
thereof, is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the State of Wisconsin Statutes. Specific
statutory references are provided within the body of this Chapter solely as a means of assisting
the reader. Such references are not to be considered as all inclusive and shall in no manner be
construed so as to limit the application or interpretation of this Chapter. State Law Reference:
Section 62.23(7), 62.231, 87.30 and 144.26, Wisconsin Statutes.
Section 98-003 Legislative Intent
In enacting this Chapter, special attention has been given to ensuring a direct relationship of these
regulations to the City of Lake Geneva's Comprehensive Master Plan. The general intent of this
Chapter is to implement certain goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Master Plan which
are best addressed through zoning approaches, as enabled by State of Wisconsin Statutes.
Section 98-004 Rationale and the Appearance of Ordinance Text
(1) Rationale
Throughout this Chapter, paragraphs labeled "Rationale" are included to ensure a complete
understanding of the purpose and reasoning of the City in adopting that particular portion of
this Chapter. Each Rationale is intended as an official statement of the legislative findings or
purposes, and shall serve to guide the administrative and judicial interpretation of this Chapter.
The specific rationale expressed in each Rationale section are not intended to be exhaustive,
and other non-explicit rationale may also be applicable. These paragraphs have been
legislatively adopted together with the more formal text of this Chapter and shall be treated in
the same manner as other aspects of legislative history.
(2) Appearance of Ordinance Text
The underlined, boldfaced, italicized, alternative point-sized, and/or capitalized typefaces used
in this Chapter are inserted only for convenience, and are in no way to be construed as part of
the provisions of this Chapter or as a limitation on the scope of the particular sections or
subsections to which they refer.
Section 98-005 Purpose
(1) The overall purpose of this Chapter is to implement the City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive
Master Plan to the extent possible under zoning, as authorized by State of Wisconsin
Statutes.
(2) This Chapter is designed to control and lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from
fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to promote adequate
light and air; to encourage the protection of groundwater resources; to prevent the
overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 6
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-006 Separability and Non-
Liability through Section 98-008 Application
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public
requirements; and to preserve burial sites as defined in s.157.70(1). State Law Reference:
Section 62.23(7)(c), Wisconsin Statutes
(3) Specifically, this Chapter is adopted for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare by implementing certain goals and
objectives of the Comprehensive Master Plan. Additional purposes of this Chapter are
specified throughout this Chapter.
Rationale: In developing the specific regulations of this Chapter, much effort has gone into
balancing the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Master Plan. The current status of
this Chapter and its components (including the Official Zoning Map) represents the cohesive
result of carefully considered plan implementation practices. Amendments to these provisions
and/or the Official Zoning Map shall seriously consider the effect of such changes on the
interrelationships which exist within this Chapter, and between this document, the
Comprehensive Master Plan, and related long-range planning policies and programs. (See
Sections 98-902 and 98-903.)
Section 98-006 Separability and Non-Liability
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the several provisions of this
Chapter are separable in accordance with the following:
(1) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Chapter to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Chapter not specifically included in
said judgment.
(2) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any portion of this
Chapter to a particular property, water, building, other structure, such judgment shall not affect
the application of said provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically
included in said judgment.
(3) If any requirement or limitation which is attached to an authorization given under this Chapter
is found invalid, it shall be presumed that the authorization would not have been granted
without the requirement or limitation.
(4) The City does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas designated as
floodlands will be subject to periodic inundation and hereby asserts that there is no liability on
the part of the Common Council, its agencies, or employee for any flood damages, sanitation
problems, or structural damages, sanitation problems, or upon, and conformance with this
Chapter.
Section 98-007 Abrogation
It is not intended that this Chapter abrogate or interfere with any constitutionally protected vested
right. It is also not intended that this Chapter abrogate, repeal, annul, impair or interfere with any
existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
Section 98-008 Application
(1) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare, and
shall be liberally construed in favor of the City and shall not be construed to be a limitation or
repeal of any other power now possessed by the City of Lake Geneva.
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 7
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-009 Jurisdiction through Section 98-011 Effective Date
(2) Where property is affected by the regulations imposed by any provision of this Chapter and by
other governmental regulations, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose
higher standards or requirements shall prevail. Regardless of any other provision of this
Chapter, no land shall be developed or used, and no structure erected or maintained in
violation of any state or federal regulations.
(3) No structure, land, water or air shall hereafter be used and no structure or part thereof shall
hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or
structurally altered without a zoning permit, except minor structures, and without full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable local, county and State
regulations.
A zoning permit shall be issued for any new or modified structure, pavement, or land
disturbance activity such as grading, filling, excavating, or woodland clearing. The zoning
permit shall be issued to confirm compliance with all applicable provisions of the zoning
ordinance including fences and antennae.
(4) Nothing herein contained shall require any changes in plans, construction, size or designated
use of any building or part thereof, for which a zoning or building permit has been issued
before the effective date of this chapter and the construction of which shall have been started
within 6 months from the date of such permit.
(5) Except as provided in this Chapter, under provisions for Nonconforming Uses (Section 98-
207), Nonconforming Developments (Section 98-307), Substandard Lots (Section 98-407),
and Nonconforming Structures and Buildings (Section 98-408), no building, structure,
development or premises shall be hereinafter used or occupied and no applicable permit
granted that does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter.
(6) In cases of mixed-occupancy or mixed-use, the regulations for each land use shall apply to
the portion of the structure or land so used.
(7) Except for outlots authorized under the City's Land Division Regulations to contain
permanently protected green space area, no yard or other open space shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for a building or structure on any other lot.
Section 98-009 Jurisdiction
This Chapter is applicable to all territory located within the corporate limits of the City of Lake
Geneva.
Section 98-010 Re-enactment and Repeal
(1) This Chapter, in part, carries forward by re-enactment some of the provisions of the
regulations governing zoning and related matters, being previously known collectively as the
"Zoning Code", Chapter 98 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Lake Geneva, adopted
prior to the effective date of this Chapter. It is not the intention of this Chapter to repeal, but
rather to re-enact and continue in force such existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities
that have accrued thereunder are preserved and may be enforced, unless explicitly
surrendered by specific provisions of this Chapter or altered by the Official Zoning Map.
(2) All provisions of Chapter 98 of the City of Lake Geneva Code of Ordinances which are not
re-enacted herein are hereby repealed.
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 8
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-011 Effective Date through Section 98-033 Abbreviations
(3) The adoption of this Chapter shall not adversely affect the City's right to prosecute any
violation of the predecessor Zoning Ordinance provided the violation occurred while that
Chapter was in effect.
Section 98-011 Effective Date
All plans approved under previous zoning regulations shall be valid and may be used to obtain
permits for a period of not more than one year after the effective date of this Chapter, except
where subject to Developer's Agreement provisions. This Chapter shall become effective upon
passage and posting according to law, following the date of repeal and re-enactment of the Official
Zoning Map, which was May 1, 1997.
Section 98-031 Introduction to Word Usage, Abbreviations and Definitions
The purpose of Sections 98-031 through 98-034 is to define words, terms and phrases contained
in this Chapter which are essential to the understanding, administration and enforcement of this
Chapter, and which are not part of common English usage.
Section 98-032 Word Usage
The interpretation of this Chapter shall abide by the provisions and rules of this Section, except
where the context clearly requires otherwise, or where the result would clearly be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of this Chapter.
(1) Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses & derivative forms.
(2) Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words in the plural number
shall include the single number.
(3) The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
(4) The words "shall", "must" and "will" are mandatory.
(5) The words "may", "can" and "might" are permissive.
(6) The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, associations, trusts,
and any other similar entities.
(7) The word "City" shall mean the City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin.
(8) The word "County" shall mean the County of Walworth, Wisconsin.
(9) The word "State" shall mean the State of Wisconsin.
(10) The word "Commission" shall mean the City of Lake Geneva Plan Commission.
(11) The words "Council", "City Council", and "Common Council" shall refer to the City of Lake
Geneva Common Council.
(12) The word "Board" shall mean the City of Lake Geneva Board of Zoning Appeals.
(13) If there is any ambiguity between the text of this Chapter and any caption, illustration, or
table, the text shall control.
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 9
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-033 Abbreviations through Section 98-034: Definitions
Section 98-033 Abbreviations
(1) The following abbreviations in this Chapter are intended to have the following meanings:
ac acre na not applicable
CB Central Business (zoning district) NB Neighborhood Business (zoning
district)
CR-5ac Countryside Residential-5ac
(zoning district)
NO Neighborhood Office (zoning
district)
db Decibel NDA Net Developable Area
ER-1 Estate Residential-1 (zoning
district)
nonres nonresidential
FAR Floor Area Ratio PB Planned Business (zoning district)
ft foot PD(_-_) Planned Development (zoning
district)
GB General Business (zoning district) PI Planned Industrial (zoning district)
GI General Industrial (zoning district) PO Planned Office (zoning district)
GSA Gross Site Area res residential
GSR Green Space Ratio RPA Resource Protection Area
ISR Impervious Surface Ratio RH Rural Holding (zoning district)
LSR Landscape Surface Ratio SR-3 Single-family Residential-3 (zoning
district)
max maximum SR-4 Single-family Residential-4 (zoning
district)
MBS Maximum Building Size sf square feet
MGD Maximum Gross Density TR-6 Two-family Residential-6 (zoning
district)
min minimum 8- eight or fewer
MH Maximum Height 9+ nine or more
MLA Maximum Lot Area 16+ sixteen or more
MSA Minimum Site Area #F number of floors
MR-8 Multi-family Residential-8 (zoning
district)
Section 98-034: Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, wherever they occur in this Chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them by this Section. Definitions provided by this Section include:
Abutting: Having a common border with, or being separated from such common border by an
alley or easement.
Access: A means of vehicular approach, i.e., entry to or exit from a property, street or highway.
Access, secondary: A means of vehicular or non-vehicular approach, entry to, or exit from
property from a source other than a public street or highway.
Access standards: See Section 98-702.
Acre: 43,560 square feet.
Accessory use or structure: A use or structure subordinate to, and serving, the principal use or
structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto. See Section 98-202(5).
Active outdoor public recreational (land use): See Section 98-206(3)(b).
Activity center: An area which is typified by a concentration of nonresidential and/or multi-family
development.
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 10
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
Addition: Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter and/or height of a building in which
the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is
connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new
construction.
Adjacent: Abutting, or being located directly across a right-of-way from, a separate lot.
Agricultural district: See Section 98-105(1).
Agricultural land use(s): See Section 98-206(2).
Agricultural services (land use): See Section 98-206(2)(d).
Air pollution standards: See Section 98-710.
Airport (land use): See Section 98-206(6)(b).
Alley: A public right-of-way usually of reduced width which affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property.
Amendment of zoning regulations: See Section 98-902.
Amendment of official zoning map: See Section 98-903.
Animal unit: A measure which represents a common denominator for the purposed of defining a
husbandry or intensive agricultural land use. The animal unit measure relates to the carrying
capacity of one acre of land and is related to the amount of feed various species consume, and
the amount of waste they produce. The following table indicates the number of common farm
species which comprise a single animal unit:
ANIMAL UNIT TABLE
Type of Livestock # Animals/
Animal Unit
Type of Livestock # Animals/
Animal Unit
Type of
Livestock
# Animals/
Animal Unit
Horse (> 2 yrs) 1.0 Calves (< 1 yr) 4.0 Lambs 14.0
Colt (< 2 yrs) 2.0 Brood Sow or Boar 2.5 Chickens 200.0
Cattle (> 2 yrs) 1.0 Hogs (up to 220 lbs) 5.0 Other Poultry 200.0
Cattle (< 2 yrs) 2.0 Sheep 7.0
Source: The Stockman's Handbook
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 11
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
Apartment: This dwelling unit type consists of an attached, multi-family residence which takes
access from a shared entrance or hallway. A minimum
building code required fire rated wall assembly
division, separating living areas from the lowest level
to the underside of the roof, is required between each
dwelling unit. No more than 16 dwelling units, and no
less than 3, may be located in a building. As part of
the conditional use requirements for group
developments, any development comprised of one or
more buildings which contain 4 or more dwelling units
shall provide additional site design features such as:
underground parking, architectural elements,
landscaping, and/or on-site recreational facilities. All
apartment units within a development shall be located
a minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the
development. Refer to the illustration(right) and to
Article I for setback requirements labeled in capital
letters:
Appeal: A means for obtaining review of a decision,
determination, order, or failure to act pursuant to the terms of this Chapter as expressly authorized
by the provisions of Section 98-912.
Average ground elevation: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to
the exterior walls of a building or structure.
Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year. The 100 year flood.
Basement: A portion of a building located partly underground, but having one-half or less of its
floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Bed and breakfast establishment (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(l).
Bedroom: A room in a residence marketed, designed, or otherwise likely to function primarily for
sleeping.
Blanket variance: A variance which is automatically granted by a provision of this Chapter in
order to reduce the creation of legal nonconforming developments (see Section 98-307 or legal
nonconforming residential structures (see Section 98-408(9)).
Board of Zoning Appeals: See Section 98-934.
Boarding house (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(o).
Bufferyard: Any permitted combination of distance, vegetation, fencing and berming which results
in a reduction of visual and other interaction with an adjoining property. See Article VI.
Building: A structure built, maintained, or intended for use for the shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, or property of any kind. The term is inclusive of any part thereof. Where independent
units with separate entrances are divided by party walls, each unit is a building.
Building, accessory: A building which:
(a) Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal use;
(b) Is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal structure or use served;
(c) Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served except as otherwise
expressly authorized by provisions of this Chapter; and
(d) Is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use. Any portion of a principal building
devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory building.
Building coverage: The percentage of a lot covered by principal and accessory buildings,
including all structures with a roof.
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 12
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
Building front: That exterior wall of a building which faces the front lot line of the lot.
Building height: The vertical distance from: (1) the lowest elevation of the adjoining ground level
or (2) the established grade, whichever is lower to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck
line of a mansard roof, to a point of the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, to the
uppermost point on a round or other arch type roof, to the mean distance of the highest gable on a
pitched or hip roof. Also applies to structures.
Building line: A line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or road right-of-way line, located a
sufficient distance therefrom to provide the minimum yards required by this Chapter. The building
line determines the area in which buildings are permitted subject to all applicable provisions of this
Chapter. This is also referred to as a "setback".
Building envelope: A component of a group development which conforms to the lot lines of
developments which are not group developments, in that required minimum setback distances are
measured from the building envelope line. (Refer to Section 98-208)
Building, principal: A building in which is conducted, or in which is intended to be conducted, the
main or principal use of the lot on which it is located.
Building separation: The narrowest distance between two buildings. See Minimum Building
Separation.
Building size: The total gross floor area of a building. See Maximum Building Size.
Bulk (of a building): The combination of building height, size, and location on a lot.
Bulkhead Line: A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a
municipal ordinance and approved by the Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Section
30.11, Wisconsin Statutes, and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the
original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions
of this ordinance.
Cafeteria, company (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(d).
Caliper: A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk measurement
one-half (0.5) foot above natural grade. Used for trees in a nursery setting.
Campground (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(n).
Candlepower: The amount of light that will illuminate a surface one foot distant from a light
source to an intensity of one footcandle. Maximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount of
candlepower emitted by any lamp, light source, or luminaire.
Caretaker's Residence: A dwelling unit which is used exclusively by either the owner, manager,
or operator of a principal permitted use and which is located on the same parcel as the principal
use. See Section 98-206(8)(w).
Carport (land use): An open sided, roofed vehicle shelter, usually formed by extension of the roof
from the side of a building. See Section 98-206(8)(c).
Cellar: That portion of the building having more than one-half (1/2) of the floor-to-ceiling height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Central Business (CB) District: See Section 98-105(3)(f).
Certificate of Occupancy: See Section 98-909.
Clear cutting (land use): See Section 98-206(2)(g).
Clerestory window: A window in which the lowest glassed area is a minimum of seven feet
above the level of the floor located directly under the window.
Climax Tree: A tree that would occupy the uppermost canopy of a forest in a natural ecological
situation. These trees are often referred to as shade trees. Examples include hickory, oak, maple,
etc. See Section 98-610.
Commercial animal boarding (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(j).
Commercial apartment (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(a).
Commercial district(s): See Section 98-102.
Commercial indoor lodging (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(k).
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 13
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
Commercial land use(s): See Section 98-206(4).
Commercial vehicle: Any motor vehicle used for business or institutional purposes or having
painted thereon or affixed thereto a sign identifying a business or institution or a principal product
or service of a business or institution. Agricultural equipment used as part of a permitted
agricultural principal use shall not be considered as a commercial vehicle.
Communication tower (land use): See Section 98-206(7)(c).
Community character: The impression which an area makes in regard to the type, intensity,
density, quality, appearance, and age of development.
Community living arrangement (land use): See Sections 98-206(3)(g) through (i).
Company provided on-site recreation (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(e).
Composting operation (land use): See Section 98-206(5)(f).
Comprehensive Master Plan: The Comprehensive Master Plan of the City of Lake Geneva,
Wisconsin, adopted January 13, 1992, and as subsequently amended.
Conditional use: A land use which requires a conditional use permit in order to develop. See
Section 98-202(4). See Section 98-905 for applicable procedures.
Construction materials standards: See Section 98-718.
Construction, Start of: The installation of foundation footings and/or materials for road
construction.
Contractor's on-site equipment storage (land use): See Section 98-206(9)(d).
Contractor's project office (land use): See Section 98-206(9)(c).
Conventional residential development: See Section 98-206(1)(a).
Countryside Residential-5ac (CR-5ac) District: See Section 98-105(2)(a).
Cultivation (land use): See Section 98-206(2)(a).
Day Care: See family day care home, intermediate day care home, or group day care center.
Deck: A structure that has no roof or walls. Can be attached or detached to the principle structure.
If attached, it is required to have main supports and continuous footings below grade by 48" and
must be raised above grade and must comply with the principle setback requirements or as
modified by Section 98-405(4). If detached, shall be an accessory structure.
Dedication: The transfer of property interest from private to public ownership for a public purpose.
The transfer may be of fee-simple interest or of a less than fee-simple interest, including an
easement.
Density: A term used to describe the number of dwelling units per acre.
Developer: The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or parcel of any land proposed for inclusion in
a development, including an optionee or contract purchaser.
Development: The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction,
reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any buildings; any
use or change in use of any buildings or land; any extension of any use of land; or any clearing,
grading, or other movement of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this
Chapter.
Development option(s): The type of residential or nonresidential development as categorized by
the proportion of the site devoted to permanently protected green space.
Development pad: The area of a lot within a large lot residential development which is devoted to
structures and septic systems.
Direct access: A condition of immediate physical connection resulting from adjacency of a road or
right-of-way abutting a property.
Disposal land use(s): See Section 98-206(5).
Distribution center (land use): See Section 98-206(6)(d).
Drainage: The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading, or other
means. Drainage includes the control of runoff, to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and
after development, and the means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 14
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
alleviation of flooding.
Drainageway: Drainageways are non-navigable, above-ground watercourses, detention basins
and/or their environs which are identified by the presence of one or more of the following: (a) All
areas within 75 feet of the ordinary high water mark of a "perennial stream" as shown on USGS
7.5 minute topographic maps for the City of Lake Geneva and its environs; (b) All areas within 50
feet of the ordinary high water mark of an "intermittent stream" or "open channel drainageway" as
shown on USGS 7.5 minute topographic maps for the City of Lake Geneva and its environs. See
Section 98-506.
Drainage standards: See Section 98-717.
Drainage structure (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(r).
Dripline: Outer perimeter edge of a tree canopy as transferred perpendicularly to ground level.
Drive-in theater (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(i).
Dryland access: A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which
connects land located in the floodplain to land which is outside the floodplain, such as a road with
its surface above the regional flood elevation and wide enough to accommodate wheeled
vehicles.
Duplex: These dwelling unit types consist of a
single-family dwelling which is attached on one side to
another single-family residence. A minimum building code
required fire rated wall assembly division, separating
living areas from the lowest level to flush against the
underside of the roof, and individual sanitary sewer and
public water laterals, are required between each dwelling
unit. The two residences may or may not be located on
individual lots. The Twin House is distinguished from the
Duplex House merely by having each unit located on an
individual lot or within a group development. These
dwelling unit types may not be split into additional
residences. Refer to the illustration (right) and to Article I
for setback requirements labeled in capital letters:
Dwelling: A residential building or one or more portions
thereof occupied or intended to be occupied exclusively
for residence purpose, but not including habitations
provided in nonresidential uses such as lodging uses and commercial campgrounds.
Dwelling, attached: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one (1) or more sides by a
party wall or walls.
Dwelling, detached: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
Dwelling, single-family detached: See Section 98-203(1). See also Single-family detached
dwelling unit.
Dwelling unit: A room or group of rooms, providing or intended to provide living quarters for not
more than one (1) family.
Dwelling unit separation: The narrowest distance between two dwelling units. See Minimum
dwelling unit separation.
Easement: Written authorization by a property owner for another party to use for a specified
purpose any designated part of his property which has been recorded in the Register of Deeds'
office.
Electromagnetic radiation standards: See Section 98-712.
Elevated Building: A non-basement building built to have its lowest floor elevated above the
ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings columns (post and piers),
shear walls, or breakaway walls.
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 15
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
Encroachment: Any fill, structure, building, use, or development in the floodway.
Environmental Control Facility: Any facility, temporary or permanent, which is reasonably
expected to abate, reduce, or aid in the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise,
air, or water pollutants, solid waste or thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including
facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not
meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be
supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities.
Environs (of the City of Lake Geneva): The area in which the City of Lake Geneva exercises
extraterritorial powers.
Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, and/or
gravity.
Essential Services: Facilities that are:
(a) Owned or maintained by public utility companies or public agencies, and;
(b) Located in public ways or in easements provided for the purpose, or on a customer's premises
and not requiring a private right-of-way, and;
(c) Reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate water, sewer, gas, electric,
communication, or similar services to adjacent customers, and;
(d) Not including any cross-country line on towers.
Estate Residential (ER-1) District: See Section 98-105(2)(b).
Explosion standards: See Section 98-714.
Exterior Communication Devices (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(v).
Extraction use (land use): See Section 98-206(7)(d).
Extraterritorial area: The area outside of the City Limits in which the City of Lake Geneva
exercises extraterritorial powers of land division, and/or zoning, review.
Family: An individual or two (2) or more persons, each related by blood, marriage or adoption,
living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than four (4) persons not so
related, maintaining a common household.
Family day care home (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(k).
Farm residence (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(b).
Fees: See Section 98-935.
Fencing standards: See Section 98-720.
Filling (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(s).
Fire standards: See Section 98-714.
First habitable floor: The top surface above an unfinished basement, cellar or crawl space that is
intended for living quarters.
Floodplain and related topics: See Section 98-503.
Floor area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building including
interior balconies, mezzanines, basements and attached accessory buildings, fitting rooms, stairs,
escalators, unenclosed porches, detached accessory buildings utilized as dead storage, heating
and utility rooms, inside off-street parking or loading space, Measurements shall be made from
the inside of the exterior walls and to the center of interior walls.
Floor area ratio (FAR): The ratio calculated by dividing the total floor area of all buildings on a
site by the Gross Site Area. See Maximum floor area ratio.
Footcandle: A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one (1) foot from
a uniform point source of one candle.
Freeboard: Represents a factor of safety usually expressed in terms of a certain amount of feet
above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for the many unknown factors that
contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated. These unknown factors may include,
but are not limited to, ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings
and floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology of the watershed, loss of flood storage
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 16
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
areas due to development and the sedimentation of a river or stream bed.
Freight terminal(land use): See Section 98-206(6)(c).
Garage (residential): A detached accessory building or portion of the principal building, including
a carport, which is used primarily for storing passenger vehicles, trailers or one (1) truck of a rated
capacity not in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds. See Section 98-206(8)(c).
Gas station: See in-vehicle sales or service.
General Business (GB) District: See Section 98-105(3)(e).
General floor plans: A graphic representation of the anticipated utilization of the floor area within
a building or structure, but not necessarily as detailed as construction plans.
General Industrial (GI) District: See Section 98-105(3)(h).
General temporary outdoor sales (land use): See Section 98-206(9)(a).
Glare: The brightness of a light source which causes eye discomfort.
Glare standards: See Section 98-713.
Green space ratio (GSR): The percentage of the gross site area which is preserved as
permanently protected green space. Green space ratio is calculated by dividing the area of
permanently protected green space by the gross site area. See Minimum green space ratio.
Gross density: The result of dividing the number of dwelling units located on a site by the gross
site area. See Maximum gross density.
Gross floor area: The total floor area of a building.
Gross site area (GSA): The total area of a site available for inclusion in calculations of the
maximum permitted density or intensity of development.
Group day care center (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(m).
Group development: See Section 98-208.
Habitable buildings: Any building, or portion thereof used for human habitation.
Heat standards: See Section 98-713.
Hearing Notice: Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Chapter 985, Stats. Class 1
notice is the minimum required for appeals: Published once at least one week (7 days) before
hearing. Class 2 notice is the minimum required for all zoning ordinances and amendments
including map amendments: published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a
week (7 days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice,
exceeding these minimums.
Heavy industrial (land use): See Section 98-206(7)(b).
Height of structure: See Building Height.
Heliport (land use): See Section 98-206(6)(b).
High flood damage potential: Any danger to human life or public health or the potential for any
significant economic loss to a structure or its contents.
Holding zone: A zoning district designed to limit development potential until adequate public
services and infrastructure are provided.
Home occupation (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(j).
Husbandry (land use): See Section 98-206(2)(b).
Impervious surface: Areas designed and installed to prohibit infiltration of stormwater. Concrete,
brick, asphalt and similar paved surfaces are considered impervious. Gravel areas and areas with
"landscaped pavers" which are intended for vehicular traffic are considered to be impervious.
Increase in regional flood height: A calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal
or greater than 0.01 foot, resulting in comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions
which is directly attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors,
expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge.
Indoor commercial entertainment (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(h).
Indoor institutional (land use): See Section 98-206(3)(c).
Indoor maintenance service (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(e).
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 17
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
Indoor sales (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(c).
Indoor sales accessory to light industrial use (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(i).
Indoor service (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(c).
Indoor storage (land use): See Section 98-206(5)(a).
Indoor wholesaling (land use): See Section 98-206(5)(a).
Industrial district(s): See Section 98-102.
Industrial land use(s): See Section 98-206(7).
Infill development: Development located in areas which are largely developed already.
Institutional land use(s): See Section 98-206(3).
Institutional residential development: See Section 98-206(1)(b).
Institutional residential unit: This dwelling unit type consists of an attached, multi-family
residence which takes access from a shared entrance or hallway. All institutional residential units
within a development shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the
development.
Intensity: A term used to describe the amount of gross floor area or landscaped area, on a lot or
site, compared to the gross area of the lot or site.
Intensive agricultural (land use): See Section 98-206(2)(c).
Intermediate day care home (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(l).
Interpretation: See Section 98-911 for application procedures and Section 98-932(2)(n).
In-vehicle sales (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(g).
In-vehicle sales as accessory use (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(g).
In-vehicle service (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(h).
In-vehicle service as accessory use (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(g).
Junkyard (land use): See Section 98-206(5)(d).
Lakeshore: Those lands lying within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of
navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond, or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream; or
to a landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is the greater. Lakeshores shall not
include those lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches where (a) such lands are not adjacent to a
navigable stream or river; (b) those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were
not navigable streams before ditching or had no previous stream history; and (c) such lands are
maintained in non-structural agricultural use. See Section 98-505.
Landscape point: See Section 98-603.
Landscaped area: The area of a site which is planted and continually maintained in vegetation,
including grasses, flowers, herbs, garden plants, native or introduced groundcovers, shrubs,
bushes, and trees. Landscaped area includes the area located within planted and continually
maintained landscaped planters.
Landscape surface area ratio (LSR): The percentage of the gross site area or lot area which is
preserved as permanently protected landscaped area.
Land use: The type of development and/or activity occurring on a piece of property.
Lawn Care (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(t).
Light industrial (land use): See Section 98-206(7)(a).
Light industrial incidental to indoor sales: See Section 98-206(8)(i).
Lighting standards: See Section 98-707.
Loading standards: See Section 98-705.
Local residential street: A road which primarily serves to collect traffic originating directly from
residential driveways and private residential courts and streets.
Lot: A parcel of land that: (a) is undivided by any street or private road; (b) is occupied by, or
designated to be developed for, one (1) building or principal use; and (c) contains the accessory
buildings or uses customarily incidental to such building, use, or development, including such
open spaces and yards as designed and arranged or required by this Chapter for such building,
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 18
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
use, or development.
Lot area: The area contained within the property boundaries of a recorded lot.
Lot corner: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersection streets, or a
lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does
not exceed 135 degrees.
Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot.
Lot frontage: Lot width measured at the street lot line. When a lot has more than one street lot
line, lot width shall be measured, and the minimum lot width required by this Chapter shall be
provided at each such line.
Lot interior: A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot line: A lot line is the property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot extends
into the public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way, the line of such public right-of-way
shall be the lot line for applying this Chapter.
Lot line, front: A lot line which abuts a public or private street right-of-way. In the case of a lot
which has two of more street frontages, the lot line along the street from which the house is
addressed shall be the front lot line.
Lot line, rear: In the case of rectangular or most trapezoidal shaped lots, that lot line which is
parallel to and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or
gore-shaped lot, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum
possible distance from the front line shall be considered to be the rear lot line. In the case of lots
which have frontage on more than one road or street, the rear lot line shall be selected by the
property owner.
Lot line, side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line, a street side lot line, or a rear lot
line.
Lot line, street side: Any lot line which abuts a public or private street right-of-way which is not
the front lot line.
Lot of record: A platted lot or lot described in a certified survey map or metes and bounds
description which has been approved by the City or by Walworth County; and has been recorded
in the office of the Register of Deeds.
Lot, through: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two substantially parallel streets
(one or more of which may be a portion of a cul-de-sac). Except for through lots which abut an
arterial or nonresidential collector street, through lots shall be prohibited under the provisions of
this Chapter.
Lot width: The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured parallel
to the front lot lines and at the rear of the required front yard. See minimum lot width.
Lowest floor: The lowest enclosed floor (including basement). Any unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosed area is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of this Chapter.
Maintenance guarantee: A guarantee of facilities or work to either ensure the correction of any
failures of any improvements required pursuant to this Chapter or to maintain same.
Master Plan: A plan, map, report, or other document pertaining to the physical development of the
City which has been adopted by the City Plan Commission, as described in Wisconsin Statutes
62.23(2) and (3).
Maximum accessory building coverage: The largest permitted area of all accessory buildings
on a lot.
Maximum building coverage: The largest permitted area of all buildings on a lot.
Maximum building size (MBS): The largest permitted total gross floor area a building may
contain. See building size.
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 19
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): The largest amount of floor area permitted on a lot. See floor
area ratio.
Maximum gross density (MGD): The maximum number of dwelling units permitted per acre of
Gross Site Area. See gross density.
Maximum height: The maximum height of the highest portion of any structure. See height.
Migrant labor camp (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(m).
Minimum building separation: The narrowest permitted building separation.
Minimum dwelling unit separation: The narrowest permitted dwelling unit separation.
Minimum floor elevation: The lowest elevation permissible for the construction, erection, or
other placement of any floor, including a basement floor.
Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): The lowest permitted landscape surface ratio. See
landscape surface ratio.
Minimum lot area (MLA): The minimum size lot permitted within the specified zoning district and
development option.
Minimum lot width: The smallest permissible lot width for the applicable dwelling unit type or
nonresidential development option.
Minimum setback: The narrowest distance permitted from a street, side, or rear property line to a
structure.
Minimum site area (MSA): The minimum gross site area in which the specified development
option may occur. See gross site area (GSA).
Mini-warehouse: See Section 98-206(5)(c).
Mobile home (land use): This dwelling unit type
consists of a fully detached, single-family residence,
which has not received a Federal Manufactured
Housing Certificate and which is located on an
individual lot or within a group development. This
dwelling unit type may not be split into 2 or more
residences. Within 30 days of occupancy, the owner
shall remove the axle and install skirting per the
requirements of the Plan Commission. Refer to the
illustration (right) and to Article I for setback
requirements labeled in capital letters:
Mobile Home Park Residential Development: See
Section 98-206(1)(e).
Mobile Home Residential Development: See Section 98-206(1)(d).
Mobile home sales: See Sections 98-206(4)(d).
Motel, Motor Court, Hotel: See commercial indoor
lodging.
Motor freight terminal: See freight terminal.
Multiplex: This dwelling unit type consists of an
attached, multi-family residence which has a private,
individual exterior entrance. A minimum building code
required fire rated wall assembly division, separating
living areas from the lowest level through the roof, is
required between each dwelling unit. No more than 6
and no less than 3 multiplex dwelling units may be
attached per group. All multiplex units within a
development shall be located a minimum of 30 feet
from the boundary of the development. Refer to the
illustration (previous page) and to Article I for setback
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 20
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
requirements labeled in capital letters:
Multi-family Residential-8 (MR-8) District: See Section 98-105(2)(f).
Natural resource protection overlay zoning districts: Zoning districts which primarily identify
and regulate the disturbance of areas containing protected natural resources. See Sections 98-
106 and 98-107. See overlay zoning districts.
Navigable water: Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within Wisconsin, and all
rivers, streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages, and other waters within the territorial limits of this state,
including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this
state. The Wisconsin Supreme Court has declared navigable all bodies of water with a bed
differentiated from adjacent uplands and with levels of flow sufficient to support navigation by a
recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis. [Muench v. Public Service
Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952), and DeGaynor and Co., Inc. v. Department of Natural
Resources, 70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975)] For the purposes of this Chapter, rivers and streams will be
presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on
the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps until such time that the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources has made a determination that the waterway is not, in fact,
navigable.
Neighborhood Business (NB) District: See Section 98-105(3)(c).
Neighborhood Office (NO) District: See Section 98-105(3)(a).
Net developable area (NDA): The area of a site which may be disturbed by development activity.
Net Developable Area is the result of subtracting Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) from
the Gross Site Area (GSA).
Noise standards: See Section 98-709.
Nonconforming building or structure: Any building, or other structure, which is lawfully existing
under provisions preceding this Chapter, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if
the building or structure were to be erected under the provisions of this Chapter.
Nonconforming development: A lawful development approved under provisions preceding the
effective date of this Chapter, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the
development were to be created under the current provisions of this Chapter. See Section 98-307.
Nonconforming use: An active and actual use of land, buildings or structures lawfully existing
prior to this Chapter which has continued as the same use to the present and which does not
comply with all the applicable regulations of this Chapter. See Section 98-207.
Nonresidential district(s): See Section 98-102.
Nonresidential land use(s): See Section 98-206(2)-(7).
Noxious matter or materials: Material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical
reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of
individuals.
Noxious materials standards: See Section 98-715.
Odor standards: See Section 98-711.
Obstruction to flow: Any development which physically blocks the conveyance of floodwaters
such that this development by itself or in conjunction with any future similar development will
cause an increase in regional flood height.
Office (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(a).
Office district: See Section 98-102.
Official map: The map adopted by the Common Council which indicates the existing and
proposed location of streets, highways, parks, playgrounds, roads, rights-of-way, waterways,
public transit facilities and other public facilities as authorized by State Statutes.
Official zoning map: See Sections 98-103, 98-104, and 98-107.
Off-site parking lot (land use): See Section 98-206(6)(a).
On-site: Located on the lot in question, except in the context of on-site detention, when the term
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 21
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
means within the boundaries of the development site as a whole.
On-site agricultural retail (land use): See Section 98-206(2)(e).
On-site parking lot (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(n).
On-site real estate sales office (land use): See Section 98-206(9)(f).
Opacity: The degree to which vision is blocked by bufferyard. Opacity is the proportion of a
bufferyard's vertical plane which obstructs views into an adjoining property.
Open sales lot: An unenclosed portion of a lot or lot of record where goods are displayed for
sale, rent or trade.
Ordinary high water mark: The point on the bank or shore of a body of water up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by
erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or
other easily recognized characteristics.
Other permanently protected green space: Permanently protected green space areas which
are not constrained by one of the protected natural resources (wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes,
lakeshores, drainageways, and woodlands). Examples include portions of private lots, outlots, or
parcels commonly held by a property owners' association which are deed restricted from site
disruption.
Outdoor assembly (land use): See Section 98-206(9)(b).
Outdoor commercial entertainment (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(i).
Outdoor display (land use): See Sections 98-206(4)(d).
Outdoor display incidental to indoor sales (land use): See Sections 98-206(8)(f).
Outdoor institutional (land use): See Section 98-206(3)(d).
Outdoor maintenance service (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(f).
Outdoor sales of farm products (land use): See Section 98-206(9)(g).
Outdoor storage (land use): See Section 98-206(5)(b).
Outdoor storage of firewood standards: See Section 98-724.
Outdoor wholesaling (land use): See Section 98-206(5)(b).
Overlay zoning district: A zoning district which imposes uniform restrictions on all properties
within its area which are in addition to the restrictions specific to the standard zoning districts
described in Section 98-102, as well as the general restrictions of this Chapter. See Sections 98-
106, 98-107, 98-108, 98-109, 98-110, 98-111, 98-112, and 98-113.
Owner: The person or persons having the right of legal title to a lot or parcel of land.
Pad, Development: See Development pad.
Parcel: The area within the boundary lines of a lot.
Parking standards: See Section 98-704.
Parking lot design standards: See Section 98-704(6)(j).
Parking requirements: See Section 98-704(7)(c).
Parking space design standards: See Section 98-704(6)(h).
Passive outdoor public recreational (land use): See Section 98-206(3)(a).
Penalty: See Section 98-936.
Performance guarantee: A financial guarantee to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work
required by this Chapter will be completed in compliance with the Chapter, regulations and the
approved plans and specifications of a development.
Performance standard: Criterion established to control and limit the impacts generated by, or
inherent in, uses of land or buildings. See Article VII.
Peripheral setback: The distance between a structure and the boundary of a development
option.
Permanently protected green space: An area in which site disruption and/or development is
strictly limited. See Section 98-204.
Permitted by right, use: See Section 98-202(2).
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 22
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
Personal service(s) (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(b).
Personal storage facility (land use): See Section 98-206(5)(c).
Piers and wharfs: See Section 98-206(10)(m).
Plan Commission: The Plan Commission of the City of Lake Geneva. See also Section 98-933.
Planned Business (PB) District: See Section 98-105(3)(d).
Planned Development (PD_-_) District: See Section 98-105(4)(a).
Planned Industrial (PI) District: See Section 98-105(3)(g).
Planned Office (PO) District: See Section 98-105(3)(b).
Principal building: See Building, principal.
Principal use: Any and all of the primary uses of a property, treated as a use permitted by right or
as a conditional use (rather than as an accessory use or a temporary use) per Section 98-206(1)-
(7).
Private Residential Kennel (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(p).
Private Residential Recreational Facility (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(o).
Private Residential Stable (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(q).
Private Sewage System: A sewage treatment and disposal system serving a single structure with
a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. This term also
means an alternative sewage system approved by the department of industry, labor, and human
relations including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system
serving more than one structure, or a system located on a different parcel than the structure.
Professional service(s) (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(b).
Protected natural resources: Resources such as floodways, floodfringes, floodplain
conservancy areas, wetlands, drainageways, woodlands, steep slopes, and lakeshores, which are
protected by the provisions of this Chapter. See Section 98-106.
Public improvement: Any improvement, facility, or service, together with customary
improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to provide for public needs such as: streets,
roads, alleys or pedestrian walks or paths, storm sewers, flood control improvements, water
supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public utility and energy
services.
Public services and utilities (land use): See Section 98-206(3)(e).
Public sewer: Includes the City of Lake Geneva sewer system and other forms of sewer systems
approved by the State Department of Natural Resources and maintained by a public agency
authorized to operate such systems.
Recorded lot: See Lot of record.
Recreational vehicle: A vehicle designed and used principally for the transport of persons.
Relocatable building (land use): See Section 98-206(9)(e).
Required resource protection area (RPA): The area of a site which may not be disturbed by
development activity and which must also be reserved as permanently protected green space.
Required resource protection area is the result of subtracting the net developable area (NDA)
from the gross site area (GSA).
Residential collector street: A collector street serving primarily residential land uses which
primarily serves to connect local residential streets to collector or arterial streets.
Residential district(s): See Section 98-102.
Residential land use(s): See Section 98-206(1).
Residentially zoned: A property located in a residential district per Section 98-102.
Restrictive, more (less): A regulation imposed by this Chapter is more (less) restrictive than
another if it prohibits or limits development to a greater (lesser) extent or by means of more (less)
detailed specifications.
Restaurant: See indoor commercial entertainment.
Restaurant, fast food: See in-vehicle sales and service.
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 23
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
Rural Holding (RH) District: See Section 98-105(1)(a).
Salvage yard (land use): See Section 98-206(5)(d).
Scale (of development): A term used to describe the gross floor area, height, or volume of a
single structure or group of structures.
Sedimentation: The deposition of soil that has been transported from its site of origin by water,
ice, wind, gravity, or other natural means as a result of erosion.
Selective cutting (land use): See Section 98-206(2)(f).
Septic systems (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(u).
Setback: The shortest distance between a building's or structure's exterior from the nearest point
on the referenced lot line. See minimum setback.
Sexually-oriented use (land use): See Section 98-206(4)(p).
Shopping center: See group development.
Shoreland and related topics: See Section 98-504.
Shrub: A low-lying deciduous or evergreen plant. See Section 98-610.
Sign: See Section 98-802. See also, Section 98-907 for applicable procedures.
Signal receiving antenna (satellite dishes) standards: See Section 98-721.
Single-family detached dwelling unit: A dwelling
designed for and occupied by not more than one family
and having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any other
dwelling unit. This dwelling unit type consists of a fully
detached single-family residence which is located on an
individual lot or within a group development. The dwelling
unit must be a site built structure built in compliance with
the State of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC), or
may be a manufactured dwelling (modular home) as
permitted by the UDC or a manufactured home as
permitted by the HUD code. For any of these dwelling
units, the use of a permanent, continuous UDC foundation
is required. This dwelling unit type may not be split into two
or more residences. Refer to the illustration (right) and to
Article I for setback requirements labeled in capital letters:
A single family dwelling may not be used as a commercial
indoor lodging facility.
Single-family Residential-3 (SR-3) District: See Section 98-105(2)(c).
Single-family Residential-4 (SR-4) District: See Section 98-105(2)(d).
Site area: See Gross site area.
Site plan: See Section 98-908. See also, Section 98-908 for applicable procedures.
Skylight: A window or other paned area located on the ceiling or roof of a structure.
Solid fence: Any fence which cannot be seen through. Such fences include basketweave fences,
stockade fences, plank fences, and similar fences.
Standard zoning districts: Zoning districts which primarily regulate the use of land, and intensity
or density of such use. See Sections 98-102, 98-103, and 98-105.
Stable, commercial: See commercial animal boarding.
Stable, private: See private residential stable.
Standard Industrial Classification code (SIC): The numeric code for categorizing land uses
developed by the US Department of Commerce. SIC codes in this Chapter are based on the
listing contained within the 1987 manual.
Standard pavement width: Required pavement width per the City of Lake Geneva Subdivision
Ordinance in residential subdivisions on a street that allows parking or as otherwise determined
by the City Engineer.
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 24
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
Start of Construction: The date the building permit is issued, provided the actual start of activity
was within 730 calendar days of the permit date. The actual start of activity means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on the site such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, the installation of piles, or the construction of columns. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or
foundations; nor does it include the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or shed not occupied as dwelling units or
part of the main structure.
Steep Slope: Steep slopes are areas which contain a gradient of 12% or greater, (equivalent to a
10 foot elevation change in a distance of 83 feet or less), as shown on USGS 7.5 minute
topographic maps for the City of Lake Geneva and its environs. See Section 98-508.
Storage land use(s): See Section 98-706.
Storage standards: See Section 98-706.
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
floor next above; or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next
above. Neither a basement nor a cellar shall be counted as a story.
Street: Any public or private way dedicated or permanently open to pedestrian and vehicular use
which is twenty-two (22) feet or more in width if it exists at the time of enactment of this Chapter;
and any such public right-of-way sixty (60) feet or more in width when established after the
effective date of this Chapter.
Street Line: See Lot line, front.
Strip development: A pattern of land uses typified by nonresidential and/or multi-family
development located along one or both sides of a street which is generally only one lot deep and
which is characterized by many curb cuts, low green space ratios, low landscape surface ratios,
high floor area ratios, and/or low quantities of landscaping.
Substandard lot: A lot of record which lawfully existed prior to this Chapter, which would not
conform to the applicable regulations if the lot were to be created under the current provisions of
this Chapter. See Section 98-407.
Substantial improvement: Any structural repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure,
the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the present equalized assessed value
of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been
damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not, however,
include either:
(a) Any project to improve a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; and
(b) Any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the Wisconsin
State Historical Society, or listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications or additions.
Such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling,
and the replacement of doors, windows, and other non-structural components. (For purposes of
this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.)
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent
location on the ground, or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground,
excepting public utility fixtures and appurtenances.
Swale: A linear depression in land running downhill or having a marked change in contour
direction in which sheet runoff would collect and form a temporary watercourse.
Temporary use: A land use which is present on a property for a limited and specified period of
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 25
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
time. See Section 98-206(9). See also Section 98-906 for applicable procedures.
Townhouse: This dwelling unit type consists of an
attached, two-story, single- family residence which has a
private, individual access and is located on its own lot or
within a group development. This dwelling unit type may not
be split into additional residences. A minimum building code
required fire rated wall assembly division, separating living
areas from the lowest level through the roof, and individual
sanitary sewer and public water laterals, are required
between each dwelling unit. No more than 8 and no less
than 3 townhouse dwelling units may be attached per
group. All townhouse units within a development shall be
located a minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the
development. Refer to the illustration (right) and to Article I
for setback requirements labeled in capital letters:
Toxic materials standards: See Section 98-715.
Transportation land use(s): See Section 98-206(6).
Truck stop: See In-Vehicle sales and service.
Twin house: These dwelling unit types consist of a
single-family dwelling which is attached on one side to
another single-family residence. A minimum building
code required fire rated wall assembly division,
separating living areas from the lowest level to flush
against the underside of the roof, and individual
sanitary sewer and public water laterals, are required
between each dwelling unit. The two residences may
or may not be located on individual lots. The Twin
House is distinguished from the Duplex House merely
by having each unit located on an individual lot or
within a group development. These dwelling unit types
may not be split into additional residences. Refer to
the illustration (right) and to Article I for setback
requirements labeled in capital letters:
Two-Flat house: This dwelling unit type consists of a single-family residence, which is in complete
compliance with the State of Wisconsin One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code (s. 101.60-.66),
which has been converted into a two-family residence. The two residences are both located on
the same lot or within the same group development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into
additional residences. Where permitted, this use is a conditional use and must be approved
through the procedures of Section 98-905. Refer to the illustration below and to Article I for
setback requirements labeled in capital letters:
Two-family Residential-6 (TR-6) District: See Section 98-105(2)(e).
Unnecessary hardship: The circumstance where special conditions affecting a particular
property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing
areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of
the purposes of the ordinance.
Use: The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is designed, arranged, or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
Use, Accessory: See Accessory use.
Use, Conditional: See Conditional use.
Use, Principal: See Principal use.
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 26
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-034: Definitions through Section 98-034: Definitions
Utility shed (land use): See Section 98-206(8)(c).
Utility vehicle: A vehicle designed and used primarily for the transport of equipment and/or
materials.
Variance: Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this Chapter granted pursuant to
Section 98-910.
Vibration standards: See Section 98-708.
Violation: See Section 98-936.
Visibility standards: See Section 98-703.
Waste disposal facility (land use): See Section 98-206(5)(e).
Waste materials standards: See Section 98-716.
Wetland: See Section 98-504.
Wind energy systems standards: See Section 98-722.
Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map: Maps prepared by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
Woodland: Woodlands are areas of trees whose combined canopies cover a minimum of 80% of
an area of one acre or more, as shown on USGS 7.5 minute topographic maps for the City of
Lake Geneva and its environs. See Section 98-507.
Working days: Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday; excluding holidays granted by
the City of Lake Geneva to its Department Heads.
Yard: A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from
its lowest ground level to the sky, except as expressly permitted in this Chapter. A yard shall
extend along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Yard, front: A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and
extending from the abutting front street right-of-way line to a depth required in the yard regulations
for the district in which such lot is located.
Yard, rear: A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between the side lot lines and
extending toward the front lot line for a depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in
which such lot is located.
Yard, side: A yard extending along the side lot line between the front and rear yards, having a
width as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Yard, street: The required area of setback located along a street right-of-way, abutting a front,
side or rear yard.
Zoning Administrator: The City employee charged with the application and interpretation of this
Chapter. See Section 98-932.
Zoning district(s): See Section 98-102.
Zoning district categories: See Section 98-102.
Zoning map: See "Official Zoning Map", above and see Section 98-103.
ARTICLE 0: INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 27
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-101 Purpose through
Section 98-103 Map of Standard Zoning
Districts
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 98-101 Purpose
The area located within the jurisdiction of this Chapter (See Section 98-009) is hereby divided into
zoning districts of such number and community character as are necessary to achieve
compatibility of land uses within each district, to implement the officially adopted City of Lake
Geneva Comprehensive Master Plan, and to achieve the other purposes of this Chapter (See
Section 98-005).
Section 98-102 Standard Zoning Districts and Standard Zoning District Categories
For the purpose of this Chapter, all areas within the jurisdiction of this Chapter (See Section 98-
009) are hereby divided into the following standard zoning districts, and standard zoning district
categories (listed in underlined text), which shall be designated as follows:
Agricultural District:
Rural Holding (RH) District
Residential Districts:
Countryside Residential-5ac (CR-5ac) District
Estate Residential-1 (ER-1) District
Single-family Residential-3 (SR-3) District
Single-family Residential-4 (SR-4) District
Two-family Residential-6 (TR-6) District
Multi-family Residential-8 (MR-8) District
Nonresidential Districts:
Office District:
Neighborhood Office (NO) District
Planned Office (PO) District
Commercial Districts:
Neighborhood Business (NB) District
Planned Business (PB) District
General Business (GB) District
Central Business (CB) District
Industrial Districts:
Planned Industrial (PI) District
General Industrial (GI) District
Heavy Industrial (HI) District
Planned Development Districts:
Planned Development District (year-order of approval in that year) e.g.: (PD 97-2)
State Law Reference: Section 62.23(7)(b), Wisconsin Statutes
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 28
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-103 Map of Standard Zoning
Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Section 98-103 Map of Standard Zoning Districts
Standard zoning districts established by this Chapter are shown on the Official Zoning Map of the
City of Lake Geneva, which together with all explanatory materials thereon, is hereby made part of
this Chapter.
Section 98-104 Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries
The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any zoning district boundary
shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Lake Geneva:
(1) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following the limits of any City,
Village, Town or County boundary shall be construed as following such limits.
(2) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets or railroad
lines shall be construed as following the centerline of such streets or railroad lines.
(3) Zoning district boundary lines shown as following or approximately following platted lot lines or
other property lines as shown on the City of Lake Geneva or County of Walworth Tax Maps
shall be construed as following such lines.
(4) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following the centerlines of
streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing watercourses shall be construed as following the
channel centerlines of such watercourses, and, in the event of a natural change in the location
of such streams, rivers, or other watercourses, the zoning district boundary shall be construed
as moving with the channel centerline.
(5) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following ridgelines or
watershed boundaries shall be construed as following such lines.
(6) Zoning district boundaries shown as separated from, any of the features listed in paragraphs
(1) through (5), above, shall be construed to be at such distances therefrom as are shown on
the Official Zoning Map.
(7) Where any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a zoning district boundary line, as
shown on the Official Zoning Map, the location of the line shall be determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 29
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of Standard Zoning Districts
The following subsections specify the purpose and intent of the standard zoning districts
established by this Chapter.
(1) Agricultural District
(a) Rural Holding (RH) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit development which is
solely of a rural community character. The land use standards for this district permit
very low density single-family residential development at a density of 1 dwelling unit for
every 35 gross acres, as well as a variety of agricultural and agricultural support land
uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that
development which requires even a minimum of urban services does not occur until
such services are available. As such, the Rural Holding (RH) District shall either serve
as a designation which preserves and protects agricultural activities, or as a "holding
zone" which provides for an interim land use (agriculture) that will easily permit further
development (with rezoning to another district) at the appropriate time.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the protection of agricultural activities, and
a very low density residential area for those who want to live in a rural environment
and who retain enough land with their residence to ensure that the rural environment is
maintained as long as the Rural Holding (RH) District designation is retained. In this
manner, even if all property were developed in a given area with the Rural Holding
(RH) District designation, the rural community character of that area would still be
maintained.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Single-Family - 35 acre lot
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
On-Site Agricultural Retail (per Section 98-206(2)(e))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(g))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Husbandry (per Section 98-206(2)(b))
Intensive Agriculture (per Section 98-206(2)(c))
Agricultural Services (per Section 98-206(2)(d))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Indoor Institutional (Church and school only) (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(i))
Commercial Animal Boarding (per Section 98-206(4)(j))
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 98-206(4)(l))
Campground (per Section 98-206(4)(n))
Intensive Outdoor Recreation (per Section 98-206(4)(r)) (Ord. No. 12-07)
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 30
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Junkyard or Salvage Yard (per Section 98-206(5)(d))
Waste Disposal Facility (per Section 98-206(5)(e))
Composting Operation (per Section 98-206(5)(f))
Airport/Heliport (per Section 98-206(6)(b))
Communication Tower (per Section 98-206(7)(c))
Extraction Use (per Section 98-206(7)(d))
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Detached Private Garage, Carport or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 98-206(8)(k))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Outdoor Display Incidental (per Section 98-206(8)(f))
Intermediate Day Care Home (per Section 98-206(8)(l))
Migrant Labor Camp (per Section 98-206(8)(m))
Private Residential Kennel (per Section 98-206(8)(p))
Private Residential Stable (per Section 98-206(8)(q))
Septic Systems (per Section 98-206(8)(u))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
Outdoor Sales of Farm Products (per Section 98-206(9)(g))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses
a. Residential Density and Intensity Requirements:
Minimum Zoning District Area: 35 acres
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): .03 du/acre
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 90%
Maximum Building Coverage: 5%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 10%
b. Residential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 35 acres
B: Minimum Lot Width: 200 feet
C: Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 31
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
E: Front or Street Lot Line to House: 35 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a street
with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
F: Front or Street Lot Line to Garage: 35 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a street
with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
G: Side Lot Line to House or Garage: 50 feet
H: Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Garage: 100 feet
I: Rear Lot Line to House or Garage: 100 feet
J: Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 50 feet
K: Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 50 feet
L: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
M: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street
N: Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation: 100 feet
O: Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit: 35 feet
P: Maximum Height of Accessory Structure: 15 feet
Q: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot
(Includes garage, drives, & all designated parking surfaces):
4 spaces if located on street with standard pavement width
8 spaces if located on street with reduced pavement width
R: Minimum Dwelling Core Dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet
S: Minimum Roof Pitch: 3 : 12
T: Minimum Eave Width: 18 inches
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for single-family. See
Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Two- & Multi-family Residential
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements:
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 1
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 90%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .10
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 40,000 sf
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 40,000 sq ft, 20,000 sf with a conditional use permit
B: Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 35 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a street
with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 50 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 50 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 50 feet
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 50 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 100 feet
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 32
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
K: Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot: See
parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential, Two- & Multifamily):
1) 20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 10 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 20 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 40 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(2) Residential Districts
(a) Countryside Residential (CR-5ac) District
1. Description and Purpose
This district is intended to permit development which has a very low density,
countryside community character. Unlike the case for the Rural Holding (RH) District,
the land use standards for this district permit primarily single-family detached
residential development and a variety of related institutional land uses, and are not
oriented to a wide range of agricultural activities. Density and intensity standards for
this district are designed to ensure that the Countryside Residential (CR-5ac) District
shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the countryside community
character of its area. A variety of residential development options are available in this
district, with a Maximum Gross Density (MGD) of 1 dwelling unit for every 5 gross
acres.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of a very low
density residential area for those who want to live in a countryside environment and
retain enough land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the
countryside character is maintained as long as the CR-5ac District designation is
retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Single-Family - 5 acre lot
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(g))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Single-Family 40,000 sf lot in a cluster development (per 98-206(1)(b)
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 33
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(h))
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 98-206(4)(l))
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Detached Garage, Carport or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 98-206(8)(k))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Intermediate Day Care Home (per Section 98-206(8)(l))
Private Residential Kennel (per Section 98-206(8)(p))
Septic Systems (per Section 98-206(8)(u))
Caretaker's Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(w))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses
a. Residential Density Requirements:
1) Conventional Single-family Development:
Minimum Zoning District Area: 5 acres
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): .20 du/acre
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 80%
Maximum Building Coverage: 20%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 5%
2) Cluster Single-family Development1:
Minimum Zoning District Area: 5 acres
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): .25 du/acre
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 90%
Maximum Building Coverage: 20%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 5%
b. Residential Bulk Requirements: (per Table 98-403)
A: Minimum Lot Area: 5 acres; Cluster1: 40,000 sf
B: Minimum Lot Width: 200 feet; Cluster1: 150 feet
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 34
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Minimum Setbacks:
E: Front or Street Lot Line to House: Single-family: 35 feet; Cluster1: 25 feet, 40
feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or
exceeding 100 feet
F: Front or Street Lot Line to Attached Garage: 35 feet; Cluster1: 25 feet, 40 feet for
a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or
exceeding 100 feet
G: Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage: 50 feet; Cluster1: 30 feet
H: Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage: 100 feet; Cluster1: 60
feet
I: Rear Lot Line to House/Attached Garage: 50 feet; Cluster1: 30 feet
J: Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 50 feet; Cluster1: 5 feet
K: Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 50 feet; Cluster1: 5 feet
L: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
M: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear
N: Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation: 100 feet; Cluster1: 60 feet
O: Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit: 35 feet
P: Maximum Height of Accessory Structure: 15 feet
Q: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot
(Includes garage, drives, & all designated parking surfaces): 3
R: Minimum Dwelling Core Dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet
S: Minimum Roof Pitch: 3 : 12
T: Minimum Eave Width: 18 inches
1Cluster development requires a conditional use permit
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for single-family. See
Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Multi-family Residential
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements:
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 1
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 80%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .10
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 40,000 sf
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 40,000 sf
B: Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 25 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 30 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 30 feet
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 35
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
J: Minimum Building Separation: 60 feet
K: Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot: See
parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential and Multi-family):
1) 50 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of building foundation
2) 30 landscaping points per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
3) 50 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 100 landscaping points per 10,000 square feet paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(b) Estate Residential-1 (ER-1) District
1. Description and Purpose
This district is intended to permit development which has a low density, estate
community character. The land use standards for this district permit primarily
single-family detached residential development and a variety of related institutional
land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that
the Estate Residential-1 District shall serve as a designation which preserves and
protects the estate character of its area.
Rationale: This district provides for the permanent protection of a low density
residential area for those who want to live in an estate environment and retain enough
land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the estate community
character is maintained as long as the ER-1 District designation is retained, regardless
of how much development occurs within that area.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Single-Family - 40,000 sf lot
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(g))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(h))
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 98-206(4)(l))
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 36
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Detached Garage, Carport or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 98-206(8)(k))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Intermediate Day Care Home (per Section 98-206(8)(l))
Private Residential Kennel (per Section 98-206(8)(p))
Septic Systems (per Section 98-206(8)(u))
Caretaker's Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(w))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses
a. Residential Density and Intensity Requirements:
Minimum Zoning District Area: 40,000 square feet
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 1.00 du/acre
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 60%
Maximum Building Coverage: 30%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 10%
b. Residential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 40,000 sf
B: Minimum Lot Width: 150 feet
C: Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks:
E: Front or Street Lot Line to House: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a street
with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
F: Front or Street Lot Line to Garage: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a street
with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
G: Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage: 30 feet
H: Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage: 60 feet
I: Rear Lot Line to House/Attached Garage: 30 feet
J: Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from alley
K: Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from alley
L: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
M: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear, 10 feet from street
N: Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation: 60 feet
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 37
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
O: Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit: 35 feet
P: Maximum Height of Accessory Structure: 15 feet
Q: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot
(Includes garage, drives, & all designated parking surfaces): 3 spaces per du
R: Minimum Dwelling Core Dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet
S: Minimum Roof Pitch: 3 : 12
T: Minimum Eave Width: 18 inches
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for single-family. See
Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Two- and Multi-family Residential.
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements:
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 1
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 60%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .10
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 40,000 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 40,000 sq ft, 20,000 sf with a conditional use permit
B: Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 35 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a street
with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 30 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 30 feet
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 60 feet
K: Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot: See
parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements:
1) 45 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of building foundation
2) 25 landscaping points per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
3) 45 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 90 landscaping points per 10,000 square feet paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 38
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
(c) Single-family Residential-3 (SR-3) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit development which has a
moderate density community character. Density and intensity standards for this district
are designed to ensure that the Single-family Residential-3 District shall serve as a
designation which preserves and protects the residential community character of its
area. Residential development with a Maximum Gross Density (MGD) of 3 dwelling
units per gross acre is available within this district.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of a moderate
density residential area for those who want to live in an suburban residential
environment and who retain enough land with their residence, or in their development,
to ensure that the community character is maintained as long as the SR-3 District
designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Single-Family - 15,000 sf lot
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(g))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(h))
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 98-206(4)(l))
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
Family Day Care Home (per Section 98-206(8)(k))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Intermediate Day Care Home (per Section 98-206(8)(l))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 39
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses
a. Residential Density and Intensity Requirements:
Minimum Zoning District Area: 15,000 square feet
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 3.00 du/acre
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 50%
Maximum Building Coverage: 40%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 10%
b. Residential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 15,000 square feet
B: Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet
C: Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
E: Front or Street Lot Line to House: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a street
with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
F: Front or Street Lot Line to Garage: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a street
with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
G: Side Lot Line to House or Garage: 10 feet
H: Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Garage: 20 feet
I: Rear Lot Line to House or Garage: 30 feet
J: Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from alley
K: Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from alley
L: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
M: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street
N: Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation: 20 feet
O: Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit: 35 feet
P: Maximum Height of Accessory Structure: 15 feet
Q: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot
(Includes garage, drives, & all designated parking surfaces): 3
R: Minimum Dwelling Core Dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet
S: Minimum Roof Pitch: 3 : 12
T: Minimum Eave Width: 18 inches
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for single-family. See
Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Multi-family Residential
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements:
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 1
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 50%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .10
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 40,000 square feet
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 40
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 40,000 sq ft, 20,000 sf with a conditional use permit
B: Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a street
with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 10 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 10 feet
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 20 feet
K: Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot: See
parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential Multi-family):
1) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 20 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 80 landscaping points per 10,000 square ft. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(d) Single-family Residential-4 (SR-4) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit development which
has a moderate density, community character. Density and intensity standards for
this district are designed to ensure that the Single-family Residential-4 (SR-4)
District shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the residential
community character of its area. Residential development with a Maximum Gross
Density (MGD) of 4 dwelling units per gross acre is available within this district.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of a
moderate density residential area for those who want to live in an suburban
residential environment and who retain enough land with their residence, or in their
development, to ensure that the community character is maintained as long as the
SR-4 District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs
within that area.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Single-Family - 9,000 sf lot
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 41
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(g))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Twin house/Duplex - 6,000 sf per du permitted until 365 days after the Effective
Date of this Zoning Ordinance
Two-Flat - 9,000 sf lot permitted until 365 days after the Effective Date of this
Zoning Ordinance
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(h))
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 98-206(4)(l))
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
Family Day Care Home (per Section 98-206(8)(k))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Intermediate Day Care Home (per Section 98-206(8)(l))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses
a. Residential Density and Intensity Requirements:
Minimum Zoning District Area: 9,000 square feet
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 4.00 du/acre
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 50%
Maximum Building Coverage: 40%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 10%
b. Residential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet
B: Minimum Lot Width: 75 feet
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 42
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
C: Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
E: Front or Street Lot Line to House: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
F: Front or Street Lot Line to Garage: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
G: Side Lot Line to House or Garage: 6 feet
H: Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Garage: 15 feet
I: Rear Lot Line to House or Garage: 30 feet
J: Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from alley
K: Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from alley
L: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
M: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from
street
N: Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation: 12 feet
O: Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit: 35 feet
P: Maximum Height of Accessory Structure: 15 feet
Q: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot
(Includes garage, drives, & all designated parking surfaces): 3
R: Minimum Dwelling Core Dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet
S: Minimum Roof Pitch: 3 : 12
T: Minimum Eave Width: 18 inches
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for single-family.
See Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Multi-family Residential
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements:
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 1
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 50%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .15
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 40,000 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 40,000 sq ft, 20,000 sf with a conditional use permit
B: Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Side Lot Line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 6 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 6 feet
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 12 feet
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 43
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
K: Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot: See
parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential Multi-family):
1) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 20 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 80 landscaping points per 10,000 square ft. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(e) Two-family Residential-6 (TR-6) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit development which
has a moderate density community character. The land use standards for this
district permit both single-family detached residential development and twin
house/duplexes permitted by right and two flat, mobile home parks, and mobile
home subdivisions permitted as a conditional use. Density and intensity standards
for this district are designed to ensure that the Two-family Residential-6 District
shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the moderate density
residential community character of its area. Various residential development
options are available in this district, with a Maximum Gross Density (MGD) of 6
dwelling units per gross acre.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of an area
for those who want to live in a moderate density residential environment and who
retain enough land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the
desired community character is maintained as long as the TR-6 District designation
is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. As such,
this district is intended to provide the principal location for a wide range of
single-family attached dwelling types, including single-family, duplexes, twin
houses, and two flats.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Single-Family - 9,000 sf lot
Twin House/Duplex - 6,000 sf per du
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(g))
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(h))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Two-Flat - 9,000 sf lot
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 44
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Mobile Home Development or Park - 9,000 sf lot (per Sections 98-206(1)(c) or
(d))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 98-206(4)(l))
Group Day Care Center (9+ children)(per Section 98-206(4)(m))
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
Family Day Care Home (per Section 98-206(8)(k))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Intermediate Day Care Home (per Section 98-206(8)(l))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses:
a. Residential Density and Intensity Requirements:
1) Conventional Development
Minimum Zoning District Area: 9,000 square feet
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 6.00 du/acre
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 50%
Maximum Building Coverage: 40%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 10%
2) Mobile Home Park/Development
Minimum Zoning District Area: 10 acres
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 5.00 du/acre
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 50%
Maximum Building Coverage: 40%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 10%
b. Residential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet (except for twin homes at 6,000 sq ft)
B: Minimum Lot Width: 75 feet
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 45
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
C: Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
E: Front or Street Lot Line to House: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
F: Front or Street Lot Line to Garage: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
G: Side Lot Line to House or Garage: 6 ft or 0 ft along common wall
H: Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Garage: 15 feet or 0 ft along
common wall
I: Rear Lot Line to House or Garage: 30 feet
J: Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from alley
K: Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from alley
L: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
M: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from
street
N: Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation: 12 feet or 0 feet along common wall
O: Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit: 35 feet
P: Maximum Height of Accessory Structure: 15 feet
Q: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot
(Includes garage, drives, & all designated parking surfaces): 3
R: Minimum Dwelling Core Dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet
S: Minimum Roof Pitch: 3 : 12
T: Minimum Eave Width: 18 inches
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for single-family.
See Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Multi-family Residential
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements: (For 2+ floor buildings, see Table
98-305)
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 2
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 30%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .22
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 40,000 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 40,000 sq ft, 20,000 sf with a conditional use permit
B: Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 6 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 6 feet
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 46
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 12 feet
K: Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot: See
parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential Multi-family):
1) 45 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 20 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 45 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 90 landscaping points per 10,000 square ft. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(f) Multi-family Residential-8 (MR-8) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit development which
has a higher density community character. The land use standards for this district
permit single-family detached, twin house/duplex, two flats, townhouses,
multiplexes, and apartments permitted by right and related institutional land uses.
Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the
Multi-family Residential-8 District shall serve as a designation which preserves and
protects the community character of its area. A variety of residential development
options are available in this district, with a Maximum Gross Density (MGD) of 8
dwelling units per gross acre.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of an area
for those who want to live in a higher density residential environment and who
retain enough land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the
urban community character is maintained as long as the MR-8 District designation
is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. As such,
it is intended to provide the principal location for mixed residential development.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Single-Family - 9,000 sf lot
Twin House/Duplex - 6,000 sf per du
Two-Flat - 9,000 sf lot
Townhouse - 4,500 sf lot
Multiplex - 4,500 sf per du (3 or 4 unit building)
Apartment - 4,500 sf per du (3 or 4 unit building)
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(g))
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(h))
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 47
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Multiplex - 4,500 sf per du (4 to 10 unit building)
Apartment - 4,500 sf per du (4 to 10 unit building)
Institutional Residential - 9,000 sf lot (per Section 98-206(3)(f))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Community Living Arrangement (16+ residents) (per 98-206(3)(i))
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 98-206(4)(l))
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 98-206(4)(m))
Boarding House (per Section 98-206(4)(o))
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
Family Day Care Home (per Section 98-206(8)(k))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Intermediate Day Care Home (per Section 98-206(8)(l))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses:
For single-family and two-family dwellings, see the TR-6 District. Bulk regulations
below apply only to townhouse, multiplex, apartment and institutional residential
development.
a. Residential Density and Intensity Requirements:
Minimum Zoning District Area: 18,000 square feet
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 8.00 du/acre
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 50%
Maximum Building Coverage: 40%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 10%
b. Residential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 4,500 square feet per du
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 48
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
B: Minimum Lot Width: 75 feet; 20 feet for townhouse on interior of row, 30 feet
for townhouse on end of row
C: Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
E: Front or Street Lot Line to House: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
F: Front or Street Lot Line to Garage: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
G: Side Lot Line to House or Garage: 10 feet or 0 feet along common wall
H: Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Garage: 20 feet or 0 ft along
common wall
I: Rear Lot Line to House or Garage: 30 feet
J: Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from alley
K: Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from alley
L: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
M: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from
street
N: Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation: 20 feet or 0 feet along common wall
O: Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit: 35 feet, greater with conditional use
permit
P: Maximum Height of Accessory Structure: 15 feet
Q: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot
(Includes garage, drives, & all designated parking surfaces): 2.5 per 3-
bedroom, 2 per 2-bedroom, 1-bedroom, or efficiency
R: Minimum Dwelling Core Dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet
S: Minimum Roof Pitch: 3 : 12
T: Minimum Eave Width: 18 inches
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for single-family.
See Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Multi-family Residential
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements: (For 2+ floor buildings, see Table 98-
305)
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 2
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 25%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .275
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 40,000 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 40,000 sq ft, 20,000 sf with a conditional use permit
B: Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 10 feet
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 49
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 10 feet
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 20 feet
K: Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot: See
parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential Multi-family):
1) 50 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 20 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 50 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 100 landscaping points per 10,000 square ft. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(3) Nonresidential Districts
(a) Neighborhood Office (NO) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit high-quality office
and institutional land uses at an intensity compatible with the older portions of
the City predominately developed with large homes which are desirable to
maintain, where traffic volumes and adjacent land uses dictate the transition of
these areas to certain nonresidential uses. The desired neighborhood
character of the development is attained through Landscape Surface Area
Ratio (LSR) requirements, and by restricting the Maximum Building Size (MBS)
of all buildings within each instance of this District to 5,000 square feet. A
range of dwelling unit types may be allowed. Significant areas of landscaping
are required in this district to ensure that this effect is achieved. In order to
ensure a minimum of disruption to adjacent residential development, no
development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential
street or a residential collector street.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of an
area which preserves the original residential appearance, yet permits office
and institutional land uses, and which ensures that the neighborhood character
is maintained as long as the NO District designation is retained, regardless of
how much development occurs within that area.
Neighborhood Office Architectural Requirements
(a) Maximum Zoning District: 2 acres
(b) Minimum Zoning District Separation: 2,000 feet
(c) All new Neighborhood Office (NO) Districts shall be established through the
conditional rezoning process. Under this approach, the Neighborhood
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 50
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Office District shall not be vested until the approved project has been
completed.
(d) Maximum Building Size: 5,000 sq. ft. (one story); 10,000 sq. ft. (two-story)
(e) No parking in required setbacks for principal buildings
(f) Residential architectural and landscaping requirements include: foundation
planting, pitched roof, 15% window covering, natural materials (brick, wood,
stone)
(g) Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio: 25% for one story; 30% for two story
(h) Operating Hours: No earlier than 6:00am or later than 11:00pm
(i) Shall provide a neighborhood-oriented amenity, per Plan Commission
direction (i.e., outdoor neighborhood gathering area, public art, etc)
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Single-Family - 9,000 sf lot
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Office (per Section 98-206(4)(a))
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 98-206(4)(b))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Twin House/Duplex - 6,000 sf per du
Two-Flat - 9,000 sf lot
Townhouse - 4,500 sf lot
Multiplex - 4,500 sf per du
Apartment - 4,500 sf per du
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Institutional Residential - 9,000 sf lot (per Section 98-206(3)(f))
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(g))
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(h))
Community Living Arrangement (16+ residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(i))
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 98-206(4)(c))
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(h))
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(i)) (Ord. No. 12-07)
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 98-206(4)(l))
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 98-206(4)(m))
Boarding House (per Section 98-206(4)(o))
Physical Activity Studio (per Section 98-206(4)(s)) (Ord. No. 13-19)
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 51
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Company Cafeteria (per Section 98-206(8)(d))
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
In-Vehicle Sales and Service (per Section 98-206(8)(g))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
Relocatable Building (per Section 98-206(9)(e))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses: For single-family and twofamily
dwellings, see the TR-6 District. For townhouse, multiplex, apartment
and institutional residential development, see the MR-8 district.
a. Residential Density and Intensity Requirements:
Institutional Residential Development:
Minimum Zoning District Area: 9,000 square feet
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): up to 50.00 per limits of the conditional
use permit
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 50%
Maximum Building Coverage: 40%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 10%
Maximum Building Size: 5,000 sf
b. Residential Bulk Requirements: For single-family and two-family
dwellings, see the TR-6 District. For townhouse, multiplex, apartment and
institutional residential development, see the MR-8 district.
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for singlefamily.
See Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Two- & Multifamily
Residential
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements: (For 2+ floor buildings, see
Table 98-305)
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 52
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 2
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 40%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .25
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 9,000 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet
B: Minimum Lot Width: 75 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 6 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 6 feet
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from
street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 12 feet
K: Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot:
See parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential, Two- & Multifamily):
1) 45 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 20 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 45 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 95 landscaping points per 10,000 square ft. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(b) Planned Office (PO) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit high-quality office
and institutional land uses at an intensity compatible with the overall
community character of the City. Significant areas of landscaping are required
in this district to ensure that this effect is achieved. In order to ensure a
minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this
district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential
collector street.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of an
area for those who desire a high quality office environment which maintains the
attractiveness of the site and retains enough open land in their development to
ensure that the community character is maintained as long as the PO District
designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within
that area.
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 53
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Office (per Section 98-206(4)(a))
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 98-206(4)(b))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Institutional Residential - 20,000 sf lot (per Section 98-206(3)(f))
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(h))
Community Living Arrangement (16+ residents) (per 98-206(3)(i))
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 98-206(4)(c))
In-Vehicle Sales or Service (per Section 98-206(4)(g))
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(h))
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(i)) (Ord. No. 12-07)
Commercial Indoor Lodging (per Section 98-206(4)(k))
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 98-206(4)(m))
Physical Activity Studio (per Section 98-206(4)(s)) (Ord. No. 13-19)
Airport/Heliport (per Section 98-206(6)(b))
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Company Cafeteria (per Section 98-206(8)(d))
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
In-Vehicle Sales and Service (per Section 98-206(8)(g))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 54
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Relocatable Building (per Section 98-206(9)(e))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
3. Regulations Applicable to Institutional Residential Uses:
a. Residential Density and Intensity Requirements:
Institutional Residential Development:
Minimum Zoning District Area: 40,000 square feet
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): up to 50.00 per limits of the conditional
use permit
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 50%
Maximum Building Coverage: 40%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 10%
b. Residential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 sf
B: Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet
C: Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
E: Front or Street Lot Line to House: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
F: Front or Street Lot Line to Garage: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
G: Side Lot Line to House or Garage: 10 feet
H: Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Garage: 20 feet
I: Rear Lot Line to House or Garage: 30 feet
J: Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from
alley
K: Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from
alley
L: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
M: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from
street
N: Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation: 20 feet
O: Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit: 35 feet, greater with conditional use
permit
P: Maximum Height of Accessory Structure: 15 feet
Q: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot
(Includes garage, drives, & all designated parking surfaces): 3
R: Minimum Dwelling Core Dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet
S: Minimum Roof Pitch: 3 : 12
T: Minimum Eave Width: 18 inches
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for singlefamily.
See Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Two- & Multifamily
Residential
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 55
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements: (For 2+ floor buildings, see
Table 98-305)
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 4
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 25%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .30
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 20,000 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 square feet
B: Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 10 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 10 feet or 0 feet on zero lot line
side
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from
street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 20 feet or 0 feet on zero lot line side
K: Maximum Building Height: 45 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot:
See parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential, Two- &
Multi-family):
1) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 15 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 80 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(c) Neighborhood Business (NB) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit small scale
commercial development which is compatible with the desired overall
neighborhood community character of the area in general, and with adjacent
residential development in particular. The desired neighborhood community
character of the development is attained through Landscape Surface Area
Ratio (LSR) requirements, and by restricting the Maximum Building Size (MBS)
of all buildings within each instance of this District to 5,000 square feet.
Significant areas of landscaping are required in this district to ensure that this
effect is achieved. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential
development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a
local residential street or a residential collector street.
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 56
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Rationale: This district is used to provide both convenience oriented goods and
services and for the permanent protection of adjacent residential areas by
permitting only a limited range of commercial activities. Together, these
requirements ensure that the desired character is maintained as long as the
NB District designation is retained, regardless of how much development
occurs within that area.
Neighborhood Business Architectural Requirements
(a) Maximum Zoning District: 2 acres
(b) Minimum Zoning District Separation: 2,000 feet
(c) All new Neighborhood Business (NB) Districts shall be established through
the conditional rezoning process. Under this approach, the Neighborhood
Business District shall not be vested until the approved project has been
completed.
(d) Maximum Building Size: 5,000 sq. ft. (one story); 10,000 sq. ft. (two-story)
(e) No parking in required setbacks for principal buildings
(f) Residential architectural and landscaping requirements include: foundation
planting, pitched roof, 15% window covering, natural materials (brick, wood,
stone)
(g) Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio: 25% for one story; 30% for two story
(h) Operating Hours: No earlier than 6:00 am or later than 11:00 pm
(i) Shall provide a neighborhood-oriented amenity, per Plan Commission
direction (i.e., outdoor neighborhood gathering area, public art, etc)
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Single-Family - 9,000 sf lot
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Office (per Section 98-206(4)(a))
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 98-206(4)(b))
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 98-206(4)(c))
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 98-206(4)(e))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Twin House/Duplex - 6,000 sf per du
Two-Flat - 9,000 sf lot
Townhouse - 4,500 sf lot
Multiplex - 4,500 sf per du
Apartment - 4,500 sf per du
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 57
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Institutional Residential - 9,000 sf lot (per Section 98-206(3)(f))
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(g))
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 98-206(3)(h))
Community Living Arrangement (16+ residents) (per 98-206(3)(i))
In-Vehicle Sales or Service (per Section 98-206(4)(g))
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(h))
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(i)) (Ord. No. 12-07)
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 98-206(4)(l))
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 98-206(4)(m))
Boarding House (per Section 98-206(4)(o))
Physical Activity Studio (per Section 98-206(4)(s)) (Ord. No. 13-19)
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Commercial Apartment (per Section 98-206(8)(a))
In-Vehicle Sales and Service (per Section 98-206(8)(g))
Light Industrial Incidental to Indoor Sales (per Section 98-206(8)(i))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
General Temporary Outdoor Sales (per Section 98-206(9)(a))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
Relocatable Building (per Section 98-206(9)(e))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
Outdoor Sales of Farm Products (per Section 98-206(9)(g))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses:
For single-family and two-family dwellings, see the TR-6 District. For
townhouse, multiplex, apartment and institutional residential development, see
the MR-8 district.
a. Residential Density and Intensity Requirements:
Institutional Residential Development:
Minimum Zoning District Area: 9,000 square feet
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): up to 50.00 per limits of the conditional
use permit
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 50%
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 58
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Maximum Building Coverage: 40%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 10%
Maximum Building Size: 5,000 sf
b. Residential Bulk Requirements: For single-family and two-family
dwellings, see the TR-6 District. For townhouse, multiplex, apartment and
institutional residential development, see the MR-8 district.
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for singlefamily.
See Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Two- & Multifamily
Residential
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements: (For 2+ floor buildings, see
Table 98-305)
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 2
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 30%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .275
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 9,000 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): 5,000 square feet
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet
B: Minimum Lot Width: 75 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 6 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 6 feet
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from
street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 12 feet
K: Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot:
See parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential, Two- &
Multi-family):
1) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 15 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 80 landscaping points per 10,000 square ft. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 59
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(d) Planned Business (PB) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit large and small
scale commercial development which is compatible with the desired overall
community character of the area in general. Significant areas of landscaping
are required in this district to ensure that this effect is achieved. A wide range
of office, retail, and lodging land uses are permitted within this district. In order
to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development
within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a
residential collector street.
Rationale: This district is intended to provide the principal zoning district for
commercial development which occurs after the adoption of this Chapter. The
standards of this district are designed to provide a clear distinction from the
General Business and Central Business Districts in terms of permitted intensity
of development, treatment of outdoor sales, and required green space areas.
The desired suburban community character of the development is attained
through the Landscape Surface Area Ratio (LSR) requirements. Together,
these requirements ensure that the desired community character is maintained
as long as the Planned Business District designation is retained, regardless of
how much development occurs within that area.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Office (per Section 98-206(4)(a))
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 98-206(4)(b))
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 98-206(4)(c))
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 98-206(4)(e))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Institutional Residential - 20,000 sf lot (per Section 98-206(3)(f))
Outdoor Display (per Section 98-206(4)(d))
In-Vehicle Sales or Service (per Section 98-206(4)(g))
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(h))
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(i)) (Ord. No. 12-07)
Commercial Animal Boarding (per Section 98-206(4)(j))
Commercial Indoor Lodging (per Section 98-206(4)(k))
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 98-206(4)(l))
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 98-206(4)(m))
Vehicle Repair and Maintenance (per Section 98-206(4)(q))
Intensive Outdoor Recreation (per Section 98-206(4)(r)) (Ord. No. 12-07)
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 60
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Physical Activity Studio (per Section 98-206(4)(s)) (Ord. No. 13-19)
Indoor Storage and Wholesaling (per Section 98-206(5)(a))(Ord. No. 01-19
2/12/01)
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Company Cafeteria (per Section 98-206(8)(d))
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Commercial Apartment (per Section 98-206(8)(a))
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
Outdoor Display Incidental (per Section 98-206(8)(f))
In-Vehicle Sales and Service (per Section 98-206(8)(g))
Light Industrial Incidental to Indoor Sales (per Section 98-206(8)(i))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
General Temporary Outdoor Sales (per Section 98-206(9)(a))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
Relocatable Building (per Section 98-206(9)(e))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
Outdoor Sales of Farm Products (per Section 98-206(9)(g))
3. Regulations Applicable to Institutional Residential Uses:
a. Residential Density and Intensity Requirements:
See the requirements of the Planned Office District.
b. Residential Bulk Requirements:
See the requirements of the Planned Office District.
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for singlefamily.
See Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Two- & Multifamily
Residential
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 61
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements: (For 2+ floor buildings, see
Table 98-305)
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 4
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 25%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .30
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 20,000 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 square feet
B: Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 10 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 10 feet or 0 feet on zero lot line
side
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from
street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 20 feet or 0 feet on zero lot line side
K: Maximum Building Height: 45 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot:
See parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential, Two- &
Multi-family):
1) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 10 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 80 landscaping points per 10,000 square ft. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(e) General Business (GB) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit both large and
small scale commercial development at intensities which provide significant
incentives for infill development and the continued economic viability of existing
development. To accomplish this effect, minimum required Green Space
Ratios (GSRs) are substantially lower than those required in the Planned
Business District. A wide range of office, retail, and lodging land uses are
permitted within this district. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 62
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
residential development, no development within this district shall take direct
access to a local residential street or a residential collector street.
Rationale: This district is intended to provide an alternative, primarily infill
development, designation for commercial activity to the Suburban Commercial
District. Performance standards for the General Business District are designed
to ensure the long-term economic health of strip commercial development
areas, existing as of the effective date of this Chapter, by limiting the attraction
of the Planned Business District to those and uses which can afford the
relatively higher development costs and rents associated with development in
that district.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Office (per Section 98-206(4)(a))
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 98-206(4)(b))
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 98-206(4)(c))
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 98-206(4)(e))
Off-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(6)(a))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Institutional Residential - 9,000 sf lot (per Section 98-206(3)(f))
Outdoor Display (per Section 98-206(4)(d))
In-Vehicle Sales or Service (per Section 98-206(4)(g))
Indoor Storage and Wholesaling (per Section 98-206(5)(a))(Ord. No. 01-19
2/12/01)
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(h))
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(i))
Commercial Animal Boarding (per Section 98-206(4)(j))
Commercial Indoor Lodging (per Section 98-206(4)(k))
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 98-206(4)(l))
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 98-206(4)(m))
Boarding House (per Section 98-206(4)(o))
Vehicle Repair and Maintenance (per Section 98-206(4)(q))
Physical Activity Studio (per Section 98-206(4)(s)) (Ord. No. 13-19)
Personal Storage Facility (per Section 98-206(5)(c))
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Company Cafeteria (per Section 98-206(8)(d))
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 63
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Commercial Apartment (per Section 98-206(8)(a))
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
Outdoor Display Incidental (per Section 98-206(8)(f))
In-Vehicle Sales and Service (per Section 98-206(8)(g))
Light Industrial Incidental to Indoor Sales (per Section 98-206(8)(i))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
General Temporary Outdoor Sales (per Section 98-206(9)(a))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
Relocatable Building (per Section 98-206(9)(e))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
Outdoor Sales of Farm Products (per Section 98-206(9)(g))
3. Regulations Applicable to Institutional Residential Uses:
a. Residential Density and Intensity Requirements:
Institutional Residential Development:
Minimum Zoning District Area: 18,000 square feet
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): up to 50.00 per limits of the conditional use
permit
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 50%
Maximum Building Coverage: 40%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 10%
b. Residential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet
B: Minimum Lot Width: 75 feet
C: Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
E: Front or Street Lot Line to House: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
F: Front or Street Lot Line to Garage: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
G: Side Lot Line to House or Garage: 6 feet
H: Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Garage: 12 feet
I: Rear Lot Line to House or Garage: 30 feet
J: Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from alley
K: Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure: 3 ft from property line, 5 ft from alley
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 64
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
L: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
M: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from
street
N: Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation: 12 feet
O: Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit: 35 feet, greater with conditional use
permit
P: Maximum Height of Accessory Structure: 15 feet
Q: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot
(Includes garage, drives, & all designated parking surfaces): 3
R: Minimum Dwelling Core Dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet
S: Minimum Roof Pitch: 3:12
T: Minimum Eave Width: 18 inches
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for single-family.
See Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Two- & Multi-family
Residential
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements: (For 2+ floor buildings, see Table
98-305)
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 4
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 15%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .40
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 9,000 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet
B: Minimum Lot Width: 75 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 6 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 25 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 10 feet or 0 feet on zero lot line side
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 25 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 12 feet, 20 feet or 0 feet on zero lot line side
K: Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot: See
parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential, Two- & Multifamily):
1) 20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 65
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
2) 5 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 20 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 40 landscaping points per 10,000 square ft. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(f) Central Business (CB) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit both large and
small scale "downtown" commercial development at an intensity which
provides significant incentives for infill development, redevelopment, and the
continued economic viability of existing development. To accomplish this
effect, minimum Landscape Surface Ratios (LSRs) permitted in this district are
much lower than those allowed in the Planned Business and General Business
Districts. A wide range of office, retail, and lodging land uses are permitted
within this district. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential
development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a
local residential street or a residential collector street. No requirements for on
site landscaping or parking are required in this district. This district is strictly
limited to the central city locations.
Rationale: This district is intended to provide an alternative, primarily infill
development, designation for commercial activity to the Planned Business (PB)
and General Business District are designed to assist in maintaining the
long-term viability of the central city.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Office (per Section 98-206(4)(a))
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 98-206(4)(b))
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 98-206(4)(c))
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 98-206(4)(e))
Off-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(6)(a))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Institutional Residential - 9,000 sf lot (per Section 98-206(3)(f))
In-Vehicle Sales or Service (per Section 98-206(4)(g))
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(h))
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(i))
Outdoor Display (per Section 98-206(4)(d)) (Ord. No. 01-19 2/12/01)
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 66
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Commercial Indoor Lodging (per Section 98-206(4)(k))
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 98-206(4)(l))
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 98-206(4)(m))
Boarding House (per Section 98-206(4)(o)
Physical Activity Studio (per Section 98-206(4)(s)) (Ord. No. 13-19)
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Commercial Apartment (per Section 98-206(8)(a))
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Company Cafeteria (per Section 98-206(8)(d))
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
In-Vehicle Sales and Service (per Section 98-206(8)(g))
Light Industrial Incidental to Indoor Sales (per Section 98-206(8)(i))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
General Temporary Outdoor Sales (per Section 98-206(9)(a))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
Relocatable Building (per Section 98-206(9)(e))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
Outdoor Sales of Farm Products (per Section 98-206(9)(g))
3. Regulations Applicable to Institutional Residential Uses:
a. Residential Density and Intensity Requirements:
Institutional Residential Development:
Minimum Zoning District Area: 9,000 square feet
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): up to 50.00 per limits of the conditional
use permit
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 50%
Maximum Building Coverage: 40%
Maximum Accessory Building Coverage: 10%
b. Residential Bulk Requirements:
See the requirements of the General Business District.
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 67
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
c. Residential Landscaping Requirements: Not applicable for singlefamily.
See Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements for Two- & Multifamily
Residential
d. Residential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Residential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements: (For 2+ floor buildings, see
Table 98-305)
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 4
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 0%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 3.00
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 1,750 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 1,750 square feet
B: Minimum Lot Width: 20 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 20 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 0 feet*
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 0 feet*
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 10 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 0 feet*
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 10 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 0 feet*
J: Minimum Building Separation: 0 feet*
K: Maximum Building Height: 45 feet, Minimum Building Height: 20 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot:
See parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
Maximum permitted setback of 0 feet, except where permitted by the Plan
Commission as an essential component of site design.
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential, Two- &
Multi-family):
1) 0 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 0 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 0 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 20 landscaping points per 10,000 square ft. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(g) Planned Industrial (PI) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit both large and
small scale industrial and office development at an intensity which is consistent
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 68
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
with the overall desired suburban community character of the community.
Beyond a relatively high minimum Green Space Ratio (GSR), the primary
distinguishing feature of this district is that it is geared to indoor industrial
activities which are not typically associated with high levels of noise, soot,
odors and other potential nuisances for adjoining properties. In order to ensure
a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this
district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential
collector street.
Rationale: This district is intended to provide a location for suburban intensity
light industrial land uses such as assembly operations, storage and
warehousing facilities, offices, and light manufacturing which are protected
from potential nuisances associated with certain development permitted within
the GI District. In addition, land uses shall comply with the minimum
performance standards presented in Article VII.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Office (per Section 98-206(4)(a))
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 98-206(4)(b))
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 98-206(4)(e))
Indoor Storage or Wholesaling (per Section 98-206(5)(a))
Light Industrial (per Section 98-206(7)(a))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 98-206(4)(c))
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(h))
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 98-206(4)(i))(Ord. No. 12-07)
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 98-206(4)(m))
Personal Storage Facility (per Section 98-206(5)(c))
Airport/Heliport (per Section 98-206(6)(b))
Distribution Center (per Section 98-206(6)(d))
Communication Tower (per Section 98-206(7)(c))
Commercial Animal Boarding (per Section 98-206(4)(j))
Physical Activity Studio (per Section 98-206(4)(s)) (Ord. No. 13-19)
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Company Cafeteria (per Section 98-206(8)(d))
Indoor Sales Incident to Light Industrial Use (per Section 98-206(8)(h))
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 69
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
In-Vehicle Sales and Service (per Section 98-206(8)(g))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
Relocatable Building (per Section 98-206(9)(e))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
Outdoor Sales of Farm Products (per Section 98-206(9)(g))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses: Not Applicable
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements: (For 2+ floor buildings, see
Table 98-305)
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 4
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 25%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .60
Minimum Zoning District Area: 40,000 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 40,000 sq ft (20,000 sq ft permitted as a conditional
use)
B: Minimum Lot Width: 200 feet (100 feet permitted as a conditional use);
Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 30 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 15 feet
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from
street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 30 feet
K: Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot:
See parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 70
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential, Two- &
Multi-family):
1) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 10 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 80 landscaping points per 10,000 square ft. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(h) General Industrial (GI) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit both large and
small scale industrial and office development at an intensity which is consistent
with existing transition and urban intensity development. Beyond a relatively
high minimum Green Space Ratio (GSR), the primary distinguishing feature of
this district is that it is geared to indoor industrial activities which are not
typically associated with high levels of noise, soot, odors and other potential
nuisances for adjoining properties. To ensure a minimum of disruption to
residential development, no development within this district shall take direct
access to a local residential street or a residential collector street.
Rationale: This district is intended to provide a location for urban intensity light
industrial land uses such as assembly operations, storage and warehousing
facilities, offices, and light manufacturing which are protected from potential
nuisances associated with certain development permitted within the HI District.
In addition, uses shall comply with the minimum performance standards
presented in Article VII.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Office (per Section 98-206(4)(a))
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 98-206(4)(e))
Indoor Storage or Wholesaling (per Section 98-206(5)(a))
Off-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(6)(a))
Distribution Center (per Section 98-206(6)(d))
Light Industrial (per Section 98-206(7)(a))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 98-206(4)(m))
Vehicle Repair and Maintenance (per Section 98-206(4)(q))
Outdoor Storage or Wholesaling (per Section 98-206(5)(b))
Personal Storage Facility (per Section 98-206(5)(c))
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 71
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Airport/Heliport (per Section 98-206(6)(b))
Freight Terminal (per Section 98-206(6)(c))
Communication Tower (per Section 98-206(7)(c))
Commercial Animal Boarding (per Section 98-206(4)(j))
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Company Cafeteria (per Section 98-206(8)(d))
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
Indoor Sales Incidental to Light Industrial Use (per Section 98-
206(8)(h))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
Relocatable Building (per Section 98-206(9)(e))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
Outdoor Sales of Farm Products (per Section 98-206(9)(g))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses: Not Applicable
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements: (For 2+ floor buildings, see
Table 98-305)
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 4
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 15%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 1.00
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 9,000 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet
B: Minimum Lot Width: 75 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 72
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 50 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 20 feet
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from
street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 40 feet
K: Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot:
See parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential, Two- &
Multi-family):
1) 20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 5 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 20 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 40 landscaping points per 10,000 square ft. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(i) Heavy Industrial (HI) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit both large and
small scale industrial and office development at an intensity which provides
ample incentive for infill development and redevelopment of industrial areas
existing as of the effective date of this Chapter. This district is designed to
permit a very wide variety of industrial uses which may occur both indoors and
outdoors, including certain land uses which are permitted in no other zoning
district because of their potential to create nuisances for adjoining properties.
In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no
development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential
street or a residential collector street.
Rationale: This district is intended to provide a location for both light and heavy
industrial uses in a zoning district in which the potential for nuisance complaints
from nearby properties is minimized. It must be emphasized that this is not a
district where virtually any land use is permitted, as all uses shall comply with
the minimum performance standards presented in Article VII. In addition,
certain land uses such as extraction, junkyards and salvage operations, and
freight terminals are permitted within this district only upon the granting of a
conditional use permit.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 98-202(2))
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 73
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
Office (per Section 98-206(4)(a))
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 98-206(4)(e))
Indoor Storage or Wholesaling (per Section 98-206(5)(a))
Outdoor Storage or Wholesaling (per Section 98-206(5)(b))
Off-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(6)(a))
Distribution Center (per Section 98-206(6)(d))
Light Industrial (per Section 98-206(7)(a))
Heavy Industrial (per Section 98-206(7)(b))
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Agricultural Services (per Section 98-206(2)(d))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Outdoor Maintenance Service (per Section 98-206(4)(f))
Sexually Oriented Land Use (per Section 98-206(4)(p))
Vehicle Repair and Maintenance (per Section 98-206(4)(q))
Junkyard or Salvage Yard (per Section 98-206(5)(d))
Waste Disposal Facility (per Section 98-206(5)(e))
Composting Operation (per Section 98-206(5)(f))
Airport/Heliport (per Section 98-206(6)(b))
Freight Terminal (per Section 98-206(6)(c))
Communication Tower (per Section 98-206(7)(c))
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Company Cafeteria (per Section 98-206(8)(d))
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
Indoor Sales Incident to Light Industrial Use (per Section 98-206(8)(h))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(t))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
Migrant Labor Camp (per Section 98-206(8)(m))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
Relocatable Building (per Section 98-206(9)(e))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses: Not Applicable
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 74
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements: (For 2+ floor buildings, see
Table 98-305)
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 2+
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 15%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 1.00
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 9,000 square feet
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
A: Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet
B: Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet; Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
C: Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a
street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet
D: Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 50 feet
E: Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 40 feet
F: Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 20 feet
G: Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
H: Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) along zoning district boundary
I: Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from
street
J: Minimum Building Separation: 40 feet
K: Maximum Building Height: 45 feet
L: Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot:
See parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential, Two- &
Multi-family):
1) 20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 5 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area
3) 20 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage
4) 40 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
(j) Planned Business Park (PBP) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to permit both large and
small scale office, service business and highly restrictive industrial and
warehousing uses in a mutually compatible environment, within a large
development park, with a campus-type setting. Land uses and site design
within the PGP District shall be restricted to those which require a pleasant,
hazard-free and nuisance-free environment, and do not create either an
appreciable nuisance or hazard to other property, individuals or the general
public. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development,
no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 75
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
street or a residential collector street. The City of Lake Geneva will require the
application of City-approved restrictive covenants when considering an
approval of a zoning map amendment to the Planned Business Park (PBP)
Zoning District.
Rationale: this district is intended to provide a location for suburban intensity
office, service, and light industrial land uses which are protected from potential
use conflicts and nuisances that may be associated with certain development
permitted within the PI or GI Districts. In addition, land uses shall comply with
the minimum performance standards presented in Article VII.
2. List of Allowable Land Uses (Per Article II)
a. Land Uses Permitted by Right: (listed in addition to those in Section
98-202(2))
Selective Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(f))
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(a))
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 98-206(3)(e))
Office (per Section 98-206(4)(a))
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 98-206(4)(b))
Indoor Storage or Wholesaling (per Section 98-206(5)(a))
Light Industrial (per Section 98-206(7)(a))
Any otherwise Permitted Use within and fully consistent with an approved
Group Development (per Section 98-208)
b. Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 98-202(4))
Cultivation (per Section 98-206(2)(a))
Clear Cutting (per Section 98-206(2)(g))
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 98-206(3)(b))
Indoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(c))
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 98-206(3)(d))
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 98-206(4)(e))
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 98-206(4)(m))
Communication Tower (per Section 98-206(7)(c))
Any otherwise Conditional Use within and fully consistent with an approved
Group Development (per Section 98-208)
Commercial Animal Boarding (per Section 98-206(4)(j))
Physical Activity Studio (per Section 98-206(4)(s)) (Ord. No. 13-19)
c. Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 98-202(5))
1) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Company Cafeteria (per Section 98-206(8)(d))
Company Provided On-Site Recreational Facility (Unlit) (per Section
98-206(8)(e))
Indoor Sales Incident to Light Industrial Use (per Section 98-206(8)(h))
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 98-206(8)(n))
Drainage Structure (per Section 98-206(8)(r))
Filling (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Lawn Care (per Section 98-206(8)(s))
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 98-206(8)(v))
On-Site Business Day Care Facility
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 76
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts through
Section 98-105 Purpose and Intent of
Standard Zoning Districts
2) Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use:
Farm Residence (per Section 98-206(8)(b))
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 98-206(8)(c))
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (lit) (per Section 98-206(8)(e))
Home Occupation (per Section 98-206(8)(j))
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 98-206(8)(o))
d. Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 98-202(6))
Outdoor Assembly (per Section 98-206(9)(b))
Contractor’s Project Office (per Section 98-206(9)(c))
Contractor’s On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 98-206(9)(d))
On-Site Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 98-206(9)(f))
3. Regulations Applicable to Residential Uses: Not Applicable
4. Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Uses:
a. Nonresidential Intensity Requirements: (For 2+ floor bldgs., see Table
98-305)
Maximum Number of Floors (F): 4
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): 30%
Maximum Building Footprint Coverage: 40%
Minimum Zoning District Area: 65,000 square feet (Ord. No. 01-28 9/10/01)
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na
b. Nonresidential Bulk Requirements:
1) Minimum Lot Area: 65,000 sq ft (20,000 sq ft permitted as a conditional
use) (Ord. No. 01-28 9/10/01)
2) Minimum Lot Width: 200 feet (100 feet permitted as a conditional use);
3) Minimum Street Frontage: 50 feet
4) Minimum Setbacks: (Note L:, below, along zoning district boundaries.)
5) Building to Front or Street Lot Line: 40 feet, except 25 feet for Street
Side not adjacent to Federal, State, or County Highway.
6) Building to Residential Side Lot Line: 30 feet
7) Building to Residential Rear Lot Line: 30 feet
8) Building to Nonresidential Side Lot Line: 25 feet, except 40 feet when
adjacent to Federal, State or County Highway.
9) Building to Nonresidential Rear Lot Line: 35 feet
10) Peripheral Setback: See 98-610(4)(b) for PI District along zoning district
boundary
11) Minimum Paved Surface Setback: 10 feet from side or rear; 20 feet
from street
12) Minimum Building Separation: 30 feet
13) Maximum Building Height: 45 feet
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 77
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-106 Natural Resource
Protection Overlay Zoning Districts through
Section 98-106 Natural Resource
Protection Overlay Zoning Districts
14) Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot:
See parking lot requirements per specific land use in Section 98-206
c. Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Nonresidential, Two- &
Multi-family):
1) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation
2) 10 landscaping points per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
3) 40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of street frontage
4) 80 landscaping points per 10,000 sq. ft paved area/20 stalls
5) the above landscaping point totals shall be increased by 1.5 times for
buildings in excess of 60,000 gross square feet. This provision shall
also apply to building additions or Group Developments in which the
combined total of the structure and/or all structures within a
development (regardless of diverse lotting, use or tenancy) combine to
more than 60,000 gross square feet. The requirement applies to both
new development and to portions of development prior to the adoption
of this ordinance.
d. Nonresidential Performance Standards: (See Article VII)
e. Nonresidential Signage Regulations: (See Article VIII)
f. Performance Standards: The Planned Business Park (PBP) District has
been added to the listing of Zoning Districts after the adoption of the new
Zoning Ordinance in 1997. Performance and signage standards for the
Planned Industrial (PI) District presented in Articles VII and VIII of this
Ordinance shall apply to development within the Planned Business Park
(PBP) District.
(4) Planned Development Districts
(a) Planned Development (PD_-_) District
1. Description and Purpose: This district is intended to provide more incentives for
redevelopment in areas of the community which are experiencing a lack of
reinvestment, or which require flexible zoning treatment because of factors which are
specific to the site. This district is designed to forward both aesthetic and economic
objectives of the City by controlling the site design and the land use, appearance,
density, or intensity of development within the district in a manner which is consistent
with sound land use, urban design, and economic revitalization principles. The
application of these standards will ensure long-term progress and broad participation
toward these principles. Refer to Section 98-914 for the procedures applicable to
proposal review in this standard zoning district.
2. Development Standards: development standards are flexible within this zoning
district. Refer to Section 98-914(2) for the range of development standards potentially
available in this zoning district.
Section 98-106 Natural Resource Protection Overlay Zoning Districts
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 78
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-107 Map of Natural Resource
Protection Overlay Districts through
Section 98-108 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District
(1) This Chapter employs overlay zoning districts to identify and regulate areas in which natural
resource protection requirements apply. Each type of natural resource regulated by this
Chapter is represented by an overlay zoning district bearing its name.
(2) Natural Resource Protection Overlay Districts include:
Floodplain Overlay Districts
Shoreland-Wetland Overlay District
Lakeshore Overlay District
Drainageway Overlay District
Woodland Overlay District
Steep Slope Overlay District
(3) For specific Natural Resource Protection Overlay District regulations, see Article V.
Section 98-107 Map of Natural Resource Protection Overlay Districts
Natural Resource Protection Overlay Zoning Districts established by this Chapter are shown on
the Official Zoning Map of the City of Lake Geneva, which together with all the explanatory
material thereon, is hereby made part of this Chapter. For specific Natural Resource Protection
Overlay District designation criteria, see Article V.
(1) Where an apparent discrepancy exists between the location of the outermost boundary of the
Floodfringe District or the Floodplain District shown on the official zoning map and actual field
conditions, the location shall be initially determined by the Zoning Administrator using the
criteria described in (2) and (3), below. Where the Zoning Administrator finds that there is a
significant difference between the map and the actual field conditions, the map shall be
amended using the procedures established in Section 98-903. Disputes between the Zoning
Administrator and the Applicant over the location of the district boundary line shall be settled
using the procedures outlined in Section 98-934(8)(b).
(2) Where flood profiles exist, the location of the district boundary line shall be determined by the
Zoning Administrator using both the scale appearing on the map and the elevations shown on
the water surface profile of the regional flood. Where a discrepancy exists between the map,
and actual field conditions, the regional flood elevations shall govern. A map amendment is
required where there is a significant discrepancy between the map and actual field conditions.
The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to grant or deny a land use permit on the
basis of a district boundary derived from the elevations shown on the water surface profile of
the regional flood, whether or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator
shall be responsible for initiating any map amendments required under this section within a
reasonable period of time.
(3) Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the district boundary line shall be determined
by the Zoning Administrator using the scale appearing on the map, visual on-site inspection
and any available information provided by the Department of Natural Resources. Where there
is a significant difference between the map and actual field conditions, the map shall be
amended. Where a map amendment has been approved by both the Common Council and
the Department of Natural Resources, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to
grant or deny a land use permit.
Section 98-108 Downtown Design Overlay Zoning District
This district is intended to implement the urban design recommendations of the Comprehensive
Master Plan, by preserving and enhancing the historical quality of the downtown, and by attaining
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 79
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-109 Historic Neighborhood
Design Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-113 Neighborhood
Conservation Overlay Zoning District
a consistent visually pleasing image for the downtown area. As emphasized by said Plan, this
district is designed to forward both aesthetic and economic objectives of the City by controlling the
site design and appearance of development within the district in a manner which is consistent with
sound land use, urban design, and economic revitalization principles. The application of these
standards will ensure long-term progress and broad participation toward these principles. Refer to
Section 98-913(9) for the procedures applicable to proposal review in this overlay district.
Section 98-109 Historic Neighborhood Design Overlay Zoning District
This district is intended to implement the urban design recommendations of the Comprehensive
Master Plan, by preserving and enhancing the historical quality of the older, historically intact,
portions of the City. As emphasized by said Plan, this district is designed to forward both aesthetic
and historic preservation objectives of the City by controlling the site design and appearance of
development within the district in a manner which is consistent with sound land use, urban design,
and economic revitalization principles. The application of these standards will ensure long-term
progress and broad participation toward these principles. Refer to Section 98-913(10)-(19) for the
procedures applicable to proposal review in this overlay district.
Section 98-110 Entry Corridor Design Overlay Zoning District
This district is intended to implement the urban design recommendations of the Comprehensive
Master Plan, by preserving and enhancing the historical quality of the STH 50 corridor west of the
downtown and the CTH H corridor north and south of the downtown, and by enhancing the
economic redevelopment potential of the STH 120 corridor north and south of the downtown; the
STH 12 corridor with in the city limits; and the STH 50 corridor east of the downtown. As
emphasized by the Plan, this district is designed to forward both aesthetic and historic
preservation objectives of the City by controlling the site design and appearance of development
within the district in a manner which is consistent with sound land use, urban design, and
economic revitalization principles. The application of these standards will ensure long-term
progress and broad participation toward these principles. Refer to Section 98-913(20)-(29) for the
procedures applicable to proposal review in this overlay district.
Section 98-111 Community Gateway Design Overlay Zoning District
This district is intended to implement the urban design recommendations of the Comprehensive
Master Plan, by requiring that development located at and around the most important entrances to
the community has a character which recognizes the City's adopted objectives of establishing an
attractive and high-quality image. These important community gateways are located around the
STH 120 interchange, the STH 12 interchange, and the intersection of CTH H and STH 120. As
emphasized by the Plan, this district is designed to forward both aesthetic and economic
development objectives of the City by controlling the site design and appearance of development
within the district in a manner which is consistent with sound land use, urban design, and
economic development principles. The application of these standards will ensure long-term
progress and broad participation toward these principles. Refer to Section 98-913(30)-(39) for the
procedures applicable to proposal review in this overlay district.
Section 98-112 Reserved
Section 98-113 Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Zoning District
This district is intended to grant legal conforming status to land uses and all other aspects of
development, for properties located within the district. Properties which have received this
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 80
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-114 Park Overlay Zoning
District through
Section 98-114 Park Overlay Zoning
District
designation may continue land uses, densities and intensities of development, and structural
configurations which exist as of the effective date of this Chapter. As legal, conforming land uses
and structures, such land uses may be replaced with similar land uses and such structures may
be reconstructed, even if damaged to more than 50 percent of their value. The physical
expansion of such land uses or densities not otherwise permitted within the base zoning district,
or the physical expansion of such structures not conforming with the intensity or bulk restrictions
of the base zoning district, shall require the granting of a conditional use permit. The Zoning
Administrator shall determine if sufficient evidence is presented to demonstrate the extent of land
use and development existing as of the effective date of this Chapter if such reconstruction or reuse
is proposed. Building permits, utility records and photographs are considered good evidence
of such status.
Section 98-114 Park Overlay Zoning District
This district is intended to apply to lands owned by the public primarily for the purpose of providing
public recreation opportunities or open space conservation. The district is intended to implement
the recreation and open space objectives of the Comprehensive Master Plan by permitting
recreation or open space land uses. Permitted uses include indoor and outdoor public or private
recreation facilities, libraries, museums, recreation centers (for example, ballrooms, performing
arts centers, and government-owned community centers). All other land uses shall be prohibited.
Park Overlay Zoning Districts established by this Chapter are shown on the Official Zoning Map of
the City of Lake Geneva.
ARTICLE I: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 81
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-201 Purpose through Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS
Section 98-201 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to indicate which land uses may locate in each zoning district and
under what requirements; and which land uses may not locate therein. A further distinction is
made for land uses which may locate in a given district only upon obtaining a conditional or
temporary use permit to do so. Finally, certain land uses may locate in a given district as a matter
of right upon compliance with special regulations for such a land use.
Section 98-202 Interpretation of Land Use Tables
(1) The land uses listed in Sections 98-202 (Table of Land Uses) and 98-204 (Table of Land Uses
Permitted in Permanently Protected Green Space Areas) are specifically designated and refer
too the detailed listing of land uses contained in Section 98-206 (Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations).
(2) Land Uses Permitted by Right: Land uses listed as permitted by right (designated as a “P” in
Sections 98-203 and 98-204) are permitted per the general land use requirements of this
Chapter (Section 98-205); per the general requirements of the specific zoning district in which
they are located; per any additional requirements imposed by applicable overlay zoning
districts as designated on the Official Zoning Map; per the general requirements of this
Chapter including Section 98-908; and per any and all other applicable City, County, State,
and Federal regulations.
(4) Land Uses Permitted as a Conditional Use:
(a) Land uses listed as permitted as a conditional uses (designated as a “C” in Sections 98-
203 and 98-204) are permitted subject to all the requirements applicable to uses permitted
by right as listed in Subsection (2), above, plus any additional requirements applicable to
that particular land use as contained in Section 98-206 (Detailed Land Use Descriptions
and Regulations), including any additional requirements imposed as part of the conditional
use review process. Each application for, and instance of, a conditional use shall be
considered a unique situation and shall not be construed as precedence for similar
requests (See also Section 98-905).
(5). Land Uses Permitted as an Accessory Use: Land uses permitted as an accessory use are
permitted subject to all the requirements applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in
Subsection (2), above, plus any additional requirements applicable to that particular land use
as contained in Section 98-206 (Detailed Land Use Descriptions and Regulations).
(6) Land Uses Permitted as a Temporary Use: Land uses listed as permitted a as temporary
use (designated as a “T” in Sections 98-203 and 98-204) are permitted subject to all the
requirements applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection (2), above, plus any
additional requirements applicable to that particular land use as contained in Section 98-
206(9) (Detailed Land Use Descriptions and Regulations). (See also Section 98-906).
(7) Land uses for which a blank space is shown for a specific zoning district are not permitted n
such zoning district, except as legal nonconforming uses (Section 98-207).
(8) Although a land use may be indicated as permitted by right or permitted as a conditional use
in a particular district, it does not follow that such a land use is permitted or permissible on
every parcel in such district. No land use is permitted or permissible on a parcel unless it can
be located thereon in full compliance with all of the standards and regulations of this Chapter
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 82
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses through Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses
which are applicable to the specific land use and parcel in question, or unless an appropriate
variance has been granted pursuant to Section 98-910.
Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses
This Chapter regulates the location of land uses to specific zoning districts through the use of the
Tables of Land Uses contained in this Section (See the following pages for Tables).
Table 98-203(1) Tables of Land Uses
P
C
CI
I
M
+
=
=
=
=
=
=
Permitted by Right in a Conventional Development (See 98-206(1)(a).)
Permitted as a Conditional Use (See Section 98-905)
Permitted as a Conditional Use in a Cluster Development (See Section 98-206(1)(b))
Permitted as a Conditional Use in an Institutional Residential Development (See 98-206(1)(c))
Permitted as a Conditional Use within a Mobile Home Development or Park (See 98-206 (1)(d) or (e))
Permitted as a Conditional Use until 365 days after the Effective Date of this Zoning Ordinance
Zoning District Abbreviations
RH
CR-5ac
ER-1
SR-3
SR-4
TR-6
MR-8
NO
PO
NB
PB
GB
CB
PI
GI
HI
PBP
Type of Land Use
DWELLING UNIT TYPES (SEE 98-034)
P P P P P P P P P (1) Single-Family Detached 35 acre lot
P P P P P P P P (2) Single-Family Detached 5 acre lot
CI P P P P P P P (3) Single-Family Detached 40,000 sf lot
P P P P P P (4) Single-Family Detached 15,000 sf lot
P P P P P (5) Single-Family Detached 9,000 sf lot
+ P P C C (6) Twin Homes/Duplex 6,000 sf per du
+ C P C C (7) Two-Flat 9,000 sf lot
P C C (8) Townhouse 4,500 sf lot
P C C (9) Multiplex 4,500 sf per du
P C C (10) Apartment 4,500 sf per du
I I I I I I I (11) Institutional Residential 9,000 sf lot
M (12) Mobile Home 9,000 sf lot
RH Rural Holding TR Two-family Res NB Neighborhood Business PI Planned Industrial
CR Countryside Res MR Multi-family Res PB Planned Business GI General Industrial
ER Estate Residential NO Neighborhood Office GB General Business HI Heavy Industrial
SR Single-family Res PO Planned Office CB Central Business PBP Planned Business Park
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 83
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses through Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses
Table 98-203(2) and (3) Tables of Land Uses
P = Permitted by Right (98-202(2)) C = Permitted as a Conditional Use (98-202(4))
Zoning District Abbreviations
RH
CR-5ac
ER-1
SR-3
SR-4
TR-6
MR-8
NO
PO
NB
PB
GB
CB
PI
GI
HI
PBP
Type of Land Use
NONRESIDENTIAL LAND USES
AGRICULTURAL USES (98-206(2)(_))
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (a) Cultivation
C (b) Husbandry
C (c) Intensive Agriculture
C C (d) Agricultural Services
P (e) On-Site Agricultural Retail
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (f) Selective Cutting
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C (g) Clear Cutting
INSTITUTIONAL USES (98-206(3)(_))
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (a) Passive Outdoor Public Recreational
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (b) Active Outdoor Public Recreational
C C C C C C C P P P P P P P (c) Indoor Institutional
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C (d) Outdoor Institutional
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (e) Public Services and Utilities
C C C C C C C (f) Institutional Residential
P P P P P P P C C (g) Community Living Arrangement (1-8 res.)
C C C C P P C C C (h) Community Living Arrangement (9-15)
C C C C (i) Community Living Arrangement (16+)
RH Rural Holding TR Two-family Res NB Neighborhood Business PI Planned Industrial
CR Countryside Res MR Multi-family Res PB Planned Business GI General Industrial
ER Estate Residential NO Neighborhood Office GB General Business HI Heavy Industrial
SR Single-family Res PO Planned Office CB Central Business PBP Planned Business Park
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 84
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses through Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses
Table 98-203(4) Tables of Land Uses
P = Permitted by Right (98-202(2)) C = Permitted as a Conditional Use (98-202(4))
Zoning District Abbreviations
RH
CR-5ac
ER-1
SR-3
SR-4
TR-6
MR-8
NO
PO
NB
PB
GB
CB
PI
GI
HI
PBP
Type of Land
Use
COMMERCIAL USES
(98-206(4)(_))
P P P P P P P P P P (a) Office
P P P P P P P P (b) Personal or
Professional Services
C C P P P P C (c) Indoor Sales or
Services
C C C (d) Outdoor Display
(Ord. No. 01-19
2/12/01)
P P P P P P P (e) Indoor
Maintenance Service
C C (f) Outdoor
Maintenance Service
C C C C C (g) In-Vehicle Sales or
Service
C C C C C C C (h) Indoor Commercial
Entertainment
C C C C C C C C (i) Outdoor
Commercial
Entertainment
C C C C C C (j) Commercial Animal
Boarding
C C C C (k) Commercial Indoor
Entertainment
C C C C C C C C C C C C (l) Bed and Breakfast
Establishments
C C C C C C C C C C C (m) Group Day Care
Center (9+children)
C (n) Campground
C C C C C (o) Boarding House
C (p) Sexually-Oriented
Land Use
C C C C (q) Vehicle Repair and
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 85
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses through Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses
Table 98-203(5), (6) and (7) Tables of Land Uses
P = Permitted by Right (98-202(2)) C = Permitted as a Conditional Use (98-202(4))
Zoning District Abbreviations
RH
CR-5ac
ER-1
SR-3
SR-4
TR-6
MR-8
NO
PO
NB
PB
GB
CB
PI
GI
HI
PBP
Type of Land Use
STORAGE/DISPOSAL
(98-206(5)(_)
C C P P P (a) Indoor Storage or
Wholesaling (Ord. No.
01-19 2/12/01)
C P (b) Outdoor Storage or
Wholesaling
C C C (c) Personal Storage
Facility
C C (d) Junkyard or Salvage
Yard
C C (e) Waste Disposal
Facility
C C (f) Composting
Operation
TRANSPORTATION
USES (98-206(6)(_))
P P P P (a) Off-Site Parking Lot
C C C C C (b) Airport/Heliport
C C (c) Freight Terminal
C P P (d) Distribution Center
TRANSPORTATION
Maintenance
C C (r) Intensive Outdoor
Recreation
C C C C C C C (s) Physical Activity
Studio
RH Rural Holding TR Two-family Res NB Neighborhood Business PI Planned Industrial
CR Countryside Res MR Multi-family Res PB Planned Business GI General Industrial
ER Estate Residential NO Neighborhood Office GB General Business HI Heavy Industrial
SR Single-family Res PO Planned Office CB Central Business PBP Planned
Business Park
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 86
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses through Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses
USES (98-206(7)(_))
P P P (a) Light Industrial
P (b) Heavy Industrial
C C C C (c) Communication
Tower
C (d) Extraction Use
RH Rural Holding TR Two-family Res NB Neighborhood Business PI Planned Industrial
CR Countryside Res MR Multi-family Res PB Planned Business GI General Industrial
ER Estate Residential NO Neighborhood Office GB General Business HI Heavy Industrial
SR Single-family Res PO Planned Office CB Central Business PBP Planned Business Park
Table 98-203(8) Tables of Land Uses
P = Permitted by Right (98-202(2)) C = Permitted as a Conditional Use (98-202(4))
Zoning District Abbreviations
RH
CR-5ac
ER-1
SR-3
SR-4
TR-6
MR-8
NO
PO
NB
PB
GB
CB
PI
GI
HI
PBP
Type of Land
Use
ACCESSORY
USES (98-
206(8)(_))
C C C C (a) Commercial
Airport
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (b) Farm Residence
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (c) Private
Residential Garage
or Shed
P P P P P P P P P (d) Company
Cafeteria
P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C (e) Company
Provide On-Site
Recreation
C C C (f) Outdoor Display
Incidental
C C C C C C C (g) In-Vehicle Sales
and Services
P P P (h) Indoor Sales
Incident to Light Ind.
Use
C C C C (i) Light Ind.
Incidental to Indoor
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 87
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses through Section 98-203 Tables of Land Uses
Sales
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (j) Home Occupation
P P P P P P P (k) Family Day Care
Home (4-8 children)
C C C C C C C (l) Intermediate Day
Care Home (8-15
children)
C C (m) Migrant Labor
Camp
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (n) On-Site Parking
Lot
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (o) Private
Residential
Recreational Facility
C C C (p) Private
Residential Kennel
C (q) Private
Residential Stable
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (r) Drainage
Structure
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (s) Filling
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (t) Lawn Care of
Subject Property
C C C (u) Septic Systems
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (v) Exterior
Communication
Devices
C C (w) Caretaker’s
Residence
C C C C C C C (x) Second Private
Residential Garage
RH Rural Holding TR Two-family Res NB Neighborhood Business PI Planned
Industrial
CR Countryside Res MR Multi-family Res PB Planned Business GI General
Industrial
ER Estate Residential NO Neighborhood Office GB General Business HI Heavy Industrial
SR Single-family Res PO Planned Office CB Central Business
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 88
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-204 Table of Land Uses
Permitted in Permanently Protected Green
Space Areas through
Section 98-204 Table of Land Uses
Permitted in Permanently Protected
Green Space Areas
Table 98-203(9) Tables of Land Uses
T = Permitted as a Temporary Use (98-202(6))
Zoning District Abbreviations
RH
CR-5ac
ER-1
SR-3
SR-4
TR-6
MR-8
NO
PO
NB
PB
GB
CB
PI
GI
HI
PBP
Type of Land
Use
TEMPORARY
USES (98-
206(9)(_))
T T T T (a) General
Temporary Outdoor
Sales
T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T (b) Outdoor
Assembly
T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T (c) Contractor’s
Project Office
T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T (d) Contractor’s On-
Site Equipment
Storage
T T T T T T T T T T (e) Relocate-able
Residence
T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T (f) On-Site Real
Estate Sales Office
T T T T T T T (g) Outdoor Sales of
Farm Products
RH Rural Holding TR Two-family Res NB Neighborhood Business PI Planned
Industrial
CR Countryside Res MR Multi-family Res PB Planned Business GI General
Industrial
ER Estate Residential NO Neighborhood Office GB General Business HI Heavy Industrial
SR Single-family Res PO Planned Office CB Central Business
Section 98-204 Table of Land Uses Permitted in Permanently Protected Green Space Areas
In all developments, certain areas may be required to be set aside as permanently protected
green space for the purpose of natural resources protection, to meet a Minimum Green Space
Ratio (GSR) requirement, or to meet a Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) requirement.
Where such permanently protected green space is required, and where the land use is also
permitted per the land use regulations of the applicable conventional zoning district (see Section
98-203, Table of Land Uses), the following table shall also be employed to establish land use
regulations. All land uses listed in Section 98-203 but not listed in this Section are prohibited in
permanently protected green spaces.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 89
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-204 Table of Land Uses
Permitted in Permanently Protected Green
Space Areas through
Section 98-205 Regulations Applicable to
All Land Uses
Table 98-204: Land Uses Permitted in Permanently Protected Green Space Areas
Land Use
Permanently Protected Green Space Areas
Conservancy
Drainageway
Lakeshore
Woodland
Steep Slope
Other
Permanently
Protected
Green
Space
(a) Cultivation C
(b) Passive Outdoor Recreation P P P P P P
(c) Active Outdoor Recreation P
(d) Outdoor Institutional P
(e) Lawn Care (mow-feed-seed-weed) C C C C C P
(f) Golf Course C C C C C P
(g) Any Permitted Temporary Use P,T
(h) Drainage Structure C C C C C C
(i) Filling C C C C C C
(j) Septic System C
(k) Road, Bridge
(l) Utility Lines & Related Facilities C C C C C C
(m) Piers and Wharfs C C C C C C
(n) Fences (Ord. No. 04-04 1/26/04) C C C P P C
C: Permitted as a Conditional Use per 98-206(10), 98-203, and 98-905
T: Permitted as a Temporary Use per 98-206(10), 98-203, and 98-206.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 90
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-205 Regulations Applicable to
All Land Uses through
Section 98-205 Regulations Applicable to
All Land Uses
Section 98-205 Regulations Applicable to All Land Uses
All uses of land initiated within the jurisdiction of this Chapter on, or following, the effective date of
this Chapter shall comply with all of the provisions of this Chapter. Specifically:
(1) Land Use Regulations and Requirements: All uses of land shall comply with all the
regulations and requirements of Article II, pertaining to the types of uses to which land may be
put, and to various requirements which must be met for certain types of land uses within
particular zoning districts. Such regulations and requirements address both general and
specific regulations which land uses shall adhere to; and which are directly related to the
protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of Lake Geneva
and its environs.
(2) Density and Intensity Regulations and Requirements: All development of land shall
comply with all the regulations and requirements of Article III, pertaining to the maximum
permitted density (for residential land uses) and intensity (for nonresidential land uses) of land
uses. Such regulations and requirements address issues such as Floor Area Ratios (FARs),
Green Space Ratios (GSRs), and Landscape Surface Ratios (LSRs); which are directly
related to, and are a critical component of density or intensity and the protection of the health,
safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of Lake Geneva and its environs.
(3) Bulk Regulations and Requirements: All development of land shall comply with all the
regulations and requirements of Article IV, pertaining to the maximum permitted bulk of
structures and the location of structures on a lot. Such regulations and requirements address
issues such as height, setbacks from property lines and rights-of-way, and minimum
separation between structures; which are directly related to, and a critical component of, the
effective bulk of a structure and the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the City of Lake Geneva and its environs.
(4) Natural Resources and Green Space Regulations and Requirements: All land use and/or
development of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of Article V,
pertaining to the protection of sensitive natural resources and required green space areas.
Such regulations and requirements address issues such as absolute protection, partial
protection, and mitigation; which are directly related to, and a critical component of, the
protection of natural resources and the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of
the residents of the City of Lake Geneva and its environs.
(5) Landscaping and Bufferyards Regulations and Requirements: All development of land
shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of Article VI, pertaining to the provision
of landscaping and bufferyards. Such regulations and requirements address issues such as
minimum required landscaping of developed land, and minimum required provision of
bufferyards between adjoining zoning districts and/or development options; which are directly
related to, and a critical component of, the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare
of the residents of the City of Lake Geneva and its environs.
(6) Performance Standards and Requirements: All development of land shall comply with all
the regulations and requirements of Article VII, pertaining to the provision of appropriate
access, parking, loading, storage, and lighting facilities. Such regulations and requirements
address issues such as maximum permitted access points, minimum required parking spaces,
the screening of storage areas, and maximum permitted intensity of lighting, as well as
defining acceptable levels of potential nuisances such as noise, vibrations, odors, heat, glare
and smoke; which are directly related to, and a critical component of, the health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents of the City of Lake Geneva and its environs.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 91
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-205 Regulations Applicable to
All Land Uses through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
(7) Signage Regulations and Requirements: All and use and/or development of land shall
comply with all the regulations and requirements of Article VIII, pertaining to the type and
amount of signage permitted on property. Such regulations and restrictions address issues
such as the maximum area of permitted signage and the number and types of permitted
signage; which are directly related to, and a critical component of, the protection of the health,
safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of Lake Geneva and its environs.
(8) Procedural Regulations and Requirements: All land use and/or development of land shall
comply with all the regulations and requirements of Article IX, pertaining to the procedures
necessary to secure review and approval of land use and/or development. Such regulations
and restrictions address both procedural and technical requirements; and are directly related
to, and a critical component of, the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the City of Lake Geneva and its environs. At a minimum, all development shall be
subject to the requirements of Section 98-908.
(9) Number of Buildings Per Lot: In the RH and CR-5 ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4 Districts, only 1
principal building shall be permitted on any 1 lot. In the TR-6, MR-8, NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB,
PI, GI, and HI Districts, more than 1 principal building shall be permitted on any 1 lot upon the
granting of a conditional use permit for a Group Development in compliance with Section 98-
208.
(10) Number of Land Uses Per Building
(a) No more than 1 nonresidential land use shall be permitted in any building unless a
conditional use permit for a Group Development is granted in compliance with Section 98-
208.
(b) With the exceptions of a Commercial Apartment or a Home Occupation, no building
containing a nonresidential land use shall contain a residential land use. (See Sections 98-
206(8)(a) and 98-206(8)(j).)
(11) Division or Combining of a Lot: no recorded lot shall be divided into 2 or more lots, and no
two or more recorded lots shall be combined into one or more lots, unless such division or
combination results in the creation of lots, each of which conforms to all of the applicable
regulations of the zoning district in which said lot is located (as set forth in this Chapter). (See
also the Land Division Regulations).
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 92
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use Descriptions and Regulations
The land use categories employed by this Chapter (particularly Sections 98-203 and 98-204) are
defined in this Section. Land uses which are not listed in this Chapter are not necessarily
excluded from locating within any given zoning district. Section 98-911 empowers the Zoning
Administrator to make interpretations on matters regarding specific land use proposals which are
not addressed by this Chapter.
(1) Residential Land Uses
(a) Conventional Residential Development
Description: This land use includes, but is not limited to, all residential developments which
do not provide permanently protected green space areas. Property which is under
common ownership of a property owners’ association is permitted, but is not a required
component of this type of development. Up to 10% of a Conventional Residential
Development’s Gross Site Area (GSA) can contain natural resource areas which must be
protected (or other permanently protected green space areas), without a reduction in
Maximum Gross Density (MGD). (See note (1)(f) below.)
1. Permitted by Right: {RH, CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, TR-6, MR-8, NO, NB}
2. Conditional Use Regulations: {SR-4, TR-6, MR-8, NO, NB}
(b) Cluster Residential Development
Description: This land use is a residential subdivision that requires dwelling unit types
which require smaller lots than conventional residential developments within the same
zoning district. This lot size flexibility is provided because the provision of sound
neighborhood design principles results in a community character which is consistent with
such Conventional Residential Developments. (See note (1)(f) below.)
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {CR-5ac}:
a. Development clusters shall be located so as to blend with adjacent residentially
zoned areas to the greatest extent possible.
b. If such adjacent areas are developed as a conventional residential development,
bufferyards shall be provided within adjoining portions of the cluster residential
development (See 98-610).
c. No access shall be permitted to local residential streets.
d. Applicant shall provide appropriate deed restrictions and performance bonds to
ensure the long-term maintenance and viability of common areas and the
development as a whole.
e. Applicant shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable
to all conditional uses.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 93
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
(c) Institutional Residential Development
Description: This land use is a form of residential development designed to accommodate
institutional residential uses, such as retirement homes, nursing homes, convents, and
dormitories (see Section 98-206(3)(f)). No individual lots are required, although the
development shall contain a minimum of 800 square feet of gross site area for each
occupant of the development. A minimum of 30% of the development’s Gross Site Area
(GSA) shall be held as permanently protected green space. (See note (1)(f) below.)
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable
2. Conditional Use Regulations {MR-8, NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB}:
a. The proposed site shall be located so as to avoid disruption of an established or
developing office area. Within the Neighborhood Office (NO) and Planned Office
(PO) District, institutional residential developments shall be designed so as to
maintain the character of the adjacent properties.
b. Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or arterial street.
c. No access shall be permitted to a local residential street.
d. Applicant shall provide off-street passenger loading area at a minimum of one
location within the development.
e. All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned
property which does not contain an institutional residential land use.
f. Applicant shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable
to all conditional uses.
(d) Mobile Home Residential Development (Subdivision)
Description: This land use is a form of residential development which is exclusively
reserved for individually sold lots containing mobile home units. Each of the lots and
mobile home units must meet the requirements for mobile homes listed in Section 98-034
of this Chapter. Under this development option, approximately 10% of a development’s
Gross Site Area (GSA) can contain natural resource areas which must be protected (or
other permanently protected green space areas), without a reduction in Maximum Gross
Density (MGD). (See note (1)(f) below.)
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable
2. Conditional Use Regulations {TR-6}:
a. Development shall be located so as to blend with adjacent residentially zoned
areas to the greatest extent possible.
b. Mobile Home Residential Developments shall comply with the same landscaping
and bufferyard requirements as the Multi-family Residential-12 district, as specified
in Section 98-610 of this Chapter.
c. No access shall be permitted to local residential streets.
d. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 94
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
(e) Mobile Home Residential Development (Rental/Condo Park)
Description: This land use is a form of conventional residential development which is
exclusively reserved for individually sold or rented air right pads containing mobile home
units. Each of the lots and mobile home units must meet the requirements for mobile
homes listed in Section 98-034 of this Chapter. Under this development option,
approximately 10% of a development’s Gross Site Area (GSA) can contain natural
resource areas which must be protected (or other permanently protected green space
areas), without a reduction in Maximum Gross Density (MGD). (See note (1)(f) below.)
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {TR-6}:
a. Development shall be located so as to blend with adjacent residentially zoned
areas to the greatest extent possible.
b. Mobile Home Residential Developments shall comply with the same landscaping
and bufferyard requirements as the Multi-family Residential-12 district, as specified
in Section 98-610 of this Chapter.
c. No access shall be permitted to local residential streets.
d. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
(f) Note Regarding Percentage of Green Space and Maximum Density Yield
This estimate is provided as a general rule of thumb for the convenience of the users of
this Chapter. Such a yield is not to be considered as ensured by the provisions of this
Chapter.
(2) Agricultural Land Uses
(a) Cultivation
Description: Cultivation land uses include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site,
outdoor raising of plants. This land use includes trees which are raised as a crop to be
replaced with more trees after harvesting, such as in nursery or Christmas tree operations.
The raising of plants for consumption of farm animals are considered cultivation if said
plants are consumed by animals which are located off-site.
1. Permitted by Right: {All Districts}
a. On buildable lots, cultivation areas shall not exceed 20% of the lot’s area.
b. Cultivation areas shall not be located within the required front yard of street yard of
any buildable or developed lot.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable
3. Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift. (Note:
Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing requirements of
Section 98-704(6)(a).)
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 95
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
(b) Husbandry
Description: Husbandry land uses include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site
raising and/or use of animals at an intensity of less than 1 animal unit (as defined in
Section 98-034) per acre. Apiaries are considered husbandry land uses.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH}:
a. Any building housing animals shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from any
residentially zoned property, and 100 feet from all other lot lines.
b. All outdoor animal containments (pasture) shall be located a minimum of 10 feet
from any residentially zoned property.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift. (Note:
Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing requirements of
Section 98-704(6)(a).)
(c) Intensive Agriculture
Description: Intensive agricultural land uses include all operations primarily oriented to the
on-site raising and/or use of animals at an intensity equal to or exceeding 1 animal unit (as
defined in Section 98-034) per acre and/or agricultural activities requiring large
investments in structures. Examples of such land uses include feed lots, hog farms,
poultry operations, fish farms, commercial greenhouse operations and certain other
operations meeting this criterion.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH}:
a. Shall not be located in, or adjacent to, an existing or platted residential subdivision.
b. Shall be completely surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum intensity of 1.00.
(See Section 98-610.)
c. All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and outdoor animal containments
shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from all residentially zoned property and
100 feet from all other lot lines.
d. Shall be located in an area which is planned to remain commercially viable for
agricultural land uses.
e. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift. (Note:
Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing requirements of
Section 98-704(6)(a).)
(d) Agricultural Service
Description: Agricultural service land uses include all operations pertaining to the sale,
handling, transport, packaging, storage, or disposal of agricultural equipment, products,
by-products, or materials primarily used by agricultural operations. Examples of such land
uses include agricultural implement sales, storage, or repair operations; feed and seed
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 96
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
stores; agricultural chemical dealers and/or storage facilities; animal feed storage facilities;
commercial dairies; food processing facilities; canning and other packaging facilities; and
agricultural waste disposal facilities (except commercial composting uses, see Section 98-
206(5)(f)).
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH, HI}:
a. Shall not be located in, or adjacent to, an existing or platted residential subdivision.
b. All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and outdoor animal containments
shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
c. If within the RH District, shall be located in an area which is planned to remain
commercially viable for agricultural land uses.
d. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift. (Note:
Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing requirements of
Section 98-704(6)(a).)
(e) On-Site Agricultural Retail
Description: On-site agricultural retail land uses include land uses solely associated with
the sale of agricultural products grown exclusively on the site. The sale of products grown
or otherwise produced off-site shall not be permitted within on-site agricultural retail
operations and such activity constitutes retail sales as a commercial land use. Packagings
and equipment used to store, display, package or carry products for the convenience of
the operation or its customers (such as egg cartons, baskets, containers, and bags) shall
be produced off-site.
1. Permitted by Right: {RH}:
a. No structure or group of structures shall exceed 500 square feet in floor area.
b. No structure shall exceed 12 feet in height.
c. All structures shall meet all required setbacks for nonresidential land uses.
d. Signage shall be limited to 1 on-site sign which shall not exceed 30 square feet in
area.
e. Such land use shall be served by no more than 1 driveway. Said driveway shall
require a valid driveway permit.
f. A minimum of one parking space shall be required for every 200 square feet of
product display area.
g. The sale of products which are grown or otherwise produced on non-adjacent
property under the same ownership, or on property under different ownership, shall
be prohibited.
h. Said structure and fencing shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 97
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
3. Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift and four
spaces for customers. (Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the
surfacing requirements of Section 98-704(6)(a).)
(f) Selective Cutting
Description: Selective cutting land uses include any operation associated with the onetime,
continuing, or cumulative clearing, cutting, harvesting, or other destruction of trees
(including fire) where the extent of such activity is limited to an area (or combined areas) of
less than or equal to 30% of the woodlands on the property (or up to 100% for
developments approved prior to the effective date of this Chapter). Selective cutting
activity shall be limited to areas located within development pads which are designated on
recorded Plats or Certified Survey Maps. The destruction of trees in an area in excess of
this amount of the woodlands on the property shall be considered clear cutting, (see (g),
below).
1. Permitted by Right {All Districts}
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
(g) Clear Cutting
Description: Clear cutting land uses include the one-time, continuing, or cumulative
clearing, cutting, harvesting, or other destruction (including by fire) of trees in an area (or
combined areas) of more than 30% of the woodlands on a property (or up to 100% for
developments approve prior to the effective date of this Chapter). Clear cutting is permitted
only as a conditional use within the jurisdiction of this Chapter. Areas which have been
clear cut as a result of intentional action following the effective date of this Chapter without
the granting of a conditional use permit are in violation of this Chapter and the property
owner shall be fined for such violation (in accordance with the provisions of Section 98-
936) and shall be required to implement the mitigation standards required for the
destruction of woodlands solely at his/her expense, including costs associated with site
inspection to confirm the satisfaction of mitigation requirements. Areas which have been
clear cut unintentionally as a result of fire shall not subject the owner of the property to
fines associated with the violation of this Chapter, but shall require the satisfaction of
mitigation requirements at the satisfaction of mitigation requirements.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {All Districts}:
a. Applicant shall demonstrate that clear cutting will improve the level of
environmental protection on the subject property.
b. Areas of the subject property which are clear cut beyond the limitations established
above, shall be replanted per the requirements of Section 98-507. (Referenced
section requires the replanting of trees in other portions of the subject property—
thereby freeing the currently wooded area for development while ensuring that the
amount of required wooded area on the subject property remains constant.
c. Clear cutting shall not be permitted within a required bufferyard or landscaped area
(see Section 98-610), or within an area designated as permanently protected
green space (see Article VI).
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 98
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
d. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
(3) Institutional Land Uses
(a) Passive Outdoor Public Recreation
Description: Passive outdoor public recreational land uses include all recreational land
uses located on public property which involve passive recreational activities. Such land
uses include arboretums, natural areas, wildlife areas, hiking trails, bike trails, particular
active recreational use (see (b), below), picnic areas, picnic shelters, gardens, fishing
areas, and similar land uses.
1. Permitted by Right {All Districts}:
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
3. Parking Requirements: One space per four expected patrons at maximum capacity for
any use requiring over five spaces.
(b) Active Outdoor Public Recreation
1. Permitted by Right: {All Districts except GI and HI}:
a. Facilities using night lighting and adjoining a residentially zoned property shall
install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see
Section 98-610). Said bufferyard shall be located at the property lien adjacent to
said residentially zoned property.
b. All structures and active recreational areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet
from any residentially zoned property.
c. Facilities which serve a community-wide function shall be located with primary
vehicular access on a collector or arterial street.
d. Facilities which serve a regional or community-wide function shall provide off-street
passenger loading area if the majority of the users will be children.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
3. Parking Regulations: Active Outdoor Public Recreation: one space per four expected
patrons at maximum capacity for any use requiring over five spaces.
(c) Indoor Institutional
Description: Indoor institutional land uses include all indoor public and not for profit
recreational facilities (such as gyms, swimming pools, libraries, museums, and community
centers), schools, churches, nonprofit clubs, nonprofit fraternal organizations, convention
centers, hospitals, jails, prisons, and similar land uses.
1. Permitted by Right: {NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI}
a. Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or arterial street.
b. Shall provide off-street passenger loading area if the majority of the users will be
children (as in the case of a school, church, library, or similar land use.)
c. All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned
property.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 99
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
2. Conditional Use Regulations: {RH, CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, TR-6, MR-8}:
a. Shall meet all regulations listed in 1., above.
b. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: Generally, one space per three expected patrons at maximum
capacity. However, see additional specific requirements below:
Church: one space per five seats at the maximum capacity.
Community or Recreation Center: One space per 250 square feet of gross floor
area, or one space per four patrons to the maximum capacity, plus one space per
employee on the largest work shift.
Funeral Home: One space per three patron seats at the maximum capacity, plus one
space per employee on the largest work shift.
Hospital: two spaces per three patient beds, plus one space per staff doctor and each
other employee on the largest work shift.
Library or Museum: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area or one space
per four seats to the maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per
employee on the largest work shift.
Elementary and Junior High: one space per teacher and per staff member, plus one
space per two classrooms.
Senior High: one space per teacher and staff member, plus one space per five nonbused
students.
College or Technical School: one space per staff member on the largest work shift,
plus one space per two students of the largest class attendance period.
(d) Outdoor Institutional
Description: Outdoor institutional land uses include public and private cemeteries, privately
held permanently protected green space areas, country clubs, non-public golf courses,
and similar land uses.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {All Districts except GI and HI}:
a. Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or arterial street.
b. Shall provide off-street passenger loading area if a significant proportion of the
users will be children.
c. All structures and actively used outdoor recreational areas shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property.
d. Facilities using night lighting and adjoining a residentially zoned property shall
install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see
Section 98-610). Said bufferyard shall be located at the property line adjacent to
said residentially zoned property.
e. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: Generally, one space per three expected patrons at maximum
capacity. However, see additional specific requirements below:
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 100
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
Cemetery: one space per employee, plus one space per three patrons to the
maximum capacity of all indoor assembly areas.
Golf Course: 36 spaces per nine holes, plus one space per employee on the largest
work shift, plus 50 percent of spaces otherwise required for any accessory uses (e.g.,
bars, restaurant).
Swimming Pool: one space per 75 square feet of gross water area.
Tennis Court: three spaces per court.
(e) Public Service and Utilities
Description: Public service and utilities land uses include all Town, County, State and
Federal facilities (except those otherwise treated in this Section), emergency service
facilities such as fire departments and rescue operations, wastewater treatment plants,
public and/or private utility substations, water towers, utility and public service related
distribution facilities, and similar land uses.
1. Permitted by Right: {All Districts}:
a. Outdoor storage areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially
zoned property.
b. All outdoor storage areas adjoining a residentially zoned property shall install and
continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 (See Section 98-
610). Said bufferyard shall be located at the property line adjacent to said
residentially zoned property.
c. All structures shall be located within a minimum of 20 feet from any residentially
zoned property.
d. The exterior of all buildings shall be compatible with the exteriors of surrounding
buildings.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one
space per company vehicle normally stored or parked on the premises, plus one
space per 500 square feet of gross square feet of office area.
(f) Institutional Residential
Description: Institutional residential land uses include group homes, convents,
monasteries, nursing homes, convalescent homes, limited care facilities, rehabilitation
centers, and similar land uses not considered to be community living arrangements under
the provisions of Wisconsin Statutes 62.23.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {MR-8, NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB}: see listing for
Institutional Residential under Residential Uses, Subsection (1)(b), above.
3. Parking Regulations:
Monastery or Convent: one space per six residents, plus one space per employee on
the largest work shift, plus one space per five chapel seats if the public may attend.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 101
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
Nursing Home: one space per six patient beds, plus one space per employee on the
largest work shift, plus one space per staff member and per visiting doctor.
(g) Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents)
Description: Community living arrangement land uses include all facilities provided for in
Wisconsin Statutes 46.03(22), including child welfare agencies, group homes for children,
and community based residential facilities. Community living arrangements do not include
day care centers (see separate listing); nursing homes (an institutional residential land
use); general hospitals, special hospitals, prisons or jails (all indoor institutional land uses).
Community living arrangement facilities are regulated depending upon their capacity as
provided for in Wisconsin Statutes 62.23.
1. Permitted by Right: {RH, CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, TR-6, MR-8}:
a. No community living arrangement shall be established within 2,500 feet of any
other such facility regardless of its capacity.
b. The applicant shall demonstrate that the total capacity of all community living
arrangements (of all capacities) in the City shall not exceed 1 percent of the City’s
population (unless specifically authorized by the City Council following a public
hearing).
c. Foster homes housing 4 or fewer children and licensed under Wisconsin Statutes
48.62 shall not be subject to a., above; and shall not be subject to, or count toward,
the total arrived at in b., above.
State Law Reference: Section 62.23, Wisconsin Statutes
2. Conditional Use Regulations: {NO and NB}
a. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Requirements: Three spaces.
(h) Community Living Arrangements (9-15 residents)
Description: See (g) above.
1. Permitted by Right: {TR-6, MR-8}:
a. No community living arrangement shall be established within 2,500 feet of any
other such facility, regardless of capacity.
b. The applicant shall demonstrate that the total capacity of all community living
arrangements (of all capacities) in the City shall not exceed 1 percent of the City’s
population (unless specifically authorized by the City Council following a public
hearing). State Law Reference; Section 62.23, Wisconsin Statutes.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, NO, PO, NB}:
a. Shall meet all regulations for permitted uses in 1., above.
b. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: Four spaces.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 102
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
(i) Community Living Arrangement (16+ residents)
Description: See (g), above.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {MR-8, NO, PO, NB}:
a. No community living arrangement shall be established within 2,500 feet of any
other such facility, regardless of capacity.
b. The total capacity of all community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the
City shall not exceed 1 percent of the City’s population (unless specifically
authorized by the City Council following a public hearing).
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses. State Law Reference: Section 62.23, Wisconsin Statutes.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per every three residents.
(4) Commercial Land Uses
(a) Office
Description: Office land uses include all exclusively indoor land uses whose primary
functions are the handling of information or administrative services. Such land uses do not
typically provide services directly to customers on a walk-in or on-appointment basis.
1. Permitted by Right {NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI, HI}
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(b) Personal or Professional Service
Description: Personal service and professional service land uses include all exclusively
indoor land uses whose primary function is the provision of services directly to an
individual on a walk-in or on-appointment basis. Examples of such uses include
professional services, insurance or financial services, realty offices, medical offices, and
clinics, veterinary clinics, barber shops, beauty shops, and related land uses.
1. Permitted by Right {NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI}
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
3. Parking Regulations: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(c) Indoor Sales or Service
Description: Indoor sales and service land uses include all land uses which conduct or
display sales or rental merchandise or equipment, or non-personal or non-professional
services, entirely within an enclosed building. This includes self-service facilities such as
coin-operated Laundromats. Depending on the zoning district, such land uses may or may
not display products outside of an enclosed building. Such activities are listed as “Outdoor
Display Incidental to Indoor Sales” under “Accessory Uses” in the Table of Land Uses,
(Section 98-206(8)(f)). A land use which contains both indoor sales and outdoor sales
exceeding 15% of the total sales area of the building(s) on the property shall be
considered an outdoor sales land use, (See (d), below.). Artisan craft production such as
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 103
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
consumer ceramics, custom woodworking, or other production activities directly
associated with retail sales are regulated as “light industrial uses incidental to retail sales”
(see Section 98-206(8)(i).)
1. Permitted by Right {NB, PB, GB, CB}
2. Conditional Use Regulations {NO, PO, PI}
a. Permitted uses shall be limited to indoor sales and personal services which
primarily support office tenants such as office supply stores, copy centers and
travel agencies.
b. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(d) Outdoor Display (Ord. No. 01-19 2/12/01)
Description: Outdoor display land uses include all land uses which conduct sales, display
sales or rental merchandise or equipment outside of an enclosed building. Examples of
such land uses include vehicle rental, manufactured and mobile housing sales and
monument sales. The area of outdoor sales shall be calculated as the area which would
be enclosed by a fence installed and continually calculated maintained in the most efficient
manner which completely encloses all materials displayed outdoors. Such land uses do
not include the storage or display of inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other materials
typically associated with a junkyard or salvage yard. (See Subsection (5), below, also.)
(Land uses which conduct or display only a limited amount of product outside of an
enclosed building, are listed separately in Sections 98-906(8)(f) as “Outdoor Display
Incidental to Indoor Sales.”)
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable
2. Conditional Use Regulations {CB, PB, GB}:
a. The display of items shall not be permitted in permanently protected green space
areas, required landscaped areas, or required bufferyards.
b. The display of items shall not be permitted within required setback areas for the
principal structure.
c. In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use or number of parking
stalls provided on the property below the requirement established by the provisions
of Section 98-704. If the number of provided parking stalls on the property is
already less than the requirement, such display area shall not further reduce the
number of parking stalls already present.
d. Display areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or circulation area by
a minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly delimited by a physical such
as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of planters, or by a clearly marked paved area.
e. Signs, screenage, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being displayed shall not
interfere in any manner with either on-site or off-site traffic visibility, including
potential traffic/traffic and traffic/pedestrian conflicts.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 104
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
f. Outdoor display shall be permitted during the entire calendar year, however, if
goods are removed from the display area all support fixtures used to display the
goods shall be removed within 10 calendar days of the goods’ removal.
g. Inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored or displayed in a
junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be displayed for this land use.
h. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all borders
of the display area abutting residentially zoned property, except per e., above (See
Section 98-610.).
i. Shall comply with Section 98-905 regarding conditional uses.
3. Parking regulations:
a. In front of required principal building setback: one space per 300 square feet of
gross floor area.
b. Behind required principal building setback: one space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
(e) Indoor Maintenance Service
Description: Indoor maintenance services include all land uses which perform
maintenances services (including repair) and contain all operations (except loading)
entirely within an enclosed building. Because of outdoor vehicle storage requirements,
vehicle repair and maintenance is considered a vehicle repair and maintenance land use,
(See Section 98-206(4)(q)).
1. Permitted by Right {NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI, HI}
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(f) Outdoor Maintenance Service
Description: Outdoor maintenance services include all land uses which perform
maintenance services, including repair, and have all, or any portion, of their operations
located outside of an enclosed building.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {HI}:
a. All outdoor activity areas shall be completely enclosed by a minimum 6 feet high
fence. Such enclosures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property and shall be screened from such property by a
bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 (see Section 98-610).
b. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(g) In-Vehicle Sales or Service
Description: In-vehicle sales and service land uses include all land uses which perform
sales and/or services to persons in vehicles, or to vehicles which may or may not be
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 105
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
occupied at the time of such activity (except vehicle repair and maintenance services, see
Section 98-206(4)(q)). Such land uses often have traffic volumes which exhibit their
highest levels concurrent with peak traffic flows on adjacent roads. Examples of such land
uses include drive-in, drive-up, and drive-through facilities, vehicular fuel stations, all forms
of car washes. If performed in conjunction with a principal land use (for example, a
convenience store, restaurant or bank), in-vehicle sales and service land uses shall be
considered an accessory use (see Section 98-206(8)(g)).
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI}:
a. Clearly marked pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided for each walk-in customer
access to the facility adjacent to the drive-through lane(s).
b. The drive-through facility shall be designed so as to not impede or impair vehicular
and pedestrian traffic movement, or exacerbate the potential for
pedestrian/vehicular conflicts.
c. In no instance shall a drive-through facility be permitted to operate which
endangers the public safety, even if such land use has been permitted under the
provisions of this Section.
d. The setback of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall be a minimum of 10
feet from all street rights-of-way lines, a minimum of 20 feet from all residentiallyzoned
property lines, and shall be a minimum of 5 feet from all other property lines.
The total height of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall not exceed 20
feet as measured to the highest part of the structure.
e. All vehicular areas of the facility shall provide a surface paved with concrete or
bituminous material which is designed to meet the requirements of a minimum 4
ton axle load.
f. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all property
boarders abutting residentially zoned property (Section 98-610).
g. Interior curbs shall be used to separate driving areas from exterior fixtures such as
fuel pumps, vacuums, menu boards, canopy supports and landscaped islands.
Said curbs shall be a minimum of 6 inches high and be of a non-mountable design.
No curb protecting an exterior fixture shall be located closer than 25 feet to all
property lines.
h. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per 50 square feet of gross floor area. Each drive-up
lane shall have a minimum stacking length of 100 feet behind the pass through
window and 40 feet beyond the pass through window.
(h) Indoor Commercial Entertainment
Description: Indoor commercial entertainment land uses include all land uses which
provide entertainment services entirely within an enclosed building. Such activities often
have operating hours which extend significantly later than most other commercial land
uses. Examples of such land uses include restaurants, taverns, theaters, bowling alleys,
arcades, roller rinks, and pool halls.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 106
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations through
Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable
2. Conditional Use Regulations {NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI}:
a. If located on the same side of the building as abutting residentially zoned property,
no customer entrance of any kind shall be permitted within 150 feet, or as far as
possible, of a residentially zoned property.
b. Facility shall provide bufferyard with minimum opacity of .60 along all borders of
the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 98-610).
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per every three patron seats or lockers (whichever is
greater); or one space per three persons at the maximum capacity of the
establishment; (whichever is greater).
(i) Outdoor Commercial Entertainment
Description: Outdoor commercial entertainment land uses include all land uses which
provide entertainment services partially or wholly outside of an enclosed building. Such
activities often have the potential to be associated with nuisances related to noise, lighting,
dust, trash and late operating hours. Outdoor entertainment land uses may include, but
are not limited to, outdoor eating and drinking areas, and outdoor assembly areas.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: {RH, NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI }:
a. Facility shall provide bufferyard with minimum opacity of .60 along all borders of
the property abutting residentially zoned property (Section 98-610).
b. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space for every three patron seats at the maximum capacity
of the establishment.
(Ord. No. 12-07)
(j) Commercial Animal Boarding
Description: Commercial animal boarding facility land uses include land uses which
provide short-term and/or long-term boarding for animals. Examples of these land uses
include commercial kennels and commercial stables. Exercise yards, fields, training areas,
and trails associated with such land uses are considered accessory to such land uses and
do not require separate consideration. Animal boarding facilities and activities which,
except for parking are completely and continuously contained indoors, are subject to a
separate set of regulations (see 4., below.).
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH, PB, GB, PI, GI, PBP}:
a. All activities, except vehicle parking, shall be completely and continuously
contained indoors—including animal exercise and display areas.
b. The minimum permitted size of horse or similar animal stall shall be 100 sf.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 107
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
c. Special events such as shows, exhibitions, and contests shall only be permitted
when a temporary use permit has been secured. (See Section 98-906).
d. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
(k) Commercial Indoor Lodging
Description: Commercial indoor lodging facilities include land uses which provide
sleeping accommodations for overnight and/or extended stay housing in individual
rooms or suites of rooms, for consideration to transients. Such land uses may provide
in-room or in-suite kitchens, and may also provide indoor recreational facilities for the
exclusive use of their customers. This land use includes but is not limited to hotels and
motels.
Commercial indoor lodging facilities also include land uses which provide sleeping
accommodations for transients for overnight and/or extended stay housing in distinct
housing units, including single-family, two-flat, twin home, duplex, townhouse, multiplex
and apartment dwelling units, including but not limited to land uses commonly referred to
as “cottages”, “vacation homes”, “tourist homes”, “resort homes”, “fractional ownership
and time share units”.
As opposed to residential land uses, such commercial indoor lodging land uses are
intended and managed to accommodate transients and tourists, and are thus prohibited
from all Residential zoning districts, and from the Neighborhood Office and
Neighborhood Business zoning districts. Such land uses are typically occupied to
provide access to recreational, cultural and business opportunities in the region, and
generally do not serve as the permanent legal residence of the occupants.
Dwelling units which are occupied by a single property owner and guests staying without
consideration for less than a year, and remain unoccupied by any other party for the
remainder of the year, such as many “second homes” are considered residential units,
rather than commercial indoor lodging. This land use does not include Bed and
Breakfast Establishments as regulated in Sec. 98-206 (4)(l).
Restaurant, arcades, fitness centers, and other on-site facilities available to non-lodgers
are not considered accessory uses and therefore require review as a separate land use.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {PO, PB, GB, CB}:
a. If located on the same side of a building as abutting residentially zoned property,
no customer entrance of any kind shall be permitted within 100 feet of a
residentially zoned property.
b. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 98-610).
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 108
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
c. Within the PO District, each and every room must take primary access via an
individual interior door, and may not be accessed via an external balcony, porch or
deck, except for emergency purposes.
d. All vehicles shall have and shall be parked on an improved surface including any
type of recreational vehicle.
e. No outside storage of any recreational accessories such a pool floats, life jackets,
etc.
f. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
g. After approval applicant must apply for City Business License.
h. After approval applicant must apply for and comply with the room tax permit.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per bedroom, plus one space for each employee on
the largest work shift.
(l) Bed and Breakfast Establishment
Description: Bed and breakfast establishments are exclusively indoor lodging facilities
which provide meals only to paying lodgers. Such land uses may provide indoor
recreational facilities for the exclusive use of their customers.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH, CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, TR-6, MR-8, NO, NB,
PB, GB, CB}:
a. All such facilities shall be required to obtain a permit to serve liquor, if applicable.
They shall be inspected annually at a fee as established by a fee separate
ordinance, to verify that the land use continues to meet all applicable regulations.
b. 1 sign, with a maximum area of 20 sf, shall be permitted on the property.
c. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 98-610).
d. No premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast operation unless there are at
least two (2) exists to the outdoors from such premises. Rooms utilized for
sleeping shall have a minimum size of one hundred (100) square feet for two (2)
occupants with an additional thirty (30) square feet for each additional occupant to
a maximum of four (4) occupants per room. Each sleeping room used for the bed
and breakfast operation shall have a separate operational smoke detector alarm,
as required in the Lake Geneva Building Code. One lavatory and bathing facility
shall be required for every 10 occupants, in addition to the owner/occupants
personal facilities.
e. The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast takes place shall be the principal
residence of the operator/owner and said operator/owner shall live on the premises
when the bed and breakfast operation is active.
f. Only the meal of breakfast shall be served to overnight guests.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 109
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
g. Each operator shall keep a list of names of all persons staying at the bed and
breakfast operation. This list shall be kept on file for a period of one year. Such list
shall be available for inspection by City officials at any time.
h. The maximum stay for any occupants of a bed and breakfast operation shall be
fourteen (14) days.
i. It shall be unlawful for any persons to operate a bed and breakfast operation as
defined and as permitted in the Municipal Code of the City of Lake Geneva without
first having obtained a conditional use permit.
j. Application Requirements. Applicant for a license to operate a bed and breakfast
shall submit a floor plan of the single-family dwelling unit illustrating that the
proposed operation will comply with the City Zoning Ordinance as amended, other
applicable City codes and ordinances, and within the terms of this Chapter.
k. Consideration of Issuance. After application duly filed with the Clerk for a license
under this division, Plan Commission review and recommendation for a conditional
use permit, the Council shall hold a public hearing and determine whether any
further license shall be issued based upon the public convenience and necessity of
the people in the City. In the Council’s determination of the number of bed and
breakfast operations required to provide for such public convenience and
necessity, the Council shall consider the effect upon residential neighborhoods of
issuance of additional licenses for public services.
l. Public Nuisance Violations. Bed and breakfast operations shall not be permitted
whenever the operation endangers, or offends, or interferes with the safety or
rights of others so as to constitute a nuisance.
m. Suspension, Revocation and Renewal. Any license issued under the provisions of
this Chapter may be revoked by the City Council for good cause shown after
investigation and opportunity to the holder of such license to be heard in opposition
thereto; in such investigation the compliance or non-compliance with the state law
and local ordinances, the conduct of the licensee in regard to the public, and other
consideration shall be weighed in determination of such issue.
n. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per each bedroom.
(m)Group Day Care Center (Nine or More Children)
Description: Group day care centers are land uses in which qualified persons provide child
care services for nine or more children. Examples of such land uses include day care
centers and nursery schools. Such land uses shall not be located within a residential
building. Such land uses may be operated in conjunction with another principal land use
on the same environs, such as a church, school, business, or civic organization. In such
instances, group day care centers are not considered as accessory uses and therefore
require review as a separate land use.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {TR-6, MR-8, NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI}
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 110
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
a. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .50 along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 98-610).
b. Shall comply with Section 98-905, applicable to all conditional uses.
c. Property owner’s permission is required as part of the conditional use permit
application.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per five students, plus one space for each employee
on the largest work shift.
(n) Campground
Description: Campgrounds include any facilities designed for overnight accommodation of
persons in tents, travel trailers, or other mobile or portable shelters or vehicles.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH}:
a. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .70 along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 98-610).
b. Shall comply with Section 98-905, applicable to all conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One and one-half (1.5) spaces per campsite.
(o) Boarding House
Description: Boarding Homes include any residential use renting rooms which do not
contain private bathroom facilities (with the exception of approved bed and breakfast
facilities).
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {MR-8, NO, NB, GB, and CB}
a. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 98-610).
b. Shall provide a minimum of one on-site parking space for each room for rent.
c. Shall be located in an area of transition from residential land uses to nonresidential
land uses.
d. Shall comply with Section 98-905, applicable to all conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per five students, plus one space for each employee
on the largest work shift.
(p) Sexually-Oriented Land Uses
Description: Sexually-oriented land uses include any facility oriented to the display of
sexually-oriented materials such as videos, movies, slides, photos, books, or magazines;
or actual persons displaying and/or touching sexually specified areas—including the
provision of body piercing or tattooing services below the clavicle. For the purpose of this
Chapter, “sexually-oriented areas” includes any one or more of the following: genitals, anal
area, female areola or nipple; and sexually-oriented material includes any media which
displays sexually specified area(s). Establishments which sell or rent sexually-oriented
materials shall not be considered sexually-oriented if the area devoted to sale of said
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 111
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
materials is less than 5% of the sales area devoted to non-sexually oriented materials and
if such materials are placed in generic covers or otherwise obscured areas. NOTE: The
incorporation of this Subsection into this Chapter is designed to reflect the City Council’s
official finding that sexually-oriented commercial uses have a predominant tendency to
produce certain undesirable secondary effects on the surrounding community, as has
been demonstrated in other, similar jurisdictions. Specifically, the City Council is concerned
with the potential for such uses to limit: the attractiveness of nearby locations for new
development, the ability to attract and/or retain customers, and the ability to market and
sell nearby properties at a level consistent with similar properties not located near such
facilities. It is explicitly not the intent of this Subsection to suppress free expression by
unreasonably limiting alternative avenues of communication, but rather to balance the
need to protect free expression opportunities with the need to implement the City’s
Comprehensive Master Plan and protect the character and integrity of its commercial and
residential neighborhoods.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {HI}:
a. Shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any agriculturally zoned property or
residentially zoned property; and shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from
any school, church, or outdoor recreational facility.
b. Exterior building appearance and signage shall be designed to ensure that use
does not detract from the ability of businesses in the vicinity to attract customers,
nor affect the marketability of properties in the vicinity for sale at their assessed
values.
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, applicable to all conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per 300 sq ft of gross floor area, or one space per
person at the maximum capacity of the establishment (whichever is greater).
(q) Vehicle Repair and Maintenance Service
Description: Vehicle repair and maintenance services include all land uses which perform
maintenance services (including repair) to motorized vehicles and contain all operations
(except vehicle storage) entirely within an enclosed building.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {PB, GB, GI, HI}:
a. Storage of abandoned vehicles is prohibited.
b. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all property
boarders abutting residentially zoned property (Section 98-610).
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, applicable to all conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Adequate onsite
parking is required for all customer and employee vehicles.
(r) Intensive Outdoor Recreation
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 112
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
Description: Land uses, located on public or private property, that require intensive lighting and
generate regional traffic and noise beyond property lines. Intensive Outdoor Recreation uses
may include, but are not limited to, amusement parks, water parks, fair grounds, outdoor
stadiums, drive-in theaters, outdoor commercial swimming pools, driving ranges, miniature
golf facilities, go-cart tracks, racetracks, and tournament –oriented athletic facilities.
1. Permitted by right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: {RH and PB}
a. A bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.0 shall be provided along all property
abutting residentially zoned property and for any facility requiring night lighting.
b. Facilities serving a regional or community-wide function shall provide an off-street
passenger loading area if the majority of the users will be children.
c. A minimum of 100 feet setback shall be required to any activity area other than
parking.
3. Parking Requirements: A minimum of one space per every four expected patrons at
maximum capacity shall be provided.
(Ord. No. 12-07)
(s) Physical Activity Studio
Description: Physical activity studio land uses include all land uses which provide a facility for
training, instruction, and physical activity within an enclosed building. Such activities often
have operating hours which extend significantly earlier or later than most other commercial
land uses, and often employ amplified music to set training tempo. Examples of such uses
include health or fitness centers, all forms of training studios (yoga, dance, art, martial arts,
gymnastics, etc.), and music schools.
1. Permitted by right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: {NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, PBP}
a. If located on the same side of the building as abutting residentially zoned property,
no customer extrance of any kind shall be permitted within 150 feet, or as far as
possible, of a residentially zoned property.
b. Facility shall provide bufferyard with minimum opacity of .60 along all borders of
the property abutting residentially zoned property if outdoor physical activity takes
place (see Section 98-610).
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procesdures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per every three persons at the maximum capacity of the
establishment.
(t) Personal or Professional Service involving tattoos and permanent cosmetics above the
clavicle.
Description: Personal service and professional service land uses for the placement of
tattoos, permanent make-up or cosmetics on parts of the human body above the clavicle.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 113
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
1. Permitted by Right: Not Applicable
2. Conditional Use Regulations: {NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, HI}
a. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
(5) Storage or Disposal Land Uses
(a) Indoor Storage or Wholesaling (Ord. No. 01-19 2/12/01)
Description: Indoor storage and wholesaling land uses are primarily oriented to the
receiving, holding, and shipping of packaged materials for a single business or a single
group of businesses. With the exception of loading and parking facilities, such land uses
are contained entirely within an enclosed building. Examples of this land use include
conventional warehouse facilities, long-term indoor storage facilities, and joint warehouse
and storage facilities. Retail outlets associated with this use shall be considered accessory
uses per Subsection 98-206(8)(h), below.
1. Permitted by Right {PI, GI, HI}
2. Conditional Use Regulations: {PB, GB}.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per 2,000 sf of gross floor area.
(b) Outdoor Storage or Wholesaling
Description: Outdoor storage and wholesaling land uses are primarily oriented to the
receiving, holding, and shipping of packaged materials for a single business or a single
group of businesses. Such a land use, in which any activity beyond loading and parking is
located outdoors, is considered an outdoor storage and wholesaling land use. Examples
of this land use include contractor’s storage yards, equipment yards, lumber yards, coal
yards, landscaping materials yard, construction materials yards, and shipping materials
yards. Such land uses do not include the storage of inoperative vehicles or equipment, or
other materials typically associated with a junkyard or salvage yard (See Subsection (4),
below.)
1. Permitted by Right {HI}:
a. All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any permitted
combination of buildings, structures, walls and fencing. Such walls and fencing
shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height and shall be designed to completely screen
all stored materials from view from non-industrialized areas at an elevation of 5
feet above the grade of all adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Said walls or
fencing shall be screened from residentially zoned property by a bufferyard with a
minimum opacity of .80.
b. The storage of items shall not be permitted in permanently protected green space
areas (see Section 98-608).
c. The storage of items shall not be permitted in required frontage landscaping or
bufferyard areas.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 114
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
d. In no event shall the storage of items reduce or inhibit the use or number of
parking stalls provided on the property below the requirement established by the
provisions of Section 98-704. If the number of provided parking stalls on the
property is already less than the requirement, such storage areas shall not further
reduce the number of parking stalls already present.
e. Storage areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or circulation area by
a minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly delimited by a physical
separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of planters, or by a clearly
marked paved area.
f. Materials being stored shall not interfere in any manner with either on- or off-site
traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and traffic/pedestrian conflicts.
g. Inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored in a junkyard or
salvage yard, shall not be stored under the provisions of this land use.
h. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 98-610).
i. All outdoor storage areas shall be located no closer to a residentially zoned
property than the required minimum setback for buildings on the subject property.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {GI}:
a. Shall comply with all regulations for permitted uses in 1., above.
b. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space for every 10,000 square feet of gross storage area,
plus one space per each employee on the largest work shift.
(c) Personal Storage Facility
Description: Personal storage facilities are land uses oriented to the indoor storage of
items entirely within partitioned buildings having an individual access to each partitioned
area. Such storage areas may be available on either a condominium or rental basis. Also
known as “mini-warehouses”.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {GB, PI, GI}:
a. Facility shall be designed so as to minimize adverse visual impacts on nearby
developments. The color, exterior materials, and orientation of proposed buildings
and structures shall complement surrounding development.
b. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .80 along property
boarders abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 98-610).
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
d. No electrical power shall be ran to the storage facilities, except for exterior lighting.
3. Parking Regulations: One space for each employee on the largest work shift.
(d) Junkyard or Salvage Yard
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 115
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
Description: Junkyard or salvage yard facilities are any land or structure used for a
salvaging operation including but not limited to: the above-ground, outdoor storage and/or
sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, and any other discarded materials intended for
sale or recycling; and/or the collection, dismantlement, storage, or salvage of 2 or more
unlicensed and/or inoperative vehicles. Recycling facilities involving on-site outdoor
storage of salvage materials are included in this land use.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH and HI}:
a. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 98-610).
b. All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and other activity areas shall be
located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
c. In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required frontage landscaping
or bufferyard areas.
d. Shall not involve the storage, handling or collection of hazardous materials,
including any of the materials listed in Section 98-719.
e. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and regulations applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space for every 20,000 square feet of gross storage area,
plus one space for each employee on the largest work shift.
(e) Waste Disposal Facility
Description: Waste disposal facilities are any areas used for the disposal of solid wastes
including those defined by Wisconsin Statutes 144.01(15), but not including composting
operations (see Subsection (f), below).
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH and HI}:
a. Shall comply with all County, State and Federal regulations.
b. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders
of the property (see Section 98-610).
c. All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a minimum of 300 feet
from all lot lines.
d. Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage or disposal of hazardous
materials (as defined by Section 98-719) in any manner.
e. Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans, which shall include
at minimum, detailed grading and revegetation plans, and a detailed written
statement indicating the timetable for such restoration. A surety bond, in an amount
equivalent to 110% of the costs determined to be associated with said restoration
(as determined by a third party selected by the City), shall be filed with the City by
the Petitioner (subject to approval by the City Administrator), and shall be held by
the City for the purpose of ensuring that the site is restored to its proposed
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 116
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
condition. (The requirement for said surety is waived for waste disposal facilities
owned by public agencies).
f. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
State Law Reference: Section 144, Subchapter IV, Wisconsin Statutes.
3. Parking Regulations: One space for each employee on the largest work shift.
(f) Composting Operation
Description: Composting operations are any land use devoted to the collection, storage,
processing and or disposal of vegetation.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH and HI}:
a. Shall comply with all County, State and Federal regulations.
b. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders
of the property occupied by non-agricultural land uses (see Section 98-610).
c. All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet
from all lot lines.
d. No food scraps or other vermin-attracting materials shall be processed, stored or
disposed of on-site.
e. Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage or disposal of hazardous
wastes as defined by State Statutes in any manner.
f. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space for each employee on the largest work shift.
(6) Transportation Land Uses
(a) Off-Site Parking Lot
Description: Off-site parking lots are any areas used for the temporary parking of vehicles
which are fully registered, licensed and operative. See also Section 98-704 for additional
parking regulations.
1. Permitted Use Regulations {GB, CB, GI, HI}:
a. Access to an off-site parking lot shall only be permitted to a collector or arterial
street.
b. Access and vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to discourage cut-through
traffic.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
3. Parking Regulations: No requirement.
(b) Airport/Heliport
Description: Airports and heliports are transportation facilities providing takeoff, landing,
servicing, storage and other services to any type of air transportation. The operation of any
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 117
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
type of air vehicle (including ultralight aircraft, hang gliders, parasails, and related
equipment, but excepting model aircraft) within the jurisdiction of this Chapter shall occur
only in conjunction with an approved airport or heliport.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH, PO, PI, GI, HI}:
a. All buildings, structures, outdoor airplane or helicopter storage areas, and any
other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
b. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders
of the property not otherwise completely screened from activity areas by buildings
or structures (see Section 98-610).
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per each employee on the largest work shift, plus one
space per every 5 passengers based on average daily ridership.
(c) Freight Terminal
Description: Freight terminals are defined as land and buildings representing either end of
one or more truck carrier line(s) which may have some or all of the following facilities:
yards, docks, management offices, storage sheds, buildings and/or outdoor storage areas,
freight stations, and truck maintenance and repair facilities, principally serving several or
many businesses and always requiring trans-shipment.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {GI and HI}:
a. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 98-610).
b. All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other activity areas shall
be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines abutting residentially zoned
property.
c. In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required frontage landscaping
or bufferyard areas.
d. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per each employee on the largest work shift.
(d) Distribution Center
Description: Distribution centers are facilities oriented to the short-term indoor storage and
possible repackaging and reshipment of materials involving the activities and products of a
single user. Retail outlets associated with this use shall be considered accessory uses per
Subsection 98-206(8)(m), below.
1. Permitted by Right {GI, HI}.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {PI}:
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 118
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
a. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Section (98-610).
b. All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other activity areas shall
be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines abutting residentially zoned
property.
c. In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required frontage landscaping
or bufferyard areas.
d. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per each employee on the largest work shift.
(7) Industrial Land Uses
(a) Light Industrial Land Use
Description: Light industrial land uses are industrial facilities at which all operations (with
the exception of loading operations): 1) are conducted entirely within an enclosed building;
2) are not potentially associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and
radiation which are detectable at the property line; 3) do not pose a significant safety
hazard (such as danger of explosion); and 4) comply with all of the performance standards
listed for potential nuisances in Article VII. Light industrial land uses may conduct retail
sales activity as an accessory use provided that the requirements of Subsection (8)(h),
below, are complied with.
1. Permitted by Right {PI, GI, HI}:
a. All activities, except loading and unloading, shall be conducted entirely within the
confines of a building.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per each employee on the largest work shift.
(b) Heavy Industrial Land Use
Description: Heavy industrial land uses are industrial facilities which do not comply with 1
or more of the following criteria: 1) are conducted entirely within an enclosed building; 2)
are not potentially associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and
radiation which are detectable at the property line; and 3) do not pose a significant safety
hazard (such as danger of explosion). More specifically, heavy industrial land uses are
industrial land uses which may be wholly or partially located outside of an enclosed
building; may have the potential to create certain nuisances which are detectable at the
property line; and may involve materials which pose a significant safety hazard. However,
in no instance shall a heavy industrial land use exceed the performance standards listed in
Article VII. Examples of heavy industrial land uses include meat product producers;
alcoholic beverage producers; paper, pulp or paperboard producers; chemical and allied
product producers (except drug producers) including poison or fertilizer producers;
petroleum and coal product producers; asphalt, concrete or cement producers; tanneries;
stone, clay or glass product producers; primary metal producers; electrical industrial
apparatus producers; transportation vehicle producers; commercial sanitary sewage
treatment plants; railroad switching yards; and recycling facilities not involving the on-site
storage of salvage materials.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 119
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
1. Permitted by Right: {HI}:
a. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders
of the property abutting properties which are not zoned Heavy Industrial (see
Section 98-610).
b. All outdoor activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from residentially
zoned property. No materials shall be stacked or otherwise stored so as to be
visible over bufferyard screening elements.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per each employee on the largest work shift.
(c) Communication Tower
Description: Communication towers include all free-standing broadcasting, receiving, or
relay structures, and similar principal land uses; and any office, studio or other land uses
directly related to the function of the tower.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Requirements {RH, PI, GI, HI}:
a. Tower shall be located so that there is sufficient radius of clear land around the
tower so that its collapse shall be completely contained on the property.
b. The installation and continued maintenance of a bufferyard with a minimum opacity
of .80 along property borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 98-
610).
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations:
(d) Extraction Use
Description: Extraction uses include land uses involving the removal of soil, clay, sand,
gravel, rock, minerals, peat, or other material in excess of that required for approve on-site
development or agricultural activities.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use {RH}:
a. Shall receive approval from Walworth County prior to action by the City of Lake
Geneva, and shall comply with all County, State and Federal regulations.
b. Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders
of the property (see Section 98-610).
c. All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a minimum of 300 feet
from all lot lines.
d. Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans, which shall include
at minimum, detailed grading and revegetation plans, and a detailed written
statement indicating the timetable for such restoration. A surety bond, an amount
equivalent to 110% of the costs determined to be associated with said restoration
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 120
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
(as determined by a third party selected by the City), shall be filed with the City by
the Petitioner (subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator), and shall be held
by the City for the purposes of ensuring that the site is restored to its proposed
condition (The requirement for said surety is waived for publicly-owned waste
disposal facilities.)
e. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
3. Parking Regulations: One space per each employee on the largest work shift.
(8) Accessory Land Uses
Accessory uses are land uses which are incidental to the principal activity conducted on the
subject property. Only those accessory uses listed in Table 98-203 shall be permitted within
the jurisdiction of this Chapter. With the exception of a commercial apartment (see (a), below),
or a farm residence (see (b), below), in no instance shall an accessory use, cellar, basement,
tent or recreational trailer be used as a residence. With the exception of farm buildings,
accessory buildings located within a residential district shall be constructed or finished in a
complimentary architectural style and with complimentary materials to the principal residential
buildings in the neighborhood. Accessory uses shall not be located between a principal
building and a street frontage on the same lot, nor within any required front yard or street side
yard, except when there is a shoreyard. In instances where there is a shoreyard, shoreyards
shall be treated as front yards and street yards as rear yards, whereby accessory structures
may be located between a principal building and a street frontage on the same lot.
(a) Commercial Apartment
Description: Commercial apartments are dwelling units which are located above the
ground floor of a building used for commercial land use (as designated in Subsection (4),
above)—most typically an office or retail establishment. The primary advantage of
commercial apartments is that they are able to share required parking spaces with
nonresidential uses.
1. Permitted by Right: NOT APPLICABLE (Ord. No, 00-12 09/25/00).
2. Conditional Use Regulations {CB, NB, PB, GB}: (Ord. No. 00-12 09/25/00)
a. The gross floor area devoted to commercial apartments shall be counted toward
the floor area of a nonresidential development.
b. A minimum of 1 off-street parking space shall be provided for each bedroom within
a commercial apartment. Parking spaces provided by nonresidential land uses on
the site may be counted for this requirement with the approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
c. Apartment units located on the ground floor or lower shall be required to
demonstrate the provision of features to ensure safety and privacy to residents,
particularly in relation to areas of high pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
d. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
(b) Farm Residence
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 121
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
Description: A farm residence is a single-family detached dwelling unit located on the
same property as any of the principal agricultural land uses listed in Subsection (2), above.
1. Permitted by Right {All Districts}
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
(c) Detached Residential Garage, Carport, Utility Shed, Play Structure, or Lawn
Ornament
Description: A private residential garage, carport or utility shed is a structure which
primarily accommodates the sheltered parking of a passenger vehicle and/or the storage
of residential maintenance equipment of the subject property. Walks, drives, paved
terraces and purely decorative garden accessories such as pools, fountains, statuary, sun
dials, flag poles, etc., shall be permitted in setback areas but not closer than three (3) feet
to an abutting property line other than a street line. For the purposes of this section,
children’s play structures including play houses or elevated play structures and climbing
gyms, shall be considered accessory structures and shall comply with the requirements of
this Section whether such play structures are placed on a foundation or not. Swing sets,
slides, and sandboxes are not considered children’s play structures for purposes of this
Section. A building permit is not required for construction of a play structure. Play
structures shall not be used for storage or be constructed out of materials that would
constitute a nuisance. It may be located on the same lot as a residential unit or units, or on
a separate lot in conjunction with a residential land use. See Section 98-408 for
requirements applicable to legal, nonconforming garages. Garages, carports and utility
sheds in excess of 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, or which exceed 30% coverage
of the rear yard area, or which exceed the lot coverage of the principal structure, are not
permitted in residential districts except as conditional uses in the RH, CR-5ac, and ER-1
Districts (Also see Section 98-206(8).).
1. Permitted by Right {All Districts, if under 1,000 sq. ft.}
a. One (1) attached or detached garage.
b. A total of three (3) accessory structures
2. Conditional Use Regulations:
a. In excess of 1,000 sq, feet for the combination of all accessory structures and
for more than three accessory structures.
b. Second garage structures on a parcel.
(d) Company Cafeteria
Description: A company cafeteria is a food service operation which provides food only to
company employees and their guests, which meets State food service requirements, and
is located on the same property as a principal land use engaged in an operation other than
food service.
1. Permitted by Right {NO, PO, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI, HI}
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
(e) Company Provided On-Site Recreation
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 122
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
Description: A company provided on-site recreational facility is any active or passive
recreational facility located on the same site as a principal land use, and which is reserved
solely for the use of company employees and their guests. Facilities using activity night
lighting shall be a conditional use.
1. Permitted by Right {NO, PO, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI, HI}
a. All structures and actively used outdoor areas shall be located a minimum of 50
feet from any residentially zoned property.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {NO, PO, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI, HI}:
a. Outdoor recreational facilities using night lighting and adjoining a residentially
zoned property shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 (see Section 98-610). Said bufferyard shall be located at the
property line adjacent to said residentially zoned property.
b. All structures and actively used outdoor areas shall be located a minimum of 50
feet from any residentially zoned property.
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, procedures applicable to all conditional uses.
(f) Outdoor Display Incidental to Indoor Sales and Services (more than 12 days)
Description: See Subsection 98-206(4)(d).
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH, PB, GB}:
a. Shall comply with all conditions of Subsection (4)(d), above.
b. Display area shall not exceed 25% of gross floor area of principal building on the
site.
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
(g) In-Vehicle Sales and Services Incidental to On-Site Principal Land Use
Description: See Subsection 98-206(4)(g), above.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB}:
a. Shall comply with all conditions of Subsection (4)(g), above.
b. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
(h) Indoor Sales Incidental to Storage or Light Industrial Land Use
Description: These land uses include any retail sales activity conducted exclusively
indoors which is incidental to a principal land use such as warehousing, wholesaling, or
any light industrial land use, on the same site.
1. Permitted by Right {PI, GI, HI}:
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 123
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
a. Adequate parking, per the requirements of Section 98-704, shall be provided for
customers. Said parking shall be in addition to that required for customary light
industrial uses.
b. The total area devoted to sales activity shall not exceed 25% of the total area of
the buildings on the property except that the total area devoted to sales activity
shall not exceed 75% of the total area of the buildings for Artisan Studio uses, such
as, ceramics, jewelry, glass, sculpture and other studio uses. (Ord. No. 00-2
2/14/00)
c. Shall provide restroom facilities directly accessible from retail sales area.
d. Retail sales area shall be physically separated by a wall from other activity areas.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
(i) Light Industrial Activities Incidental to Indoor Sales or Service Land Use (Ord. No.
01-18 2/12/00)
Description: These land uses include any light industrial activity conducted exclusively
indoors which is incidental to a principal land use such as indoor sales or service, on the
same site.
1. Permitted by Right: {PB, GB}
a. Indoor storage up to 50% of the Floor Area Ratio (FAR) will be permitted if located
in the same building as the principal use.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {PB, NB, GB, CB}:
a. The total area devoted to light industrial activity shall not exceed 15% of the total
area of the buildings on the property, or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less.
However, artisan studio activities for such products as pottery, stained glass,
jewelry, custom fabrics, weaving, needlecrafts, painting, sculpture, custom
woodworking, basketry, metalwork, candle making, leather working, soap making
and limited production activities (as determined by the Plan Condition) may exceed
these limits by consideration and approval through the conditional use process.
b. Production area shall be physically separated by a wall from other activity areas
and shall be soundproofed to the level required by Section 98-709 for all adjacent
properties.
c. Indoor storage in a separate building or indoor storage greater than 50% of the
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) located in the same building as the principal use will require
a conditional use permit.
d. Shall comply with Section 98-905, procedures applicable to all conditional uses.
(j) Home Occupation
Description: It is the intent of this Section to provide a means to accommodate a small
home-based family or professional business without the necessity of rezoning from a
residential to a commercial district. Approval of an expansion of a home occupation at a
future time beyond the limitations of this Section is not to be anticipated; relocation of the
business to an area that is appropriately zoned may be necessary. Home occupations are
economic activities performed within any single-family detached residence which comply
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 124
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
with the following requirements. Examples include personal and professional services, and
handicrafts, which comply with all of the following requirements:
1. Permitted by Right: {All Districts}
a. The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed area of the
dwelling unit or an attached garage.
b. There shall be no exterior alterations which change the character thereof as a
dwelling and/or exterior evidence of the home occupation other than those signs
permitted in the district.
c. No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment related to the
operation of the home occupation shall be visible outside any structures located on
the premises.
d. No home occupation use shall create smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire
hazard, small electrical interference or any other nuisance not normally associated
with the average residential use in the district.
e. Only one (1) sign may be used to indicate the type of occupation or business. Such
sign shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed three (3) square feet.
f. The use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for more than occasional
delivery of materials to and from the premises.
g. A permitted home occupation is restricted to a service-oriented business
prohibiting the manufacturing of items or products or the sale of items or products
on the premises. Examples of service-oriented business are, but are not limited to,
computer programming, accounting, insurance agency and computer-based
consulting and clerical services.
h. A permitted home occupation shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of
the floor area of the dwelling.
i. Persons employed by a permitted home occupation shall be limited to the resident
family members and no more than one non-resident employee.
j. Under no circumstances shall a vehicle repair or body work business qualify as a
home occupation.
2. Conditional Use Regulations:
a. The Plan Commission may approve home occupations in residential districts which
do not meet the standards in subsection 1., above, as conditional uses. The
standards in Section 98-905 shall be applicable.
b. The types and numbers of equipment or machinery used on the conditional use
site may be restricted by the Plan Commission.
c. Sale or transfer of the property or expansion of the home occupation shall cause
the Conditional Use Permit to be null and void.
(k) Family Day Care Home (Four to Eight Children)
Description: Family day care homes are occupied residences in which a qualified person
or persons provide child care for 4 to 8 children. The care of less than 4 children is not
subject to the regulations of this Chapter.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 125
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
1. Permitted by Right: {RH, CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, TR-6, MR-8}
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
State Law Reference: Section 66.304(b)(2), Wisconsin Statutes
(l) Intermediate Day Care Home (Nine to Fifteen Children)
Description: Intermediate day care homes are occupied residences in which a qualified
person or persons provide child care for 9 to 15 children.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: {RH, CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, TR-6, MR-8}
State Law Reference: Section 66.304(b)(2), Wisconsin Statutes
(m)Migrant Labor Camp
Migrant labor camps include any facility subject to the regulation of Wisconsin Statutes
103.90.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH and HI}:
a. Shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all
property lines adjacent to all properties in residential, office or commercial zoning
districts (see Section 98-610).
b. Migrant labor camp shall be an accessory use to an active principal use, under the
same ownership, which is associated within the City of Lake Geneva.
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
(n) On-Site Parking Lot
Description: On-site parking lots are any areas located on the same site as the principal
land use which are used for the temporary parking of vehicles which are fully registered,
licensed and operative. Refer also to Section 98-704.
1. Permitted by Right: {All Districts}
a. Access to an off-site parking lot shall only be permitted to a collector or arterial
street.
b. Access and vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to discourage cut-through
traffic.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
(o) Private Residential Recreational Facility
Description: This land use includes all active outdoor recreational facilities located on a
private residential lot which are not otherwise listed in Table 93-203. Materials and lighting
shall limit light levels at said property line are to be equal to or less than 0.5 foot candles
(see Section 98-707). All private residential recreation facilities and their attendant
structures shall comply with the bulk requirements for accessory structures (See Article
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 126
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
IV.) Common examples of these accessory uses include swing sets, tree houses,
basketball courts, tennis courts, swimming pools, and recreational-type equipment.
1. Permitted by Right: (All Districts)
a. Access to an off-site parking lot shall only be permitted to a collector or arterial
street.
b. Access and vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to discourage cut-through
traffic.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
(p) Private Residential Kennel
Description: A maximum of any combination of 3 dogs and/or cats (over 6 months of age)
are permitted by right for any 1 residential unit. Any residence housing a number of dogs
and/or cats exceeding this number shall be considered a private residential kennel. Such a
kennel (dogs only) shall require licensing by the City of Lake Geneva. In addition to those
requirements, a private residential kennel shall meet the following requirements:
1. Permitted by Right: {All Districts for any combination of 3 (or fewer) dogs and/or cats
over 6 months of age}.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH}
a. For any number over three animals, a maximum of one additional animal per 5
acres shall be permitted.
b. Outdoor containments for animals shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any
residentially zoned property and shall be screened from adjacent properties.
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, procedures applicable to all conditional uses.
(q) Private Residential Stable
Description: A private residential stable is a structure facilitating the keeping of horses (or
similar animals) on the same site as a residential dwelling.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH}:
a. A minimum lot area 175,000 square feet (4 acres) is required for a private
residential stable.
b. A maximum of one horse per five acres of fully enclosed, by fencing and/or
structures, area is permitted.
c. Outdoor containments for animals shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
d. The requirements of Subsection 98-206(4)(k) shall also apply to private residential
stables.
e. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
(r) Drainage Structure
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 127
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
Description: These include all improvements including, but not limited to swales, ditches,
culverts, drains, tiles, gutters, levees, basins, detention or retention facilities,
impoundments, and dams intended to effect the direction, rate and/or volume of
stormwater runoff, snow melt, and/or channelized flows across, within and/or away from a
site.
1. Permitted by Right {All Districts}:
a. Shall comply with Section 98-206(10) for the placement of drainage structures in
permanently protected green space areas.
b. Shall comply with Section 98-206(10) regarding protection measures for
drainageways.
c. Any drainage improvement shall not increase the rate or volume of discharge from
the subject property onto any adjacent properties, except where regional
stormwater management facilities such as storm sewers and retention or detention
facilities are in place to serve the subject property.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
(s) Filling
Description: Filling includes any activity in an area over 4,000 square feet or greater than
500 cubic yards of fill, involving the modification of the earth’s surface above that in its
undisturbed state.
1. Permitted by Right: {All Districts}:
a. Shall comply with Section 98-204 regarding filling activities in permanently
protected green space areas.
b. Shall comply with Article V regarding protection measures for natural resources.
c. Shall not create drainage onto other properties.
d. Shall not impede on-site drainage
e. Shall comply with provisions of the Subdivision and Platting Ordinance.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
(t) Lawn Care
Description: Lawn care includes any activity involving the preparation of the ground,
installation and maintenance of vegetative ground cover (including gardens) which
complies with the City of Lake Geneva Code of Ordinances. Lawn care is not permitted in
certain permanently protected green space areas, see Section 98-509.
1. Permitted by Right {All Districts}
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
(u) Individual Septic Disposal System
Description: This land use includes any State-enabled, County-approved septic disposal
system.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 128
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
2. Conditional Use Regulations {RH, CR-5ac, ER-1}
a. Minimum lot size of 0.5 acres.
b. Shall comply with Article V regarding protection measures for natural resources.
c. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures applicable to all
conditional uses.
(v) Exterior Communication Devices (e.g. satellite dishes, ham radio towers, t.v.
antennas)
Description: This land use includes any antennas use for communication reception.
1. Permitted by Right: {All Districts}
a. Except for television antennas and satellite dishes which are 18” or smaller,
exterior communication devises shall not be visible from a public street.
b. Devises must be sited an equal or greater number of fee from any property lines as
their maximum height and may not be located in a required street yard.
c. The applicant must demonstrate that all reasonable mechanisms have been used
to mitigate safety hazards and the visual impacts of the device.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable.
(w) Caretakers Residence
Description: This land use includes any residential unit which provides permanent housing
for a caretaker of the subject property in either an attached or detached configuration.
1. Permitted by Right: Not applicable.
2. Conditional Use Regulations: {CR-5ac and ER-1}
a. Shall provide housing only for on-site caretaker and family.
b. Shall comply with Section 98-905, standards and procedures for all conditional
uses.
(9) Temporary Land Uses
(a) General Temporary Outdoor Sales {NB, PB, GB, CB}
Description: Includes the display of any items outside the confines of a building which is
not otherwise permitted as a permitted or conditional use, or a special event otherwise
regulated by the City of Lake Geneva Municipal Code. Examples of this land use include
but are not limited to: seasonal garden shops, tent sales, bratwurst stands, and garage
sales; however, up to two garage sales are exempt from the provisions of this section.
1. Temporary Use Regulations:
a. Display shall be limited to a maximum of 12 days in any calendar year.
b. Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular
site distances.
c. Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in Section 98-807.
d. Adequate parking shall be provided.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 129
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
e. If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, sales and display
activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
f. Shall comply with Section 98-906, standards and procedures applicable to all
temporary uses.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 130
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
(b) Outdoor Assembly {All Districts}
Description: Includes any organized outdoor assembly of more than 100 persons.
1. Temporary Use Regulations:
a. Activities shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular
sight distances.
b. Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in Section 98-807.
c. Adequate parking, drinking water, and toilet facilities shall be provided, and shall
be described in the application.
d. If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, activities shall be
limited to daylight hours.
e. Adequate provisions for crowd control shall be made, and shall be described within
the application.
f. Shall comply with Section 98-906, standards and procedures applicable to all
temporary uses.
(c) Contractor’s Project Office {All Districts}
Description: Includes any structure containing an on-site construction management office
for an active construction project.
1. Temporary Use Regulations:
a. Structure shall not exceed 2,000 square feet in gross floor area.
b. Facility shall be removed within 10 days of issuance of occupancy permit.
c. Shall not be used for sales activity. (See subsection (9)(f), below.)
d. Projects requiring said land use to be in place for more than 365 days shall require
a Conditional Use Permit.
e. Shall comply with Section 98-906, standards and procedures applicable to all
temporary uses.
(d) Contractor’s On-Site Equipment Facility {All Districts}
Description: Includes any structure or outdoor area designed for the on-site storage of
construction equipment and/or materials for an active construction project.
1. Temporary Use Regulations:
a. Facility shall be removed within 10 days of issuance of occupancy permit.
b. Projects requiring said land use to be in place for more than 365 days shall require
a Conditional Use Permit.
c. Shall be limited to a maximum area not exceeding 10% of the property’s Gross
Site Area.
d. Shall comply with Section 98-906, standards and procedures applicable to all
temporary uses.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 131
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
(e) Relocatable Building {NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI, HI}
Description: Includes any manufactured building which serves as a temporary building for
less than 6 months. (Facilities serving more than 6 months shall be considered conditional
uses and subject to the general standards and provisions presented in Section 98-905.)
1. Temporary Use Regulations:
a. Shall conform to all setback regulations.
b. Shall conform to all building code regulations.
c. Shall comply with Section 98-906, standards and procedures applicable to all
temporary uses.
(f) On-Site Real Estate Sales Office {All Districts}
Description: Includes any building which serves as an on-site sales office for a
development project.
1. Temporary Use Regulations:
a. Structure shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in gross floor area.
b. Facility shall be removed or converted to a permitted land use within 10 days of the
completion of sales activity.
c. Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signage in Section 98-
807.
d. Projects requiring said land use to be in place for more than 365 calendar days
shall require a conditional use permit.
e. Shall comply with Section 98-906, standards and procedures applicable to all
temporary uses.
(g) Seasonal Outdoor Sales of Farm Products {RH, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI}
Description: Includes any outdoor display of farm products not otherwise regulated by the
City of Lake Geneva Code of Ordinances.
1. Temporary Use Regulations:
a. Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular
sight distances.
b. Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in Section 98-807.
c. Adequate parking shall be provided.
d. If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, sales and display
activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
e. Shall comply with Section 98-906, standards and procedures applicable to all
temporary uses.
(h) Tents {RH, CR, ER, SR, TR, MR}
Description: Includes any structure or enclosure, consisting of a pliable material,
constructed or erected for the purposes of shelter.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 132
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
1. Tents shall not be erected, used, or maintained for dwelling, lodging, or other purposes,
except as may be used for incidental recreation purposes when erected on the same
lot as a residential dwelling and used only by the residents of the dwelling.
(10)Natural Resource Disruption and Required Mitigation Standards:
For all land uses, disruption to natural resource areas shall comply with the requirements of
the Subsection Ordinance pertaining to drainage, grading and erosion control. All land uses
located within Permanently Protected Green Space Areas shall comply with the following:
(a) Cultivation
1. Permitted as a Conditional Use: {Other permanently protected green space areas}:
a. Permitted only if designated on the submitted site plan, and/or the recorded Plat or
Certified Survey as an “Area which may be used for cultivation”.
(b) Passive Outdoor Public Recreational Area
1. Permitted by Right: {All permanently protected green space areas}:
a. Limited to a 20 foot wide area in permanently protected natural resource areas.
Permitted in other permanently protected green space areas without restriction.
b. Non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into permanently protected
natural resource areas beyond said 20 foot wide area.
(c) Active Outdoor Public Recreational Area
1. Permitted by Right: {Other permanently protected green space areas}:
a. Non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into permanently protected
natural resource areas.
2. Permitted as a Conditional Use: {Floodfringe}
(d) Outdoor Institutional
1. Permitted by Right: {Other permanently protected green space areas}:
a. Non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into permanently protected
natural resource areas.
(e) Lawn Care
1. Permitted by Right: {Other permanently protected green space areas}:
a. Non-native ground cover shall not be permitted to spread into permanently
protected natural resource areas. Clearance of understory growth shall be
permitted.
2. Permitted as a Conditional Use: {All permanently protected natural resource areas
except wetlands}:
a. Only disturbance associated with the care of native vegetation is permitted, with
the exception of a 20 foot wide access path which may be cleared for passive
recreational purposes.
b. Each property abutting a natural resource area shall be limited to one such access
path.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 133
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses through Section 98-206 Commercial Land Uses
c. Non-native vegetation (such as domestic lawn grass) shall not be introduced into
natural resource areas beyond said 20 foot wide access path.
(f) Golf Course
1. Permitted by Right: {Other permanently protected green space areas except
wetlands}:
a. Non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into permanently protected
natural resource areas.
2. Permitted as a Conditional Use: {All permanently protected natural resource areas}:
a. Only disturbance associated with the care of native vegetation is permitted. Natural
resource areas which are located within or adjacent to golf play areas shall be
incorporated into the course design as out-of-bounds play hazards, and shall be
maintained in their natural state.
(g) Any Permitted Temporary Use
1. Permitted by Right: {Other permanently protected green space areas}:
a. Activity shall in no manner encroach upon permanently protected natural
resources areas. Party securing the temporary use permit shall be responsible for
restoring all such natural resource areas to an undamaged state, or shall be
considered in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Section 98-906).
(h) Drainage System
1. Permitted as a Conditional Use: {All permanently protected green space areas}:
a. Structure shall not be deemed necessary by the City Engineer.
b. Natural vegetation shall be restored in disturbed areas.
(i) Filling
1. Permitted as a Conditional Use: {All permanently protected green space areas}:
a. Filling in the floodway shall be done only as required by a necessary road, bridge,
utility, or other infrastructure facility which has been deemed necessary by the
Department of Public Works.
b. Natural vegetation shall be restored in disturbed areas.
c. In no instance shall filling raise the base flood elevation.
(j) Individual Septic Disposal System
1. Permitted as a Conditional Use: {Other permanently protected open space}:
a. Shall not locate closer than 30 feet to any other permanently protected natural
resource area.
(k) Road and/or Bridge
1. Permitted as a Conditional Use: {All permanently protected green space areas}:
a. May locate in or across a natural resources areas only in conjunction with a boat
landing, or when deemed essential by the Department of Public Works.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 134
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-207 Nonconforming Use
Regulations through
Section 98-207 Nonconforming Use
Regulations
b. May locate in other permanently protected green space areas if designed to
provide an essential service to an activity area located within the green space area
which cannot be efficiently reached from another point.
c. Road networks shall be designed to circumvent permanently protected green
space areas, thereby eliminating the need for intrusions and crossings.
(l) Utility Lines and Related Facilities
1. Permitted as a Conditional Use: {All permanently protected green space areas}:
a. May locate in or across a natural resource areas only when deemed essential by
the Department of Public Works.
b. May locate in other permanently protected green space areas if designed to
provide an essential service to an activity area located within the green space area
which cannot be efficiently reached from another point.
c. In general, utility lines shall be designed to circumvent permanently protected
green space areas, thereby eliminating the need for intrusions and crossings.
(m)Piers and Wharfs
1. Permitted as a Conditional Use: {All permanently protected green space areas}:
a. A site plan shall be required per Section 98-908 for construction, erection,
placement or extension of a pier or wharf, with specific information provided
regarding: its location in relation to the shoreline and abutting riparian property
lines, and regarding dimensions and building materials.
b. In the area known as Baker Park, those piers subject to the provisions of the park
dedication and subsequent Resolution, the permitted use of piers or wharves shall
be those uses specified as principal or conditional uses for the zoning district of the
parcel from which the right to the pier or wharf arises. This Zoning Ordinance is not
intended to supersede those rights given to those property owners under the
original Baker Park dedication.
(n) Fences per the requirements of Sec. 98-720
1. Permitted as by Right: Woodland and Steep Slope Districts
2. Permitted as by Conditional Use: All permanently protected green space areas not
specified above.
a. Under no circumstances shall a fence be erected which encumbers in any way the
public access and use of the lake shore path in the Lakeshore Overlay zoning
district.
Section 98-207 Nonconforming Use Regulations
(1) Definition: A nonconforming use is an active and actual use of land or structures, or both;
legally established prior to the effective date of this Chapter or subsequent applicable
amendments thereto which has continued the same use to the present, and which would not
be permitted under the current terms of this Chapter.
(2) Continuance of a Nonconforming Use: Any nonconforming use lawfully existing upon the
effective date of this Chapter may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation
existing upon such date, except as specified in this Section. Any legal use under the previous
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 135
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-208 Group Developments through Section 98-208 Group Developments
Zoning Ordinance which is made nonconforming by this Chapter may apply for a conditional
use permit (per Section 98-905) to be granted legal conforming status. Any legal use under
the previous zoning map which is made nonconforming by a change to the official zoning map
may apply for a zoning map amendment (per Section 98-903) to an appropriate zoning district
to be granted legal conforming use status.
(3) Modification of a Nonconforming Use
(a) Except as permitted in (b), below, a nonconforming use shall not be expanded, or changed
to another nonconforming use; unless such modification would make the nonconforming
use have a more desirable effect in terms of implementing the purpose of this Chapter (as
determined by the Zoning Administrator). If such a modification occurs, said use shall not
be modified back to the original nonconforming use, or to any other nonconforming use
which does not better accomplish the purpose of this Chapter.
(b) A nonconforming nonresidential use which is not served by public sanitary sewer and/or
public water if said facilities are not available within 1,000 feet of the subject property, and
upon the granting of a conditional use permit per the requirements of Section 98-905.
(4) Discontinuance of a Nonconforming Use: When any nonconforming use of any structure or
land is discontinued for a period of 12 months, or is changed into a conforming use, any future
use of said structure or land shall be in complete conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter.
(5) Maintenance of a Nonconforming Use: The normal maintenance of a structure or land
containing or related to a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary repairs and
incidental alterations which do not exacerbate the adverse impacts of the nonconforming use
in relation to the purpose of this Chapter. In no instance shall said repairs exceed over the life
of the structure, 50% of the present equalized assessed value of said structure or property
prior to said repairs.
(6) Reconstruction of Two-family Dwellings in areas formally zoned R-2: A legal, nonconforming
two-family structure which is destroyed by fire, tornado or other disaster may apply
for construction as a conditional use to be reconstructed so as not to expand the floor area nor
footprint of the structure, if said structure is located in an area which was zoned to permit twofamily
dwellings on the day preceding the Effective Date of the Ordinance.
(7) Nonconforming Lots, Structures, and Buildings: See Sections 98-307, 98-408 and 98-
409.
Section 98-208 Group Developments
(1) Definition: A group development is any development containing two (2) or more structures
containing principal land uses (as listed in Table 98-203) on the same lot, and/or any single
structure on a single lot which contains five (5) or more dwelling units or two (2) or more nonresidential
uses. Common examples of group developments include six (6) unit apartment
buildings, apartment complexes, condominium complexes, shopping centers, one building
office structures, one building commercial strip centers, (4 unit apartment buildings, and other
land uses in which each lot contains 4 or fewer dwelling units, are not group developments,
even though such developments may contain parcels under common ownership.) (Ord. No.
98-10 11/9/98)
(2) Regulation of Group Developments: Group developments are permitted as conditional uses
in all zoning districts. Any land use which is permitted within the applicable zoning district(s) is
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 136
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-208 Group Developments through Section 98-208 Group Developments
permitted to locate within a group development. The land use regulations of this Section, as
well as Section 98-206 and all other applicable provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the
group development. The requirements of Section 98-905 shall apply to the review of proposals
for group developments.
(3) Specific Development Standards for Group Developments
(a) All required off-street parking spaces and access drives shall be located entirely within the
boundaries of the group development.
(b) The development shall contain a sufficient number of waste bins to accommodate all trash
and waste generated by the land uses in a convenient manner.
(c) No group development shall take access to a local residential street.
(d) All development located within a group development shall be located so as to comply with
the intent of this Chapter regarding setbacks of structures and buildings from lot lines. As
such, individual principal and accessory structures and buildings located within group
developments shall be situated within building envelopes which serve to demonstrate
complete compliance with said intent. Said building envelopes which serve to demonstrate
complete compliance with said intent. Said building envelopes shall be depicted on the site
plan required for review of group developments. The use of this approach to designing
group developments will also ensure the facilitation of subdividing group developments in
the future, (if such action is so desired).
(4) Discrimination Against Condominium Forms of Ownership: It is not the intent of this
Section, nor any other provision of this Chapter, to discriminate against condominium forms of
ownership in any manner which conflicts with Wisconsin Statutes 703.27. As such, the
provisions of this Section are designed to ensure that condominium forms of ownership are
subject to the same standards and procedures of review and development as other physically
identical forms of development.
ARTICLE II: LAND USE REGULATIONS 137
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-301 Purpose through
Section 98-303 Required Natural
Resources Site Evaluation
ARTICLE III: DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS
Section 98-301 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to indicate the maximum permitted density (for residential projects)
and maximum permitted intensity (for nonresidential projects) of development on any given site
within the jurisdiction of this Chapter (see Section 98-009). The development potential of any site
is determined by a variety of factors, including but not limited to: 1) the area of the site; 2) the
proportion of the site not containing sensitive natural resources; 3) the zoning district(s) in which
the site is located; 4) the development option(s) the site is developed under; and 5) the use(s)
considered for development.
Rationale: This Article regulates the development potential of all property within the jurisdiction of
this Chapter. This Article is designed to ensure the implementation of many goals and objectives
of the City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive Master Plan. (See also, Section 98-005 of this
Chapter.) Many of these are extremely difficult to address using conventional zoning techniques,
particularly those which rely on minimum lot area requirements to establish maximum permitted
residential densities, and maximum floor area ratios to establish the character of nonresidential
developments. Such approaches provide for a minimum flexibility of site design options, which in
turn results in land use inefficiencies, forced site planning, and/or the needless destruction of
sensitive natural resources. The approach employed by this Article, relying on Maximum Gross
Densities (MGDs) and minimum Green Space Ratios (GSRs) for residential development, and
minimum required Landscape Surface Ratios (LSRs) in combination with maximum permitted
Floor Area Ratios (FARs) for nonresidential development, (both in conjunction with a variety of
development options available in every zoning district) results in a very high degree of site design
flexibility and the protection and implementation of desired community character and adopted
community goals.
Section 98-302 How to Use this Article
This Article contains the standards which determine the maximum amount of development
permitted on any given site. Prior to using the provisions of this Article to determine the
development potential of a given property, the guidelines provided by Section 98-306(1) though
(3) should be reviewed. This Article recognizes inherent differences between residential and
nonresidential land uses, and thus regulates their development in slightly different manners. The
description of the process addressing residential development in Section 98-306(1) and (2) refers
to the requirements of Section 98-304, Residential Density Standards. The description of the
process addressing nonresidential development in Section 98-306(1) and (3) refers to the
requirements of Section 98-305, Nonresidential Intensity Standards.
ARTICLE III: DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS 138
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-303 Required Natural
Resources Site Evaluation through
Section 98-303 Required Natural
Resources Site Evaluation
Section 98-303 Required Natural Resources Site Evaluation
(1) Purpose
An important goal of the City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive Master Plan is the protection of
natural resources which are sensitive to disruption caused by development and/or other land
use activities. These resources include: Floodways, Floodplain Areas, Floodfringe,
Shorelands, Wetlands, Drainageways, Lakeshores, Steep Slopes, and Woodlands. (These
resources are fully defined in Article V.) These resources serve important functions which are
lost when these areas are subject to development and/or other land use activities, in the
absence of correct mitigation approaches. In many instances, these functions cannot be
provided by other natural or man-made features. Specific broad categories of such functions
include the protection and enhancement of air, surface water, and soil quality; habitat provision
and diversification; aesthetic diversification; and buffering effects.
(2) Mitigation
In certain instances, natural features can accommodate development and/or other land use
activities without a significant loss of their functional benefits if proper mitigation practices are
employed. (Article V) Natural Resource Protection Regulations, provides detailed standards
regarding permitted mitigation techniques and requirements.
Section 98-303(3) continues with the Natural Resources Site Evaluation Worksheet on the
following page.
ARTICLE III: DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS 139
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-303 Required Natural
Resources Site Evaluation through
Section 98-304 Residential Density
Standards
(2) Natural Resources Site Evaluation Worksheet
(a) Determine the Gross Site Area (GSA) of the Site:
1. Total Site Area as determined by actual on-site survey: ______ acres
2. Subtract area located within proposed rights-of-ways of roads
and within proposed boundaries of public facilities which are
designated within the City’s Comprehensive Master Plan and/or
required for dedication per Subdivision regulations: - ______ acres
3. Subtract land which although part of the same parcel is not
contiguous to, or is not accessible from, the proposed road
network serving the project. - ______ acres
4. Subtract land which is proposed for a different
development option or a different zoning district. - ______ acres
5. Subtract area of navigable waters (lakes & streams). - ______ acres
6. Equals Gross Site Area (GSA) = ______ acres
(b) Determine the Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) of the Site:
1. Portion of Gross Site Area containing Floodways. ______ acres
2. Portion of Gross Site Area containing Floodplain Areas. ______ acres
3. Portion of Gross Site Area containing Floodfringes. ______ acres
4. Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Wetlands. + ______ acres
5. Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Drainageways. + ______ acres
6. Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Lakeshores. + ______ acres
7. Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Woodlands. + ______ acres
8. Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Steep Slopes. + ______ acres
9. Subtract portions of natural resource areas ((b)1.-(b)9.) made
developable using approved environmental mitigation techniques. - ______ acres
6. Equals Required Resource Protection Area (RPA). = ______ acres
(c) Determine the Net Developable Area (NDA) of the Site:
1. Enter Gross Site Area (GSA) {from (a)6., above}. ______ acres
2. Subtract Required Resource Protection Area (RPA)
{from (b)10., above}. - ______ acres
3. Equals Net Developable Area (NDA). = ______ acres
ARTICLE III: DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS 140
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-304 Residential Density
Standards through
Section 98-304 Residential Density Standards
Key to Table 98-304
Zoning District
Regulates the type of uses
permitted on the site. Section
98-105 describes each Zoning
District. Table 98-203 provides
a detailed listing of all uses
permitted in each Zoning
District. Sections 98-205 and
98-206 provide detailed
regulations applying to specific
land uses. Zoning Districts are
depicted on the Official Zoning
Map (see Section 98-103).
Maximum Gross Density
Is the maximum number of
dwelling units permitted on one
acre of Gross Site Area in the
specific Zoning District and
Development Option. Gross
Site Area is calculated in
Section 98-303(3)(a).
Minimum Lot Area
Is the minimum size lot
permitted within the specified
Zoning District and
Development Option. This also
limits the type of dwelling unit
permitted. Specific dwelling
unit regulations are given in
Section 98-034.
Table 98-304: City of Lake Geneva Residential Density Standards
Zoning District
Development
Option
Maximum
Gross
Density
(MGD)
Minimum
Lot Area
(MLA)
Minimum
Zoning
District
Area
Minimum
Landscape
Surface Ratio
(LSR)
Single-family Res-4 Conventional 4.00 9,000 sf 9,000 sf 50%
Two-family Res-6
Conventional 6.00 9,000 sf 9,000 sf 50%
Mobile Home 5.00 9,000 sf 10 acres 50%
Multi-family Res-8
Conventional/
Institutional 8.00
4,500 sf per
du 18,000 sf 50%
Development Option
Describes the maximum level of clustering and the
minimum proportion of permanently protected
green space area permitted on the site. (Refer to
Section 98-206 for a full description of each
development option and specific regulations which
apply to its use.
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio
Is the minimum permitted percentage of the
Gross Site Area (GSA) which must be
preserved as permanently protected
landscaped area. LSR is calculated by
dividing the total landscaped area of a site
by the GSA. GSA is calculated in Section 98-
303(3)(a). “Landscaped area” is defined in
Section 98-034.
ARTICLE III: DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS 141
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
through
Section 98-305 Nonresidential Density
Standards
Table 98-304: City of Lake Geneva Residential Density Standards
Zoning District
Development
Option
Maximum
Gross
Density
(MGD)
Minimum
Lot Area
(MLA)
Minimum
Zoning
District
Area
Minimum
Landscape
Surface Ratio
(LSR)
Rural Holding Conventional .03 35 acres 35 acres 90%
Countryside Residential-5ac
Conventional .20 5 acres 5 acres 80%
Cluster .25 40,000 sf 5 acres 90%
Estate Residential-1 Conventional 1.00 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 60%
Single-family Residential-3 Conventional 3.00 15,000 sf 15,000 sf 50%
Single-family Residential-4 Conventional 4.00 9,000 sf 9,000 sf 50%
Two-family Residential-61
Conventional 6.00 9,000 sf 9,000 sf 50%
Mobile Home 5.00 9,000 sf 10 acres 50%
Multi-family Residential-81,2 Conventional/
Institutional 8.004
4,500 sf per
du 10 acres 50%
Neighborhood Office
Conventional Varies1,2,3 9,000 sf 50%
Institutional Varies5 9,000 sf 50%
Planned Office Institutional Varies5 20,000 sf 40,000 sf 50%
Neighborhood Business
Conventional Varies1,2,3 9,000 sf 50%
Institutional Varies5 9,000 sf 50%
Planned Business Institutional Varies5 20,000 sf 40,000 sf 50%
General Business Institutional Varies5 9,000 sf 18,000 sf 50%
Central Business Institutional Varies5 9,000 sf 9,000 sf 0%
1 For single-family, see Single-family-4 District.
2 For two-family, see Two-family-6 District.
3 For townhouse, multiplex, apartment and institutional residential development, see Multi-family-8 District.
4Up to 10.00 du/acre per the limits of the conditional use permit.
5Up to 50.00 du/acre per the limits of the conditional use permit.
ARTICLE III: DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS 142
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-305 Nonresidential Density
Standards through
Section 98-305 Nonresidential Density
Standards
Section 98-305 Nonresidential Density Standards
Key to Table 98-305
Zoning District
Regulates the type of uses
permitted on the site. Section
98-205 describes each Zoning
District. Table 98-203 provides
a detailed listing of all uses
permitted in each Zoning
District. Sections 98-205 and
98-206 provide detailed
regulations applying to specific
land uses. Zoning Districts are
depicted on the Official Zoning
Map (see Section 98-103).
Maximum Floor Area
Is the maximum permitted ratio
calculated by dividing the total
gross floor area of all buildings
on a site by the Gross Site
Area (GSA). “Gross Floor
Area” is defined in Section 98-
034.
Maximum Building Size
Is the maximum total Gross
Floor Area which a building is
permitted to contain. “Gross
Floor Area” is defined in
Section 98-034.
Zoning District
Max Number
of Floors (F)
Min
Landscape
Surface
Ratio (LSR)
Max Floor
Surface
Ratio (FAR)
Min Lot
Area (MLA)
Max Bldg
Size (MBS)
Neighborhood Business
1 30% .250 9,000 sf 5,000 sf
2 40% .275 9,000 sf 5,000 sf
Planned Business
1 25% .250 20,000 sf Na
2 30% .275 20,000 sf Na
3 33% .300 20,000 sf Na
4 35% .300 20,000 sf Na
Maximum Number of
Floors
Is the maximum number of
full floors a building is
permitted to contain. “Full
floors” is defined in Section
98-034
Minimum Landscape Surface Area
Ratio
Is the minimum permitted percentage of
the Gross Site Area (GSA) which must
be protected landscaped area. LSR is
calculated by dividing the total
landscaped area of a site by the Gross
Site Area (GSA). GSA is calculated in
Section 98-303(3)(a). “Landscaped
area” is defined in Section 98-034.
Minimum Lot Area
Is the minimum size lot
permitted in the specified
Zoning District for a
building with the listed
number of floors.
ARTICLE III: DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS 143
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-306 Detailed Instructions for
Density and Intensity Regulations through
Section 98-306 Detailed Instructions for
Density and Intensity Regulations
Table 98-305: City of Lake Geneva Nonresidential Intensity Standards
Zoning District
Max Number
of Floors (F)
Min
Landscape
Surface
Ratio (LSR)
Max Floor
Surface
Ratio (FAR)
Min Lot
Area (MLA)
Max Bldg
Size (MBS)
Rural Holding** 1 90% .100 40,000 sf* Na
Countryside Residential** 1 80% .100 40,000 sf* Na
Estate Residential** 1 60% .100 40,000 sf* Na
Single-family Res-3** 1 50% .100 40,000 sf* Na
Single-family Res-4** 1 50% .150 40,000 sf* Na
Two-family Res-6**
1 30% .200 40,000 sf* Na
2 40% .220 40,000 sf* Na
Multi-family Res-8**
1 25% .250 40,000 sf* Na
2 30% .275 40,000 sf* Na
Neighborhood Office 1 or 2 40% .250 9,000 sf Na
Planned Office
1 25% .250 20,000 sf Na
2 30% .275 20,000 sf Na
3 33% .290 20,000 sf Na
4 35% .300 20,000 sf Na
Neighborhood Business
1 30% .250 9,000 sf 5,000 sf
2 40% .275 9,000 sf 5,000 sf
Planned Business
1 25% .250 20,000 sf Na
2 30% .275 20,000 sf Na
3 33% .290 20,000 sf Na
4 35% .300 20,000 sf Na
General Business
1 15% .300 9,000 sf Na
2 18% .350 9,000 sf Na
3 22% .375 9,000 sf Na
4 25% .400 9,000 sf Na
Central Business
1 0% 1.000 1,750 sf Na
2 0% 2.000 1,750 sf Na
3 10% 2.500 1,750 sf Na
4 20% 3.000 1,750 sf Na
Planned Industrial
1 25% .500 40,000 sf* Na
2 30% .550 40,000 sf* Na
3 33% .575 40,000 sf* Na
4 35% .600 40,000 sf* Na
General Industrial
1 15% .800 9,000 sf Na
2 18% .900 9,000 sf Na
3 22% .975 9,000 sf Na
4 25% 1.000 9,000 sf Na
Heavy Industrial
1 15% .850 9,000 sf Na
2+ 18% 1.000 9,000 sf Na
* reduction in Lot Area from 40,000 square feet to 20,000 square feet is permitted as a Conditional Use per Section 98-905 with site plan
for end use of the property demonstrating full compliance with all of the requirements of the City Code.
** For permitted non-residential uses in Residential Districts, such as churches and schools.
ARTICLE III: DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS 144
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-306 Detailed Instructions for
Density and Intensity Regulations through
Section 98-306 Detailed Instructions for
Density and Intensity Regulations
Section 98-306 Detailed Instructions for Density and Intensity Regulations
(1) Instructions for Both Residential and Nonresidential Development
(a) Check Planning Recommendations for the Subject Property
1. Check Comprehensive Plan Recommendations: The City’s Comprehensive Plan
should be checked for implications related to the subject property, particularly the Land
Use and Transportation Plan Map. (Copies of the Comprehensive Plan are available
from the City.) From time to time, the Comprehensive Plan may be amended. The
City’s Public Work’s Development should be consulted regarding changes to the
Comprehensive Plan which may effect the subject property or its environs.
2. Check Official Map Recommendations: The City’s Official Map should be checked
for proposed capital facilities and dedication requirements including schools, parks,
stormwater management facilities and street improvements which may effect the
subject property. The Official Map is on display at the City’s Public Works Department.
From time to time the Official Map may be amended. The City’s Public Works
Department should be contacted regarding changes to the Map which may effect the
subject property or its environs.
(b) Check the Zoning of the Subject Property: The potential amount and type of
development any given site may contain is directly related to the zoning district in which
the site is located. The subject property should be identified on the City’s Official Zoning
Map (See Section 98-103), and the current zoning designation should be compared with
the description of that district provided in Section 98-105. The Official Zoning Map is on
display at the City’s Public Work’s Department. From time to time, the Official Zoning Map
may be amended. The Zoning Administrator should be contacted regarding potential
changes in the Official Zoning Map which may effect the subject property or its environs.
(c) Complete a Natural Resources Site Evaluation for the Site: The effect of protected
natural resources on the development potential of the subject property should be
evaluated. All resources listed in Section 98-303, Required Natural Resources Site
Evaluation, should be identified on the subject property, located on a map (or air photo) of
the subject property, and the total area of the property (in acres) covered by those
resources, known as Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) should be determined, as
should the Gross Site Area (GSA) and the Net Developable Area (NDA) of the subject
property. (Section 98-303(3) contains a worksheet to simplify these calculations.) The
Zoning Administrator should be contacted if assistance is desired in completing these
calculations.
(2) Instructions for Only Residential Development (For Steps (a) through (c), see (1), above.)
(a) Determine What Types of Dwelling Units are Permitted: Page 1 of the Table of Land
Uses (Section 98-203) should be checked to determine which types of dwelling units are
permitted within the zoning district for the subject property. (Section 98-034 describes each
dwelling unit types.)
ARTICLE III: DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS 145
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-306 Detailed Instructions for
Density and Intensity Regulations through
Section 98-306 Detailed Instructions for
Density and Intensity Regulations
(b) Identify the Desired Permitted Development Option: Page 1 of the Table of Uses
(Section 98-203) should also be checked to determine which types of development
options are permitted within the zoning district for the subject property. Each development
option is described in detail in Section 98-206(1). The selection of a particular
development option may be related to the preponderance of sensitive natural resource
areas on the site, or may reflect current or projected residential market conditions and the
dwelling unit types they call for. After the desired permitted development option is
identified, Section 98-304: Residential Density Standards, should be referred to for the
selected development option(s) in the zoning district(s).
(c) Check Minimum Site Area Requirement Against the Gross Site Area: The required
Minimum Site Area (MSA), given in Section 98-304 (Residential Density Standards) for the
development option selected in (e), and in the zoning district identified in (b), should be
compared with the Gross Site Area (GSA) required on the subject property as determined
under the Natural Resources Site Evaluation in Step (c), above. If the GSA is les than the
MSA required by the selected development option, then a different development option
must be selected, or additional property should be acquired.
(d) Determine Maximum Gross Density Permitted on the Site: The Maximum Gross
Density (MGD), given in Section 98-304 (Residential Density Standards) for the
development option selected in (e) and the zoning district identified in (b), above, should
be noted; and used in Step (h), below.
(e) Determine the Maximum Number of Units Permitted on the Site: The Maximum Gross
Density (MGD), identified in (g), above, multiplied by the Gross Site Area (GSA) calculated
in Step (c), above, equals the maximum number of dwelling units permitted on the subject
property under the selected development option within the selected zoning district. The
ability to actually develop this number of dwelling units on the subject property is not
guaranteed by the provisions of this Chapter. Inefficient site design, poor property
configuration, and other factors may result in a lower number of units actually fitting on the
site.
(f) Check the Minimum Permitted Lot Area Against Table 98-203: The Minimum Lot Area
(MLA) requirement given in Section 98-304 (Residential Density Standards), is the
smallest size lot permitted within the selected development option within the selected
zoning district. The MLA must equal or be less than the lot size requirement for the type of
dwelling unit proposed for the project in Step (d), above. If the MLA given in Section 98-
203 is larger than the lot size requirement given in Step (d), then a dwelling unit type with a
larger lot size must be selected (in which case, it may be advantageous to repeat Steps
(d) through (i) using a different dwelling unit type and a different development option).
(3) Instructions for Only Nonresidential Development (For Steps (a) through (c), see (1),
above.) Section 98-305 contains a key to assist with the procedure described below.
(a) Determine What Types of Land Uses are Permitted: The Table of Uses (Section 98-
303) should be checked to determine which types of land uses are permitted within the
zoning district present on, or proposed for, the subject property. A complete description of
each land use is presented in Section 98-206.
ARTICLE III: DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS 146
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-307 Nonconforming
Development Regulations through
Section 98-307 Nonconforming
Development Regulations
(b) Check Minimum Lot Area Requirement Against Gross Site Area Present on the
Subject Property: The required Minimum Lot Area (MLA), given in Section 98-305
(Nonresidential Intensity Standards) for the zoning district identified in (b), should be
compared with the Gross Site Area (GSA) required on the subject property as determined
under the Natural Resources Site Evaluation in Step (c), above. If the GSA is less than the
MLA required by the zoning district, then additional property should be acquired. In other
words, the GSA (from (c)) must be greater than or equal to the MLA (from (e)).
(c) Check Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio Required Against the Required Resource
Protection Area Present on the Subject Property: The required Landscape Surface
Ratio (LSR), given in Section 98-305 (Nonresidential Intensity Standards) for the zoning
district identified in (b), should be multiplied by the Gross Site Area (GSA) use in Step (e),
above. The resulting product is the area of the site which must be permanently protected
as green space. This area should be compared with the Required Resource Protection
Area (RPA) required on the subject property as determined under the Natural Resource
Site Evaluation in step (c), above. If the area of the site containing sensitive natural
resources exceeds the area of permanently protected landscape surface required, then
more floors may have to be used in order to approach maximum development potential on
the site. In other words, if the RPA (from (c)) is greater than the LSR, the use of more
floors may permit the development of more floor area on the subject property.
(d) Determine Maximum Floor Area Ratio Permitted on the Site: The Maximum Floor Area
Ratio (FAR) for the zoning district identified in (b), above, should be noted. This number
will be used in Step (h) below.
(e) Determine the Maximum Floor Area Permitted on the Site: The Maximum Floor Area
Ration (FAR), identified in (g), above, multiplied by the Gross Site Area (GSA) calculated
in Step (c), above, equals the maximum square footage of gross floor area permitted on
the subject property within that zoning district. The ability to actually develop this amount
of floor area is not guaranteed by the provisions of this Chapter. Inefficient site design,
poor property configuration, and other factors may result in a smaller amount of area
actually fitting on the site.
(f) Check the Maximum Building Size Requirement (NC District): The Maximum Building
Size (MBS) requirement given in Section 98-305, Nonresidential Intensity Standards, is
the largest size building permitted within the Neighborhood Office and Neighborhood
Business Districts. The MBS must equal or be greater than the building size proposed for
the project in Step (h), above. If the MBS given in Section 98-305 is smaller than the
proposed building size calculated in Step (h) above, then a smaller building must be built,
or the use of additional buildings should be considered.
Rationale: The combinations of Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) and Minimum
Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) requirements within each zoning district are designed to
result in a consistent community character of development within that district. The
Minimum Lot Area (MLA) requirements for each zoning district are used to ensure that a
consistency of neighborhood character within each zoning district is maintained and that
maximum permitted Floor Area Ratios (FARs) are approachable, if not completely
attainable, under efficient site design practices. The Maximum Building Size (MBS)
requirements ensure that development within the Neighborhood Office and Neighborhood
Business Districts retain a neighborhood function and maintains a scale which is
compatible with nearby residential development.
ARTICLE III: DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS 147
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-307 Nonconforming
Development Regulations through
Section 98-307 Nonconforming
Development Regulations
Section 98-307 Nonconforming Development Regulations
A variance for any and all requirements of this Article is hereby automatically granted to all
developments in their configuration existing or as finally approved as of the effective date of this
Chapter. However, after the effective date of this Chapter, such developments shall not be
permitted to enlarge, expand or extend without bringing the enlargement, expansion or extension
into compliance with the provisions of this Article, and unless a variance is granted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals per the requirements of Section 98-910.
Rationale: The “blanket variance” provision of this Section is intended to prevent the creation of
certain nonconforming developments within the jurisdiction of this Chapter. The adoption of the
provisions of this Section ensures that developments approved prior to the adoption of this
Chapter do not encounter difficulty in transferring ownership because they would otherwise be
considered nonconforming.
ARTICLE III: DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS 148
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-401 Purpose through
Section 98-402: Residential Bulk
Standards
ARTICLE IV: BULK REGULATIONS
Section 98-401 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to indicate the requirements for building location and bulk in both
residential and nonresidential developments. The provisions of this Article interact closely with the
provisions of Article III: Density and Intensity Regulations.
Section 98-402: Residential Bulk Standards
(1) All residential lots created under the provisions of this Chapter shall comply with the standards
of this Section. These standards are related to the specific zoning district used. Table 98-203
and Table 98-304 relate each use with each zoning district. Table 98-402 on the following
page presents the standards for residential bulk regulations.
(2) Rules to Distinguish a One-family Dwelling with an In-Family Suite, from a Two-family
Dwelling:
(a) The dwelling unit shall appear as a single-family dwelling. A separate walled garage area
and/or driveway is not permitted;
(b) A separate address is not permitted;
(c) Separate utility connection and/or meters are not permitted;
(d) A physical all-weather connection between the main living area and the in-family suite
must be present. This required connection may not occur through an attic, basement,
garage, porch, or other non-living area. A door may be used to separate the in-family suite
from the rest of the dwelling unit, but may not be locking, except that a locking door may
be used for the bedroom and/or bathroom doors of this in-family suite;
(e) The in-family suite may contain separate kitchen, dining, bathroom, laundry, living,
sleeping and recreation areas, including exterior porches, patios, and/or decks. In addition
to the internal physical connection required above, separate outdoor access and/or
separate access to the garage, may be provided. However, external stairs which serve as
the primary access to the in-family suite are prohibited;
(f) The in-family suite may not be occupied by a non-family member (as defined by the State
of Wisconsin One- and Two-family Dwelling Code);
(g) In-family suites should be considered and regulated as part of a single-family dwelling unit;
(h) When an application is submitted for a building permit to accommodate what is explicitly
listed as, or could possibly serve as, an in-family suite, the building plan shall be marked
as "Not a separate dwelling unit nor apartment," and a signed letter from the applicant
stating agreement with this condition shall be required.
ARTICLE IV: BULK REGULATIONS 149
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-402: Residential Bulk
Standards through
Section 98-403 Nonresidential Bulk
Standards
Table 98-402: Summary of City of Lake Geneva Residential Bulk Standards
Zoning
District
Min1 Lot
Area (sq
ft)
Min
Lot
Width
(ft)
Minimum Setbacks
Min
Dwelling
Separation
(ft)
Max Building
Height (ft)
Front/
Street2
(ft)
Side to Home3 (ft)
Rear
to
Home3
(ft)
Rear/
Side to
accesso
ry bldg4
(ft)
Pavement
(ft)6 Home
Accessory
bldg4
Least
Side
Sum of
Sides
Rural Holding 35 ac 200 35/40 50 100 100 50 5/10 100 35 15
Countryside
Res-58
5 ac 200 35/40 50 100 50 50 5/10 100 35 15
Estate Res-1 40,000 150 25/40 30 60 30 3/5 5/10 60 35 15
Single-family
Res-3
15,000 100 25/40 10 20 30 3/5 5/10 20 35 15
Single-family
Res-4
9,000 75 25/40 6 15 30 3/5 5/10 12 35 15
Two-family
Res-6
9,000 75 25/40 0/610 0/1510 30 3/5 5/10 0/1210 35 15
Multi-family
Res-86
4,500/du
6
1006 25/40 0/106,10 0/206,10,11 30 3/5 5/10 0/206,10 359 15
Neighborhood
Office
9,000 75 25/40 6 15 30 3/5 5/10 12 359 15
Planned
Office7
20,000 100 25/40 10 20 30 3/5 5/10 20 359 15
Neighb Busi. 9,000 75 25/40 6 15 30 3/5 5/10 12 359 15
Planned
Busi.7
20,000 100 25/40 10 20 30 3/5 5/10 20 359 15
General
Business 7
9,000 75 25/40 6 12 30 3/5 5/10 12 359 15
Central
Business7
9,000 75 25/40 6 12 30 3/5 5/10 12 359 15
Planned
Business Park
1 Measured from existing or officially mapped right-of-way line, whichever is farthest from the center line of the street.
2 For street with said right-of-way equal to or greater than 100 feet, 40 feet of setback is required.
3 Additional setbacks may be required along zoning district boundaries. See Section 98-610.
4 Accessory buildings shall be 3 feet from the property line 5 feet from an alley.
5 Minimum of 5 feet from a side or rear yard (or additional per 98-610), minimum of 10 feet from a public street
6 For single-family and two-family homes see Two-family-6 District.
7 Refers to bulk requirements for institutional residential developments in nonresidential zoning districts.
8 For cluster residential development, see bulk regulations for the ER-1 District.
9 Institutional residential buildings in excess of two stories are allowed with a conditional use permit.
10 Zero feet where property line divides attached buildings.
11 20 feet for townhouse on the interior of row, 30 feet for townhouse on the end of row.
ARTICLE IV: BULK REGULATIONS 150
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-403 Nonresidential Bulk
Standards through
Section 98-404 Yard Setback
Adjustments
Section 98-403 Nonresidential Bulk Standards
All nonresidential lots created under the provisions of this Chapter shall comply with the standards
of this Section. These standards are related to the specific zoning district used. Table 98-203 and
Table 98-305 relate each use with each zoning district. The following table, 98-403, presents the
standards for nonresidential bulk regulations.
TABLE 98-403: CITY OF LAKE GENEVA NONRESIDENTIAL BULK STANDARDS
ZONING DISTRICT
??
MIN
LOT
AREA
(sq ft)
MIN
LOT
WIDTH
(ft)
MINIMUM SETBACKS MIN
BLDG
SEPARATION
(ft)
MAX
BLDG
HEIGHT
(ft)
FRONT/
STREET
(ft)
SIDE
FROM REAR
(ft)
SIDE/
REAR
FROM
ACC
(ft)
PAVEMENT
RES (ft)
(ft)
NONRES
(ft)
Rural Holding1 40,0002 100 35/40 50 50 50 50 5/106 100 35
Countryside Res-5ac1 40,0002 100 25/40 30 30 30 3/55 5/106 60 35
Estate Residential-11 40,0002 100 25/40 30 30 30 3/55 5/106 60 35
Single-family Res-31 40,0002 100 25/40 10 10 30 3/55 5/106 20 35
Single-family Res-41 40,0002 100 25/40 6 6 30 3/55 5/106 12 35
Two-family Res-61 40,0002 100 25/40 6 6 30 3/55 5/106 12 35
Multi-family Res-81 40,0002 100 25/40 10 10 30 3/55 5/106 20 35
Neighborhood Office 9,000 75 25/40 6 6 30 3/55 5/106 12 35
Planned Office 20,000 100 25/40 10 0/104 30 3/55 5/106 0/204 45
Neighborhood Business 9,000 75 25/40 6 6 30 3/55 5/106 12 35
Planned Business 20,000 100 25/40 10 0/104 30 3/55 5/106 0/204 45
General Business 9,000 75 25/40 6 0/104 25 3/55 5/106 12, 0/204 35
Central Business 1,750 20 Maximum setback of 0 feet
or block average, except per
Plan Comm. as a
component of site design.
Side yard is 10 feet from
residential.
10 3/55 06 Max = 0
except per
Plan Comm.
45; Min =
20 except
per Plan
Comm.
Planned Industrial 40,0002 2003 25/40 30 15 30 3/55 5/106 30 35
General Industrial 9,000 75 25/40 50 20 30 3/55 5/106 40 35
Heavy Industrial 9,000 100 25/40 50 20 40 3/55 5/106 40 45
Planned Business Park
1Bulk requirements for institutional uses, such as churches and schools, in agricultural and residential districts.
2May be reduced to 20,000 square feet with a conditional use permit.
3May be reduced to 100 feet with a conditional use permit.
4Zero feet where property line divides attached buildings.
5Accessory buildings shall be 3 feet from the property line; 5 feet from an alley.
65 feet from side and rear lot lines, except where modified along district boundary by required bufferyard; see Section 98-610.
10 feet from front or street line.
ARTICLE IV: BULK REGULATIONS 151
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-404 Yard Setback Adjustments through
Section 98-405 Intrusions into Required
Yards
Section 98-404 Yard Setback Adjustments
(1) Front Yard Setback Adjustment
(a) For lots located adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped or existing right-of- way
equal to or exceeding 100 feet, 40 feet of setback is required to address anticipated future
conditions of noise and air quality.
(b) The required front yard setback for any use may be reduced for a principal structure on
any lot where more than 50 percent of the same type of principal structure on the same
block face or street face do not meet the required front yard setback. In such instances,
the required front yard setback for the proposed structure shall be the average of all the
adjoining same type principal structures on said block face or street face.
(c) In order to preserve and maintain the character of established neighborhoods within the
City of Lake Geneva, which are typified by front yard setbacks substantially in excess of
the minimum required front yard setback, the following regulation shall apply. On block
faces with an average front yard setback more than five feet over the minimum required
front yard setback shall be increased to the average of the adjoining same type principal
structures on said block face or street face.
Section 98-405 Intrusions into Required Yards
The minimum setback requirements of Sections 98-402 and 98-403 establish the minimum
required yards for all uses, except those exempted by the provisions of this Section.
(1) No yard shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard less than the
minimum required by this Chapter. If an existing yard is less than the minimum required, it
shall not be reduced further, except where exempted by the provisions of this Section.
(2) No required yard or lot area allocated to satisfy the minimum yard or lot area requirements for
one building or structure shall be used to satisfy the minimum yard or lot area requirement for
another building or structure.
(3) In instances where the required bufferyard width (per Section 98-610) exceeds the minimum
required setback width, the minimum required bufferyard width shall prevail. Absolutely no
intrusions of a building or structure are permitted within the required bufferyard.
(4) Permitted Intrusions Into Required Yards:
The following intrusions by buildings and structures are permitted into the specified required
yards:
(a) Permitted Intrusions Into Required Front or Street Yards:
1. Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, and
gutters for residential buildings; provided they do not extend more than two and
one-half feet into the required yard.
2. Yard lights, ornamental lights, and nameplate signs for residential lots, provided that
they comply with the illumination requirements of section 98-707 and provided they do
not locate closer than five feet from the front or street property line.
3. Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, decks, stoops, or similar appurtenances to
residential buildings which do not extend above the floor level of the adjacent building
entrance; provided they do not locate closer than 20 feet from any street right-of-way.
ARTICLE IV: BULK REGULATIONS 152
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-406 Exceptions to Maximum
Height Regulations through
Section 98-407 Substandard Lot
Regulations
4. Fences on residential or nonresidential lots which do not exceed four feet in height;
provided they do not locate closer than two feet to any street right-of-way. Permitted
fence types shall comply with the provisions of Section 98-720(3).
(b) Permitted Intrusions Into Required Rear or Side Yards:
1. Sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, and gutters for residential
buildings; provided they do not extend more than two and one-half feet into the
required yard.
2. Fences may locate on the property line. Permitted fence types shall comply with the
provisions of Section 98-720.
3. Fire escapes (on residential buildings) which do not extend more than three feet into
the required yard.
(c) Permitted Intrusions Into Required Rear Yards:
1. Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, decks, stoops, or similar appurtenances to
residential buildings which do not extend more than one foot above grade; provided
they do not locate closer than twenty feet to the rear lot line.
(5) All Front Yard and Street Yard Areas:
With the exception of fences, or as provided on lakeshore lots under section 98-409, no
accessory structures shall be permitted within any portion of a front yard or street yard. (Ord.
No. 04-04 1/26/04)
Section 98-406 Exceptions to Maximum Height Regulations
(1) Permitted Exceptions to Maximum Height Regulations
(a) The maximum height regulations listed for residential uses and residential accessory
structures in Section 98-402, and for nonresidential uses and nonresidential accessory
structures in Section 98-403, are the maximum permitted heights for all buildings and
structures, except those exempted by this Section, below.
(b) The following are permitted to exceed the maximum height regulations by 10 feet, within
any district where permitted: church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes which do not
contain useable space, public monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, flag poles,
chimneys, smokestacks, cooling towers, and elevator penthouses. Such uses may exceed
said maximum by more than 10 feet with the approval of a conditional use permit.
(c) Any building or structure not otherwise accounted for by (b), above, may exceed said
maximum height regulations with the granting of a conditional use permit which specifically
states the maximum permitted height of the proposed building or structure.
Section 98-407 Substandard Lot Regulations
(1) Upon and after the effective date of this Chapter, no lot shall be created which does not meet
the Minimum Zoning District Area requirements of Section 98-304 or the Minimum Lot Area
requirements of Section 98-305 or which does not meet the lot dimension requirements of
Sections 98-402 or 98-403.
(2) A lot of record existing upon the effective date of this Chapter in a Residential District (see
Section 98-102), which does not meet the Minimum Zoning District Area of Section 98-304 or
the Minimum Lot Area (MLA) requirements of Section 98-305, or which does not meet the lot
ARTICLE IV: BULK REGULATIONS 153
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-408 Nonconforming Structure
and Building Regulations through
Section 98-408 Nonconforming Structure
and Building Regulations
dimension requirements of Sections 98-402 or 98-403 may be utilized for a detached
single-family dwelling unit, provided the measurements of such area and dimensions are
equal to or greater than 70% of the requirements of this Chapter. Said lot shall not be more
intensively developed (with multi-family or nonresidential uses) unless combined with one or
more abutting lots (or portions thereof) so as to create a lot which meets the requirements of
this Chapter.
(3) Existing legal lots of record that are now substandard in any way, and that are zoned ER-1
shall be considered as legal substandard lots. For new dwellings or building additions on such
lots, a Conditional Use Permit may be sought to enable the granting of permission to use the
lot width, lot frontage, lot area and setback requirements of the SR-4 District. (Section 98-905
for Conditional Use procedures). For this particular type of Conditional Use Permit request, a
fee of $100.00 shall be imposed. (Ord. No. 98-1 2/9/98)
Section 98-408 Nonconforming Structure and Building Regulations
(1) Any structure or building lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Chapter may be
continued at the size and in a manner of operation existing upon such date, except as
hereafter specified.
(2) Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the Building Inspector from remedial or enforcement
actions when said structure or building is declared unsafe.
(3) When any lawful nonconforming structure or building in any district is modified so as to be in
conformance with the provisions of this Chapter, any future modification of said structure or
building shall be in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(4) Whenever a lawful nonconforming structure or building has been damaged by fire, flood, wind,
explosion, earthquake, war, riot, unlawful act, or Act of God, it may be reconstructed and used
as before if it be reconstructed within one year after such calamity, unless the damage to said
structure or building equals or exceeds 50% of its assessed value. In such cases, the
reconstruction shall be limited to uses permitted by the provisions of this Chapter (unless the
ability to re-establish a nonconforming use is specifically granted by Council).
(5) Normal maintenance of a nonconforming structure or building is permitted, including
necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend, enlarge, or
intensify the nonconforming structure or building.
(6) Alterations may be made to a building containing lawful nonconforming residential units,
provided such alterations do not increase the number of dwelling units or the bulk of the
building, except that a conforming garage may be added if none previously existed. However,
after the effective date of this Chapter, such structures shall not be permitted to enlarge,
expand or extend without bringing the enlargement, expansion or extension into compliance
with the provisions of the Article unless a variance is granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals
per the requirements of Section 98-910.
(7) A legal, nonconforming garage may be enlarged or replaced provided the following
requirements are met:
(a) That the proposed garage replacement or addition does not encroach farther into required
setback(s) than the current legal, nonconforming structure.
(b) That the proposed garage replacement or addition does not locate closer to an existing
residence on an adjacent parcel than the sum of the required garage setback (on the
subject property) and the required house setback (on said adjacent parcel).
ARTICLE IV: BULK REGULATIONS 154
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-409 Lakeshore Lots (Ord. No.
04-04 1/26/04) through
Section 98-409 Lakeshore Lots (Ord. No.
04-04 1/26/04)
(c) And that precautions (determined on a case-by-case basis by the Building Inspector) are
taken to reduce the possibility of fire damage to nearby structures.
(8) Any structure or building for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to the
effective date of this Chapter, which will become nonconforming under the provisions of this
Chapter or amendments thereto, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans,
provided construction is started within 730 calendar days of the effective date of this Chapter
for single- and two-family construction and within 365 calendar days of the effective date of
this Chapter for all other development, and provided that construction is completed within 730
calendar days of the effective date of this Chapter or amendments thereto. Said structure or
building shall thereafter be a legal nonconforming structure or building.
(9) A variance for any and all requirements of this Article is hereby automatically granted to all
legal nonconforming residential dwellings, and to all structures fronting onto either Broad
Street or onto Williams Street between Geneva Street and George Street, in their
configuration existing as of the effective date of this Chapter. However, after the effective date
of this Chapter, such structures shall not be permitted to enlarge, expand or extend without
bringing the enlargement, expansion or extension into compliance with the provisions of the
Article unless a variance is granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals per the requirements of
Section 98-910. (Ord. No. 99-3 3/8/99)
Rationale: The "blanket variance" provision of (9), above, is intended to eliminate the
continued classification and/or creation of certain nonconforming residential structures within
the jurisdiction of this Chapter. This provision addresses two different situations. First: prior to
the provision of full-time inspection services, a number of residential structures were approved
in the City of Lake Geneva which did not meet setback requirements. Second: this Chapter
requires greater side yard setback requirements for certain residential lot sizes than did
previous regulations for similar sized lots. The adoption of the provisions of (9), above, ensure
that residential structures approved prior to the adoption of this Chapter do not encounter
difficulty in transferring ownership because they would otherwise be considered
nonconforming uses. This "blanket variance" is not available for nonresidential structures.
Section 98-409 Lakeshore Lots (Ord. No. 04-04 1/26/04)
(1) New development on lakeshore lots shall comply with the requirements of the Lakeshore
Overlay Zoning District, Section 98-505
(2) With the exception of fences, which are permitted per the requirements of Section 98-720, any
new accessory structure proposed to be located, in whole or in part, closer to the lakeshore
than the principal structure on the lot may only be approved through the Conditional Use
process, Section 98-905.
(3) With the exception of fences, which are permitted per the requirements of Section 98-720, no
new accessory structure may be located, in whole or in part, within the required front yard or
street yard setback for the principal structure on the lot, as required in Section 98-402 for
residential uses, or Section 98-403 for non-residential uses, except as approved through the
Conditional Use process, Section 98-905.
(4) Accessory structures existing prior to the adoption date of this Section, may be maintain in
their original location and configuration, as legal, nonconforming structures.
ARTICLE IV: BULK REGULATIONS 155
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-501 Purpose through
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe,
and Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS
Section 98-501 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to set forth the requirements for the mandatory protection of natural
resources and permanently protected green space areas within the jurisdiction of this Chapter
(see Section 98-009). The provisions of this Article interact closely with the provisions of Section
98-204 (Uses Permitted in Other Permanently Protected Green Space Areas), Subsection 98-
206(10) (Natural Resource Disruption and Required Mitigation Standards), Section 98-303
(Required Natural Resources Site Evaluation), and Sections 98-304 and 98-305 which provide
residential and nonresidential development standards. Section 98-306 provides a complete
overview of the interrelationship between the above-listed Sections. In part, the provisions of this
Article are designed to ensure the implementation of the City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive
Master Plan, the environmental protection element of the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional
Planning Commission's (SEWRPC's) Environmental Corridor Protection Program, and State of
Wisconsin Statutes 62.231 and 87.30.
Section 98-502 How to Use this Article
This Article contains the standards which govern the protection, disturbance, and mitigation of
disruption of all natural resource and other permanently protected green space areas. The
provisions of this Article are intended to supplement those of the City of Lake Geneva, Walworth
County, the State of Wisconsin, and the Federal Government of the United States which pertain to
natural resource protection. Prior to using the provisions of this Article to determine the permitted
disruption of such areas, the requirements provided below should be reviewed. This Article
recognizes the important and diverse benefits which natural resource features provide in terms of
protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. Each of the following sections
is oriented to each natural resource type, and is designed to accomplish several objectives:
(1) First, a definition of the natural resource is provided.
(2) Second, the specific purposes of the protective regulations governing each natural resource
type are provided.
(3) Third, the required method of identifying and determining the boundaries of the natural
resource area is given.
(4) Fourth, mandatory protection requirements are identified.
NOTE: Protection requirements for specific land uses and natural resource types designed to
minimize disruption of natural resource functions are presented in Subsection 98-206(10).
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe, and Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts
(1) General Standards Applicable to all Floodplain Districts
(a) No development, except as provided in (b), below, shall be allowed in a floodplain areas
which will:
1. Cause an obstruction to flow, defined as any development which physically blocks
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or in conjunction with future similar development
causing an increase in regional flood height; or
2. Cause an increase in regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost which is
equal or exceeding 0.01 foot.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 156
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe, and
Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts through
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe,
and Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts
(b) Obstructions or increase equal or greater than 0.01 foot may only be permitted if
amendments are made to this ordinance, the official floodplain zoning maps, including
floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with Section 98-903, and only if
the total cumulative effect of the proposed development will not increase the height of the
regional flood more than 1.0 foot for the affected hydraulic reach of the stream unless a
waiver is secured from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the 1.0
foot maximum increase.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits where it is determined the proposed
development will cause an obstruction to flow increase in regional flood height of 0.01 foot
or greater.
(2) Floodway Overlay Zoning District (FW): This District is intended to be used to protect
people and property from flood damage by prohibiting the erection of structures that would
impede the flow of water during periodic flooding. Permitting such use of the floodway would
increase damages in the broader floodplain by increasing flood stages. In delineating the FW
District, the effects of development within the associated flood fringe shall be computed. No
increase in flood stages shall be permitted that is equal to or greater than 0.01 foot unless the
City of Lake Geneva has made notification to all affected units of government and made
appropriate legal arrangements with all property owners affected by the stage increase, and
until all such affected units of government have amended their water surface profiles and
floodland zoning maps to reflect the increased flood elevations. No floodway district changes
shall be permitted where the cumulative effect of changes increase flood stages by more than
1.0 foot, unless a waiver is obtained from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. In
addition to floodways delineated by detailed engineering studies, all "unnumbered A zones"
shall be placed in the FW district.
(a) Permitted Uses in the FW District
1. Drainage and movement of water.
2. Navigation.
3. Stream Bank Protection.
4. Water Measurement and Control Facilities.
5. Any of the following uses are permitted provided that they are permitted uses in the
underlying base use district, and further provided that such use shall not involve the
erecting or placing of a structure.
a. Grazing.
b. Horticulture.
c. Open Parking and Loading Areas provided that such uses shall not be subject to
inundation depths greater than two (2) feet or flood velocities greater than two (2)
feet per second.
d. Open Markets.
e. Open Recreational Uses, such as parks, sport fields, beaches, bathing, hunting,
fishing, rinks, golf courses, and driving ranges.
f. Outdoor Plant Nurseries.
g. Pasturing.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 157
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe, and
Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts through
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe,
and Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts
h. Sod Farms.
i. Truck Farming.
j. Utility poles, towers, and underground conduit for transmitting electricity, telephone,
cable television, natural gas, and similar products and services.
k. Viticulture (grape growing).
l. Wildlife Preserves.
(b) Conditional Uses in the FW District
1. Open space and related uses for the following uses provided that the applicant shows
that such use or improvement will not impede drainage, will not cause ponding, will not
obstruct the floodway, will not increase flood flow velocities, will not increase the flood
stage, and will not retard the movement of floodwaters. When permitted, all structures
shall be floodproofed to the flood protection elevation and constructed so as not to
catch or collect debris nor be damaged by floodwaters. All structures shall not be for
human habitation. All floodproofed structures shall be securely anchored to protect
them from larger floods. All structures shall have a low flood damage potential.
Certification of floodproofing shall be made to the Zoning Administrator and shall
consist of a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the flood velocities, forces, depths, and
other factors associated with the regional flood. All service facilities shall be elevated to
the flood protection elevation. the only structures allowed are those associated with a
permitted open space use, or are functionally de-pendent on a waterfront location, or
are classified as historic structures.
a. Navigational structures.
b. Public water measuring and control facilities.
c. Bridges and approaches.
d. Marinas.
e. Filling as authorized by the Wisconsin DNR to permit establishment of approved
bulkhead lines.
f. Other open space uses consistent with the purpose and intent of the district and
compatible with uses in adjacent districts, not including structures.
2. Accessory structures provided that all structures, when permitted, are not designed for
human occupation, have a low flood damage potential, are constricted and placed to
cause an increase of less than 0.01 foot in height and provide minimum obstruction to
flood flows (whenever possible, accessory structures shall be placed with their
longitudinal axis parallel to the flow of floodwaters), are firmly anchored to prevent
them from floating away and restricting bridge openings, and have all service facilities
(such as electrical and heating equipment) at an elevation at least two (2) feet above
the regional flood. Certification of floodproofing shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator and shall consist of a plan or document certified by a registered
professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the flood
velocities, forces, depths, and other factors associated with the regional flood.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 158
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe, and
Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts through
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe,
and Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts
(c) Structures Designed for Human Habitation Prohibited. Lands lying with the floodway
overlay district shall not be used for structures designed for human habitation, associated
with high flood damage potential, or not associated with permanent open-space uses.
(d) Dumping and Filling Prohibited. Lands lying within the floodway overlay district shall not
be used for dumping or be filled except as authorized to permit establishment of approved
bulkhead lines or to accommodate bridge approaches. Normal earth grading activities to
permit utilization of the lands for open space, outdoor recreation, yard, parking, and similar
uses are permitted.
(e) Dangerous Materials Storage Prohibited. Lands lying within the floodway overlay district
shall not be used for the storage of materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or
injurious to property, water quality, human, animal, or plant, fish or other aquatic life.
(f) Incompatible Use Prohibited. Lands lying within the floodway overlay district shall not be
used for any solid or hazardous waste disposal site or onsite soil absorption sanitary
sewerage system site, or the construction of any well which is used to obtain water for
ultimate human consumption. Sewage treatment plants and treatment ponds shall not be
constructed in the floodway district.
(g) Maintenance of Drainageways. No development in the floodway overlay district shall
adversely effect the channels, floodways, or shorelands of Lake Geneva, White River,
Lake Como, Como Creek, Nippersink Creek, any tributary thereto, drainage ditches, or
other lands lying outside the floodlands.
(h) Mobile Homes Prohibited. No mobile home, mobile home park, or trailer camp shall be
placed or moved onto lands lying in the FW floodway overlay district.
(i) Annexations Containing Floodlands. These shall be governed by the provisions of the
Walworth County Floodplain Zoning Ordinance until such time that the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) certifies that amendments to the City of Lake
Geneva Zoning Ordinance meet the requirements of Subchapter NR 116 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(j) Notice to DNR, when required. The Plan Commission shall transmit a copy of each
application for a conditional use permit in the FW, FP, and FF floodland districts, and the
shoreland portion of the shoreland-wetland overlay district to the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) for review and comment at least ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing. Final action on the application shall not be taken for thirty (30) days or until the
DNR has made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions
granting conditional uses in the floodland districts and the shoreland portion of the
shoreland-wetland overlay district shall be transmitted to the DNR within ten (10) days of
the effective date of such decision.
(k) Floodland District Boundary. See Section 98-107.
(l) Floodland District Boundary Changes Limited. See Section 98-903(9).
(m)Notice of Variance Application to the DNR. See Section 98-910(9).
(n) Mapping Disputes. See Section 98-934(8).
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 159
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe, and
Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts through
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe,
and Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts
(3) Floodplain Overlay Zoning District (FP): This District is intended to preserve essentially
open space and natural uses lands which are unsuitable for intensive urban development
purposes due to poor natural soil conditions and periodic flood inundations. The proper
regulation of these areas will serve to maintain and improve water quality, prevent flood
damage, protect wildlife habitat, and prohibit the location of structures on soils which are
generally not suitable for such use. In delineating the FP district, considerations shall be given
to the maintenance of flood storage capacity and preventing significant increases in the flood
discharges identified in the City's Flood Insurance Study.
(a) Permitted Uses in the FP District
1. Drainage and movement of water
2. Navigation
3. Stream Bank Protection
4. Water Measurement and Control Facilities
5. Any of the following uses are permitted provided that they are permitted uses in the
underlying base use district, and further provided that such use shall not involve the
erecting or placing of a structure.
a. Grazing.
b. Horticulture.
c. Open Parking and Loading Areas provided that such uses shall not be subject to
inundation depths greater than two (2) feet or flood greater than two (2) feet per
second.
d. Open Markets.
e. Open recreational Uses, such as parks, sport fields, beaches, bathing, hunting,
fishing, rinks, golf courses, and driving ranges.
f. Outdoor Plant Nurseries.
g. Pasturing.
h. Sod Farms.
i. Truck Farming.
j. Utility poles, towers, and underground conduit for transmitting electricity, telephone,
cable television, natural gas, and similar products and services.
k. Viticulture (grape growing).
l. Wildlife Preserves.
(b) Conditional Uses in the FP District
1. Open space and related uses for the following uses provided that the applicant shows
that such use or improvement will not impede drainage, will not cause ponding, will not
obstruct the floodway, will not increase flood flow velocities, will not increase the flood
stage, and will not retard the movement of floodwaters. When permitted, all structures
shall be floodproofed to the flood protection elevation and constructed so as not to
catch or collect debris nor be damaged by floodwaters. All structures shall not be for
human habitation. All floodproofed structures shall be securely anchored to protect
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 160
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe, and
Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts through
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe,
and Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts
them from larger floods. All structures shall have a low flood damage potential.
Certification of floodproofing shall be made to the Zoning Administrator and shall
consist of a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the flood velocities, forces, depths, and
other factors associated with the regional flood. All service facilities shall be elevated to
the flood protection elevation. the only structures allowed are those associated with a
permitted open space use, or are functionally de-pendent on a waterfront location, or
are classified as historic structures.
a. Navigational structures.
b. Public water measuring and control facilities.
c. Bridges and approaches.
d. Marinas.
e. Filling as authorized by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources to permit
the establishment of approved bulkhead lines.
f. Other open space uses consistent with the purpose and intent of the district and
consistent with uses in adjacent districts, not including structures.
2. Accessory structures provided that all structures, when permitted, are not designed for
human occupancy, have a low flood damage potential, are constructed and placed to
cause an increase of less than 0.01 foot in height and provide minimum obstruction to
flood flow (whenever possible, accessory structures shall be placed with their
longitudinal axis parallel to the flow of floodwaters), are firmly anchored to prevent
them from floating away and restricting bridge openings, and have all service facilities
(such as electrical and heating equipment) at an elevation at least two (2) feet above
the regional flood. Certification of floodproofing shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator and shall consist of a plan or document certified by a registered
professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the flood
velocities, forces, depths, and other factors associated with the regional flood.
(c) Structures Designed for Human Habitation Prohibited. Lands lying with the floodway
overlay district shall not be used for structures designed for human habitation, associated
with high flood damage potential, or not associated with permanent open-space uses.
(d) Dumping and Filling Prohibited. Lands lying within the floodway overlay district shall not
be used for dumping or be filled except as authorized to permit establishment of approved
bulkhead lines or to accommodate bridge approaches. Normal earth grading activities to
permit utilization of the lands for open space, outdoor recreation, yard, parking, and similar
uses are permitted.
(e) Dangerous Materials Storage Prohibited. Lands lying within the floodway overlay district
shall not be used for the storage of materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or
injurious to property, water quality, human, animal, or plant, fish or other aquatic life.
(f) Incompatible Use Prohibited. Lands lying within the floodway overlay district shall not be
used for any solid or hazardous waste disposal site or onsite soil absorption sanitary
sewerage system site, or the construction of any well which is used to obtain water for
ultimate human consumption. Sewage treatment plants and treatment ponds shall not be
constructed in the floodway district.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 161
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe, and
Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts through
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe,
and Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts
(g) Maintenance of Drainageways. No development in the floodway overlay district shall
adversely effect the channels, floodways, or shorelands of Lake Geneva, White River,
Lake Como, Como Creek, Nippersink Creek, any tributary thereto, drainage ditches, or
other lands lying outside the floodlands.
(h) Mobile Homes Prohibited. No mobile home, mobile home park, or trailer camp shall be
placed or moved onto lands lying in the FW floodway overlay district.
(i) Annexations Containing Floodlands. These shall be governed by the provisions of the
Walworth County Floodplain Zoning Ordinance until such time that the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) certifies that amendments to the City of Lake
Geneva Zoning Ordinance meet the requirements of Subchapter NR 116 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(j) Notice to DNR, when required. The Plan Commission shall transmit a copy of each
application for a conditional use permit in the FW, FP, and FF floodland districts, and the
shoreland portion of the shoreland-wetland overlay district to the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) for review and comment at least ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing. Final action on the application shall not be taken for thirty (30) days or until the
DNR has made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions
granting conditional uses in the floodland districts and the shoreland portion of the
shoreland-wetland overlay district shall be transmitted to the DNR within ten (10) days of
the effective date of such decision.
(k) Floodland District Boundary. See Section 98-107.
(l) Floodland District Boundary Changes Limited. See Section 98-903(9).
(m)Notice of Variance Application to the DNR. See Section 98-910(9).
(n) Mapping Disputes. See Section 98-934(8).
(4) Floodfringe Overlay Zoning District (FF): This District is intended to provide for and
encourage the most appropriate use of land and water in areas subject to periodic flooding
and to minimize flood damage to people and property.
(a) Permitted Uses in the FF District
1. Any use of land, except development involving structures, that is permitted in the
underlying base use district. Examples of such use would be croplands in an
agricultural district; required yards in a residential district; or parking or loading areas in
a commercial or industrial district, provided that inundation depths for parking and
loading areas do not exceed two feet or that they are not subject to flood velocities
greater than two feet per second upon the occurrence of a regional flood.
(b) Conditional Uses in the FF District
1. Residential and commercial structures, provided that the structure is permitted in the
underlying base use district, and provided that such floodplain fringe areas shall be
filled to an elevation at least two feet above the elevation of the regional flood. Such fill
shall extend for at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure placed thereon. The
finished surface of the lowest floor (excluding basement or crawlway) shall be
constructed or placed at an elevation that is at least two feet above the elevation of the
regional flood. Basement or crawlway floors may be placed at the regional flood
elevation provided that the basement or crawlway is floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation. All structures shall be provided with dryland access to lands
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 162
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe, and
Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts through
Section 98-503 Floodway, Floodfringe,
and Floodplain Overlay Zoning Districts
outside the floodplain. Where existing streets or sewer lines are at elevations which
make dryland access impractical, the City may permit development where access
roads are at or below the regional flood stage, provided that the City has written
assurance from appropriate police and fire departments, and emergency service
agencies, that rescue and relief service will be provided to properties in the area by
wheeled vehicles during a flood event--or--the City has an adopted natural disaster
plan concurred in by the Wisconsin Division of Emergency Government and approved
by the Wisconsin DNR. Residential, or commercial structure placed on fill may be
removed from the FF District provided that the fill is contiguous to lands lying outside of
the floodlands, and further provided that the property owner, or his agent, has
complied with all the requirements for amending the zoning map as set forth in this
Code.
2. Industrial Structures provided that the structure is permitted in the underlying district
and the fill requirements and dryland access requirements for residential structures in
the FF District are complied with. However, when the intent and purpose of this
Ordinance cannot be fulfilled by filling the floodplain fringe due to existing and
committed development, and when the Common Council, upon recommendation of
the City Plan Commission, has made a finding to this effect, all new structures and
additions to existing structures in the FF District shall be floodproofed to a point two
feet above the elevation of the regional flood. All floodproofed structures shall be
securely anchored to protect them from larger floods. Certification of floodproofing
shall be made to the Zoning Administrator and consist of a plan or document certified
by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent
with the flood velocities, forces, depths, and other factors associated with the regional
flood level for the particular stream reach, structures placed on fill may be removed
from the FF District provided that the fill is contiguous to lands lying outside of the
floodlands, and provided that the property owner, or his agent, has complied with all
the requirements for amending the zoning map as see forth in this Code.
3. Accessory structures provided that all structures, when permitted, are not designed for
human occupancy, have a low flood damage potential, are constructed and placed to
provide minimum obstruction to flood flows (whenever possible, accessory structures
shall be placed with their longitudinal axis parallel to the flow of floodwaters), are firmly
anchored to prevent them from floating away and restricting bridge openings, and
have all service facilities (such as electrical and heating equipment) at an elevation at
least two feet above the regional flood. Certification of floodproofing shall be made to
the Zoning Administrator and shall consist of a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with
the flood velocities, forces, depths, and other factors associated with the regional
flood.
4. Municipal water supply and sanitary sewerage systems provided the system is
floodproofed to an elevation of at least two feet above the regional flood elevation, and
is designed to eliminate or minimize infiltration of floodwaters into the system. All
floodproofed utilities shall be anchored to prevent flotation. Certification of
floodproofing shall be made to the Zoning Administrator and shall consist of a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer that floodproofing measures
are consistent with the flood velocities, forces, depths, and other factors associated
with the regional flood level for the particular stream reach.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 163
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
5. Filling to remove lands from the FF District provided that such fill shall be to an
elevation at least two feet above the elevation of the regional flood and further
provided that such lands are contiguous to lands lying outside of the floodlands. No
such FF District shall be removed from the Supplementary Floodland Zoning Map until
the filling is complete and until the property owner, or his agent, has complied with all
the requirements for amending the zoning map as set forth in this Code.
(c) Dumping and Filling Prohibited. Lands lying within the floodway overlay district shall not
be used for dumping or be filled except as authorized to permit establishment of approved
bulkhead lines or to accommodate bridge approaches. Normal earth grading activities to
permit utilization of the lands for open space, outdoor recreation, yard, parking, and similar
uses are permitted.
(d) Dangerous Materials Storage Prohibited. Lands lying within the floodway overlay district
shall not be used for the storage of materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or
injurious to property, water quality, human, animal, or plant, fish or other aquatic life.
(e) Incompatible Use Prohibited. Lands lying within the floodway overlay district shall not be
used for any solid or hazardous waste disposal site or onsite soil absorption sanitary
sewerage system site, or the construction of any well which is used to obtain water for
ultimate human consumption. Sewage treatment plants and treatment ponds shall not be
constructed in the floodway district.
(f) Maintenance of Drainageways. No development in the floodway overlay district shall
adversely effect the channels, floodways, or shorelands of Lake Geneva, White River,
Lake Como, Como Creek, Nippersink Creek, any tributary thereto, drainage ditches, or
other lands lying outside the floodlands.
(g) Mobile Homes Prohibited. No mobile home, mobile home park, or trailer camp shall be
placed or moved onto lands lying in the FW floodway overlay district.
(h) Annexations Containing Floodlands. These shall be governed by the provisions of the
Walworth County Floodplain Zoning Ordinance until such time that the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) certifies that amendments to the City of Lake
Geneva Zoning Ordinance meet the requirements of Subchapter NR 116 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(i) Notice to DNR, when required. The Plan Commission shall transmit a copy of each
application for a conditional use permit in the FW, FP, and FF floodland districts, and the
shoreland portion of the shoreland-wetland overlay district to the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) for review and comment at least ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing. Final action on the application shall not be taken for thirty (30) days or until the
DNR has made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions
granting conditional uses in the floodland districts and the shoreland portion of the
shoreland-wetland overlay district shall be transmitted to the DNR within ten (10) days of
the effective date of such decision.
(o) Floodland District Boundary. See Section 98-107.
(p) Floodland District Boundary Changes Limited. See Section 98-903(9).
(q) Notice of Variance Application to the DNR. See Section 98-910(9).
(r) Mapping Disputes. See Section 98-934(8).
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 164
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland Overlay Zoning District
(1) Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, and Statement of Purpose:
(a) Statutory Authorization: This Section is adopted pursuant to the authorization in
Sections 62.23, 62.231, 87.30 and 144.26, Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Finding of Fact and Purpose: Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and pollution
of the navigable waters of the City would adversely affect the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare and impair the tax base. The legislature of Wisconsin
has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to:
1. Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare.
2. Maintain the storm and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands.
3. Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store
sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain
into navigable waters.
4. Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife by preserving
wetlands and other aquatic habitat.
5. Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area.
6. Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural
shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth
moving activities.
(2)General Provisions
(a) Compliance: The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within the shoreland area
of the City shall be in full compliance with the terms of this Section and other applicable
local, State or federal regulations. However, see Subsection (5) for standards applicable to
nonconforming uses. All permitted development shall require the issuance of a zoning
permit, unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this Section.
(b) Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated: Unless specifically exempted by law, all
cities, villages, towns and counties are required to comply with this Section and obtain all
necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Section 13.48(13), Wisconsin
Statutes, applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of State
highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt when
Section 30.12(4)(a), Wisconsin Statutes, applies.
(c) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions:
1. This Section supersedes all the provisions of any City zoning ordinance enacted under
Section 62.23 or Section 87.30, Wisconsin Statutes, which relate to floodplains and
shoreland-wetlands, except that where another City zoning ordinance is more
restrictive than this Section, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the
extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
2. This Section is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed
restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this Section imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this Section shall prevail.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 165
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
(d) Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Section shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the City
and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the
Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of this Section is required by a standard in Chapter
NR 117, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and where the Section provision is unclear, the
provision shall be interpreted in light of Chapter NR 117 standards in effect on the date of
the adoption of this Section or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to
this Section.
(e) Severability: Should any portion of this Section be declared invalid or unconstitutional by
a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Section shall not be affected.
(f) Annexed Areas: The Walworth County shoreland zoning provisions in effect on the date
of annexation remain in effect administered by the City after May 7, 1982. These annexed
lands are described on the City's official zoning map. The Walworth County shoreland
zoning provision are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this
Section and are on file in the office of the City Zoning Administrator.
(3) Definitions:
(a) For the purpose of administering and enforcing this Section, the terms or words used
herein shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future;
words in the singular number include the plural number; words in the plural number
include the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory, not permissive. All distances,
unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally.
(b) The following terms used in this Section have the meanings indicated:
1. Accessory Structure or Use. A detached subordinate structure or a use which is clearly
incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principle structure or use to
which it is related and which is located on the same lot as that of the principle structure
or use.
2. Boathouse. (Am. MSC '90) As defined in Section 30.01(1d), Wisconsin Statutes,
means a structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials which
has one or more walls or sides.
3. Class 2 Public Notice. Publication of a public hearing notice under Chapter 985,
Wisconsin Statutes, in a newspaper of circulation in the affected area. Publication is
required on 2 consecutive weeks, the last at least 7 days prior to hearing.
4. Conditional Use. A use which is permitted by this Section, provided that certain
conditions specified in this Section are met and that a permit is granted by the City
Council.
5. Department. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
6. Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including,
but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the
construction of additions or substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory
structures; the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or
extraction of earthen materials.
7. Drainage System. One or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices which
collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 166
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
8. Environmental Control Facility. Any facility, temporary or permanent, which is
reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention, measurement, control
or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution,
radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or to
replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting
acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by
other pollution control facilities.
9. Fixed Houseboat. (Am. MSC '91) As defined in Section 30.01(1r), Wisconsin Statutes,
means a structure not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary
high watermark of a navigable waterway and is retained in place, either by cables to
the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed of the waterway.
10. Navigable Waters.
a. Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within Wisconsin and all
streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the territorial limits of
this State, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable
under the laws of this State. Under Section 144.26(2)(d), Wisconsin Statutes,
notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated
thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under Section 62.231, Wisconsin
Statutes, and Chapter NR 117, Wisconsin Administrative Code, do not apply to
lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if:
i. Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river.
ii. Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not
navigable streams before ditching.
iii. Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
b. Wisconsin's Supreme Court has declared navigable bodies of water that have a
bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and levels or flow sufficient to support
navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring
basis [Muench v. Public Service, 261 Wis. 492 (1952), and DeGaynor and Co.,
Inc., v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975)]. For example, a
stream which is navigable by skiff or canoe during normal spring high water is
navigable, in fact, under the laws of this State though it may be dry during other
seasons.
11. Ordinary High Watermark. The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence
and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark, such as by
erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic
vegetation or other easily recognized characteristic.
12. Planning Agency. The municipal plan commission created under Section 62.23(1),
Wisconsin Statutes, a board of public land commissioners or a committee of the
municipality's governing body which acts on matters pertaining to planning and zoning.
13. Shorelands. Lands within the following distances from the ordinary high watermark of
navigable waters: 1,000' from a lake, pond or flowage and 300' from a river or stream
or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 167
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
14. Shoreland-Wetland District. The zoning district created in the Section, comprised of
shorelands that are designated as wetlands on the wetland inventory maps which
have been adopted and made a part of this Section.
15. Unnecessary Hardship. That circumstance where special conditions, which were not
self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with restrictions
governing area, setbacks, frontage height or density unnecessarily burdensome or
unreasonable in light of the purposes of this Section.
16. Variance. An authorization granted by the Board of Appeals to construct or alter a
building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional standards of this
Section.
17. Wetlands. Those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough
to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet
conditions.
18. Wetland Alteration. Any filling flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating,
temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam construction in a
wetland area.
(4) Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District C-2:
(a) Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Maps: The following maps are hereby adopted and made
part of this Section and are on file in the office of the City Clerk:
1. Wisconsin wetland inventory maps, stamped "final" on December 11, 1986 and "final
revised" March 27, 1987.
2. Floodplain zoning maps titled "Firm" (Flood Insurance Rate Map) and dated December
1, 1982.
3. United States Geological Survey maps dated 1976.
4. Zoning map titled "City of Lake Geneva Zoning Map" and dated August 22, 1983.
(b) District Boundaries:
1. The Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District includes all wetlands in the City shown on the
final wetland inventory map that has been adopted and made part of this Section and
which are:
a. Within 1,000' of the ordinary high watermark of navigable lakes, pond, flowages.
Lakes, ponds or flowages in the City shall be presumed to be navigable if they are
shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning
base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this
Section.
b. Within 300' of the ordinary high watermark of navigable rivers or streams or to the
landward side of the floodplain whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams
shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or
intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps
or other base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part
of this Section. Floodplain zoning maps adopted in subsection (4)(a)2. shall be
used to determine the extent of floodplain areas.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 168
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
2. Determinations of navigability and ordinary high water location shall initially be made
by the Zoning Administrator. When questions arise, the Zoning Administrator shall
contact the appropriate district office of the Department for a final determination of
navigability or ordinary high watermark.
3. When an apparent discrepancy exists between the Shoreland-Wetland District
boundary shown on the official zoning maps and actual field conditions at the time the
maps were adopted, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district
office of the Department to determine if the Shoreland-Wetland District boundary as
mapped is in error. If Department staff concur with the Zoning Administrator that a
particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Zoning Administrator shall
have the authority to immediately grant or deny a zoning permit in accordance with the
regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland
mapping errors or acknowledge exempted wetlands designated in subsections 4. and
5. below, the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for initiating a map amendment
within a reasonable period.
4. Wetlands which are filled prior to December 11, 1986, the date on which the City
received final wetland inventory maps, in a manner which affects their wetland
characteristics to the extent that the area can no longer be defined as wetland are not
subject to this Section.
5. Wetlands located between the original ordinary high watermark and a bulkhead line
established prior to May 7, 1982, under Section 30.11, Wisconsin Statutes, are not
subject to this Section.
(c) Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted, subject to the provisions of this
Section and of other local, State and federal laws, if applicable:
1. Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit, provided that
no wetland alteration occurs:
a. Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and boating.
b. The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries,
tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural
reproduction of such crops.
c. The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber.
d. The pasturing of livestock.
e. The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
2. Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and which may involve
wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
a. The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization
measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions which
would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not
corrected.
b. The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for
the purposes of growing and harvesting cranberries.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 169
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
c. The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore preexisting
levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of
dredged spoil, provided that the filling is otherwise permissible and that dredged
spoil is placed on existing spoil banks, where possible.
d. The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock,
including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or
maintenance.
e. The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways, observation decks
and trail bridges built in pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary
for such construction or maintenance.
f. The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands
outside the Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District, provided that such installation or
maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the
natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in Section (14).
g. The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and
bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance,
repair, replacement or reconstruction.
3. Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit and which may
include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
a. The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the continuity
of the City street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services
or to provide access to uses permitted under this subsection, provided that:
i. The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland.
ii. The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts upon the
natural functions of the wetland listed in Section (14).
iii. The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area
practical to serve the intended use.
iv. Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate roadbed area only.
v. Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or maintenance
of the road.
b. The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings, provided that:
i. The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the
Shoreland-Wetland District or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows, or other
wetland or aquatic animals.
ii. The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland.
iii. The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area.
iv. Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for
the building is allowed.
c. The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation
areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific areas, game refuges
and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 170
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that:
i. Any private development allowed under this subsection shall be used
exclusively for the permitted purpose.
ii. Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat
launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or
similar structures is allowed.
iii. The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted
under this subsection are allowed only where such construction and
maintenance meets the criteria in (c)3.a..
iv. Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat
improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and wildlife preserves shall
be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland
values.
d. The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines,
water and gas distribution lines and sewage collection lines and related facilities
and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that:
i. The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad lines cannot, as a
practical matter, be located outside the wetland.
ii. Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or
maintenance is allowed.
iii. Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize
adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in Section
(14).
(d) Prohibited Uses:
1. Any use not listed in subsection (c), above, is prohibited, unless the wetland or a
portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this Section in accordance
with Section (14).
2. The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a
boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high watermark of any navigable
waters are prohibited.
(5) Nonconforming Structures and Uses: The lawful use of a building, structure or property
which existed at the time this Section or an applicable amendment to this Section took effect
and which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Section, including the routine
maintenance of such a building or structure may be continued, subject to the following
conditions:
(a) The shoreland-wetland provisions of this Section authorized by Section 62.231, Wisconsin
Statutes, shall not limit the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling or expansion of a
nonconforming structure in existence on the effective date of the shoreland-wetland
provisions or of any environmental control facility in existence on May 7, 1982, related to
such a structure. All other modifications to nonconforming structures are subject to Section
62.23(7)(h), Wisconsin Statutes, which limits total lifetime structural repairs and alterations
to 50% of current fair market value.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 171
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12
consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform to
this Section.
(c) Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and
which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this Section though
such use does not conform with the provisions of this Section. However, such
nonconforming use may not be extended.
(d) The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below the
ordinary high watermark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of
Section 30.121, Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as
nonconforming uses.
(6) Zoning Administrator: The Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties and powers:
(a) Advise applicants as to the provisions of this Section and assist them in preparing permit
applications and appeal forms.
(b) Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for compliance with
this Section.
(c) Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official
actions.
(d) Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. for the
purpose of performing these duties.
(e) Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits, appeals for a map or
text interpretation and map or text amendments within 10 days after they are granted or
denied to the appropriate district office of the Department.
(f) Investigate and report violations of this Section to the appropriate City planning agency
and the District Attorney, Corporation Counsel or City Attorney.
(7) Zoning Permits:
(a) When Required: No structure, land, water, or air shall hereafter be used and no structure
or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged, converted, or structurally altered without a zoning permit, except minor
structures, and without full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable local, county, state and federal regulations. Unless another Section of this
Chapter specifically exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning
permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator before any new development, as
defined in Subsection (3)(b), or any change in the use of an existing building or structure is
initiated.
(b) Application: An application for a zoning permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator
upon forms furnished by the City and shall include for the purpose of proper enforcement
of these regulations the following information:
1. General Information:
a. Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property owner, architect,
engineer, and contractor, where applicable.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 172
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
b. Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded subdivision or by metes
and bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; existing and proposed
operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees; and the zoning
district within which the subject site lies.
c. Additional information as may be required by the Plan Commission or Zoning
Administrator.
d. Fee receipt from the City Treasurer in an amount specified in sub. (2) of this section.
2. Plat of Survey. Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in Wisconsin
showing the location, boundaries, dimensions, uses and size of the following: subject
site; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed easements, streets and
other public ways; off street parking, loading areas and driveways; existing highway
access restrictions; high water, channel floodway and floodplain boundaries; and
existing and proposed street, side and rear yards. In addition, the plat of survey shall
show type, slope and boundaries of soils shown on the operations soil survey maps
prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service for the Southeastern Wisconsin
Regional Planning Commission.
3. Site Development Plan. The site development plan shall be submitted as a part of the
permit application and shall contain the following information drawn to scale:
a. Dimensions and area of the lot.
b. Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and
centerline of all abutting streets or highways.
c. Description of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water
supply systems.
d. Location of the ordinary high watermark of any abutting navigable waterways.
e. Boundaries of all wetlands.
f. Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover.
g. Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined from
floodplain zoning maps.
h. Location of existing or future access roads.
i. Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration.
4. Fees.
a. All applicants shall pay a zoning permit fee as determined by the Common Council
from time to time.
b. Zoning permit fees do not include and are in addition to building permit fees
established in the Municipal Code.
c. A double fee may be charged by the Zoning Administrator if work is started before
a permit is applied for and issued. Such double fee shall not release the applicant
from full compliance with this chapter nor from prosecution for violation of this
chapter.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 173
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
(c) Determination and Expiration: A Zoning permit shall be granted or denied by the Zoning
Administrator in writing within 30 days of application and the applicant shall post such
permit in a conspicuous place at the site. The permit shall expire within 4 months unless
work equal to 10% of the dollar amount of the permits has been completed or within 18
months after the issuance of the permit if the structure for which a permit issued is not
75% completed as measured by the dollar amount of the permit. The applicant shall
reapply for a zoning permit before recommencing work on the structure. Any permit issued
in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.
(8) Certificates of Compliance:
(a) Except where no zoning permit or conditional use permit is required, no land shall be
occupied or used and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to,
modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by
the Zoning Administrator, subject to the following provisions:
1. The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof
and the proposed use thereof conform to the provisions of this Section.
2. Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a zoning or
conditional use permit.
3. The certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10 days after notification of the
completion of the work specified in the zoning or conditional use permit, providing the
building or premises and proposed use thereof conform with all the provision of this
Section.
(b) The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a building,
premises or part thereof pursuant to rules and regulations established by the City Council.
(c) Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of
compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of the adoption of this Section,
certifying after inspection the extent and type of use made of the building or premises and
whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of this Section.
(9) Conditional Use Permits for Shoreland-Wetland Overlay Zoning Districts:
(a) Application:
1. Any use listed as a conditional use in this Section shall be permitted only after an
application has been submitted to the Zoning Administrator and a conditional use
permit has been granted by the City Council following the procedures in Section 98-
905 of this Ordinance.
2. A copy of the notice of public hearing shall be forwarded to the appropriate district
office of the Department at least 10 days prior to such hearing date. Also, a copy of the
written decision to grant or deny a conditional use permit shall be forwarded to the
appropriate district office of the Department within 10 days after the decision is issued.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 174
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
(b) Conditions: Upon consideration of the permit application and the standards applicable to
the conditional uses designated in Section (4)(c)3. of this Section, the City Council shall
attach such conditions to a conditional use permit, in addition to those required elsewhere
in this Section, as are necessary to further the purposes of this Section as listed in Section
(1). Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific
enumeration, type of shore cover; erosion controls; increased setbacks; specific sewage
disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation;
operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking areas and
signs; and type of construction. To secure information upon which to base its
determination, the City Council may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the
information required for a zoning permit, other pertinent information which is necessary to
determine if the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this Section.
(10) Fees: The City Council may, by resolution, adopt fees for the following:
(a) Zoning permits.
(b) Certificate of compliance.
(c) Public hearings.
(d) Legal notice publications.
(e) Conditional use permits.
(f) Rezoning petitions.
(11) Recording: Where a zoning permit or conditional use permit is approved, an appropriate
record shall be made by the Zoning Administrator of the land use and structures permitted.
(12) Revocation: Where the conditions of a zoning permit or conditional use permit are violated,
the permit shall be revoked by the City Council.
(13) Board of Appeals for Shoreland-Wetland Overlay Zoning Districts: The City Mayor shall
appoint a Board of Appeals under Section 62.23(7)(e), Wisconsin Statutes, consisting of 5
members, subject to confirmation by the City Council. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules
for the conduct of its business as required by Section 62.23(7)(e)3., Wisconsin Statutes.
(a) Powers and Duties: The Board of Appeals:
1. Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement or administration of this Section.
2. May authorize upon appeal a variance from the dimensional standards of this Section
where an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
a. Literal enforcement of the terms of this Section will result in unnecessary hardship
for the applicant.
b. The hardship is due to special conditions unique to the property and is not selfcreated
or based solely on economic gain or loss.
c. Such variance is not contrary to the public interest as expressed by the purpose of
this Section.
d. Such variance will not grant or increase any use of property which is prohibited in
the zoning district.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 175
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District through
Section 98-504 Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning District
(b) Appeals to the Board: Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the community affected by any
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other
administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided
by the rules of the Board, by filing with the official whose decision is in question and with
the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying reasons for the appeal. The Zoning
Administrator or other official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the Board all
the papers constituting the record on the matter appealed.
(c) Public Hearings:
1. Before making a decision on an appeal, the Board of Appeals shall, within a
reasonable period of time, hold a public hearing. The Board shall give public notice of
the hearing by publishing a Class 2 notice under Chapter 985, Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come before the
Board. A copy of this notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the
appropriate district office of the Department 10 days prior to the hearing. At the public
hearing, any party may present testimony in person, by agent or by attorney.
2. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate
district office of the Department within 10 days after the decision is issued.
(14) Amending Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Regulations: The City Council may alter,
supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this Section in
accordance with the requirements of Section 62.23(7)(d)2., Wisconsin Statutes, Chapter NR
117, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and the following:
(a) A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate
district office of the Department within 5 days of submission of the proper amendment to
the City planning agency.
(b) All proposed text and map amendments to this Section shall be referred to the City
planning agency and a public hearing shall be held after a Class 2 notice as required by
Section 62.23(7)(d)2., Wisconsin Statutes. The appropriate district office of the
Department shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least 10 days
prior to such hearing.
(c) In order to insure that this Section will remain consistent with the shoreland protection
objectives of Section 144.26, Wisconsin Statutes, the City Council may not rezone a
wetland in a Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District or any portion thereof where the proposed
rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any if the following wetland
functions:
1. Storm and floodwater storage capacity.
2. Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland,
the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater
through a wetland.
3. Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, or organic compounds that
would otherwise drain into navigable waters.
4. Shoreline protection against erosion.
5. Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds.
6. Wildlife habitat.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 176
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-505 Lakeshore Overlay Zoning
District through
Section 98-505 Lakeshore Overlay Zoning
District
7. Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scare wetland types
and habitat of endangered species.
(d) Where the district office of the Department determines that a proposed rezoning may have
a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in Subsection (c), the
Department shall so notify the City of its determination, either prior to or during the public
hearing held on the proposed amendment.
(e) The appropriate district office of the Department shall be provided with:
1. A copy of the recommendation and report, if any, of the City planning agency on a
proposed text or map amendment within 10 days after the submission of those
recommendations to the City Council.
2. Written notice of the action on the proposed text or map amendment with 10 days after
the action is taken.
(f) If the Department notifies the City planning agency in writing that a proposed amendment
may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (c), that
proposed amendment, if approved by the City Council, shall not become effective until
more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the City approval was mailed to
the Department as required by subsection (e)2., above. If within the 30 day period the
Department notifies the City that the Department intends to adopt a superseding
shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the City as provided by Section 62.231(6),
Wisconsin Statutes, the proposed amendment shall not become effective until the
ordinance adoption procedure under Section 62.231(6), Wisconsin Statutes, is completed
or otherwise terminated.
(15)Enforcement and Penalties: Any development, building or structure or accessory building or
structure constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced or any use or accessory
use established after the effective date of this Section in violation of the provisions of this
Section by any person, association, corporation, including building contractors or their agents,
shall be deemed a violation. The Zoning Administrator shall refer violations to the City planning
agency and the District Attorney, Corporation Counsel or City Attorney who shall prosecute
such violations. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this
Section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $5 nor more than $500 per offense,
together with the taxable costs of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute
a separate offense. Every violation of this Section is a public nuisance and the creation thereof
may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the City,
State or any citizen thereof pursuant to Section 87.30(2), Wisconsin Statutes.
Section 98-505 Lakeshore Overlay Zoning District
(1) Definition: Lakeshores are the land margins of navigable waters which are identified as
"lakes and other water bodies" as shown on Environmental Corridors Composite Maps for
the City of Lake Geneva and its environs, prepared by the SEWRPC. Lakeshores are all
areas within 100 feet of the ordinary high water mark of such features. Decorative water
features shall not be considered "navigable waters" for the purposes of this Section. This
meaning of "lakeshores" shall remain distinct from the meaning of the term as employed
by the State of Wisconsin Statutes and the DNR.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 177
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-505 Lakeshore Overlay Zoning
District through
Section 98-505 Lakeshore Overlay Zoning
District
(2) Purpose of Lakeshore Protection Requirements: Lakeshores serve to protect land/water
margins from erosion due to site disruption. Because of regular contact with wave action,
currents, and runoff, such areas are highly susceptible to continuous, and in some cases,
rapid erosion. Lakeshore protection also provides a natural vegetation buffer which serves to
reduce water velocities and wave energy, and filters significant amounts of water-borne
pollutants and sediments. Lakeshores also promote infiltration and groundwater recharging,
and provide a unique habitat at the land/water margin.
(3) Determination of Lakeshore Boundaries: General lakeshore boundaries are depicted on
the Official Zoning Map. Upon the proposal of development activity on any property which
contains a lakeshore depicted on the Official Zoning Map, the petitioner shall prepare a
detailed site analysis per the requirements of Section 98-510. This analysis shall depict the
location of all lakeshore areas on the subject property as related to the provisions of
Subsection (1), above.
(4) Mandatory Lakeshore Protection Requirements: With the exception of the activities
permitted below, lakeshores shall remain in an undisturbed state, except for the land uses
permitted in Section 98-204 per the requirements of Subsection 98-206(10).
(a) Tree Removal:
1. Purpose: The intent and purpose of this subsection is to preserve the City's character
as a natural wooded community, maintain property values by improving and preserving
the aesthetic appeal of the City through tree regulations, preserve the natural
resources of the City and State, reduce the amount of erosion in the City due to tree
removal, protect the quality of the waters of the State and the City, and protect and
promote the health, safety and welfare of the people by minimizing the amount of
sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff to surface waters due to the erosion of
land not protected by a naturally wooded environment.
2. Scope: The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to SR-3 and SR-4 Zoning
Districts, except planned developments on those districts.
3. Clear-Cutting Prohibition:
a. Shoreland Areas: In a strip of land 35' wide inland from the bulkhead line, no
more than 30' in any 100' shall be clear-cut. Where the lot is less than 100', no
more than 30% of this strip shall be clear-cut. Natural shrubbery shall be preserved
as far as practicable and, where removed, it shall be replaced with other vegetation
that is equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion and preserving
natural beauty.
b. Tree Preservation Area: Except for circumstances identified under subsection
4.b., it is prohibited to remove any tree or cause any trees to be removed from the
tree preservation area of each lot. During construction, no equipment movement,
construction or placement of equipment or material storage shall be permitted in
the tree preservation area.
4. Cutting Exceptions:
a. Trees may be removed from the building activities area. This area shall be as small
as possible, including the entire area affected by building, grading and temporary
material storage areas. In no case shall the amount of trees with a 6" tree diameter
removed within the building activities area exceed the following:
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 178
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-505 Lakeshore Overlay Zoning
District through
Section 98-505 Lakeshore Overlay Zoning
District
i. 80% of the total such trees on lots of 1/4 acre or less.
ii. 60% of the total such trees on lots of 1/4 acre to one acre, except in the CR-
5ac and the ER-1 Districts.
iii. 40% of the total such trees on lots of one acre, except in the CR-5ac and ER-1
Districts.
iv. 20% of the total such trees on lots of 2.5 acres or more, except in the CR-5ac
and ER-1 Districts.
v. 10% of the total such trees on all lots in the CR-5ac and ER-1 Districts.
b. Trees removed in excess of the above reasons will require a tree removal permit.
Conditions under which a permit may be issued include, but will not be limited to,
the following:
i. The tree is dead, dying or diseased.
ii. The tree is damaged or injured to the extent that it is likely to die or become
diseased.
iii. The removal of the tree will enhance the tree preservation area and the health
of the remaining trees.
iv. The removal of the tree will avoid or alleviate an economic hardship or
hardship of another nature to the property or residences.
v. The removal of the tree is consistent with good arboriculture practices.
5. Replacement Trees: When in keeping with good arboriculture practices, replacement
trees shall be planted for all removed trees. They may be planted in the tree
preservation area or in the building activities area after the initial construction activities
are completed. All replacement trees shall be planted within 30 days of final grading.
The determination of good arboriculture shall be based on tree density and spacing of
the table on the following page.
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 179
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-506 Drainageway Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-506 Drainageway Overlay
Zoning District
Small Trees: Trees which have an ultimate height of 20' to 30' and 15' to 25' spread. They should be planted 15' to 20'
on center or roughly at a density of 115 trees per acre.
Apricot
Crabapple, Flowering (sp)
Hawthorne (sp)
Lilac, Japanese Tree
Peach, Flowering
Plum, Purpleleaf
Redbud
Golden Train Tree
Soapberry
Pear, Bradford
Serviceberry
Medium Trees: Trees which have an ultimate height of 30' to 50' and 30' to 40' spread. They should be planted 25' to
30' on center or approximately 30 trees per acre.
Ash, Green
Hackberry
Honeylocust (Thornless)
Linden or Basswood (sp)
Mulberry, Red
(fruitless, male)
Oak, English
Oak, Red
Pagodatree, Japanese
Pecan
Birch
Osageorange
(Thornless)
Persimmon
Poplar
Sassafras
Large Trees: Trees which have an ultimate height greater than 50' and over 40' spread. They should be planted 35' to
40' on center or approximately 25 trees per acre.
American Elm
Walnut
Kentucky Coffeetree
Silver Maple
Sugar Maple
Oaks
Sycamore
Cottonwood
6. Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall be subject to a
penalty per tree illegally cut or removed, which shall be determined by the assessed value
of the trees removed. The assessed value shall be determined in accordance with the
"Manual for Plant Appraisers," published by the County of Tree and Landscape Appraisers,
most recent edition. In addition, a replacement tree shall be planted to replace all trees cut
illegally.
Section 98-506 Drainageway Overlay Zoning District
(1) Definition: Drainageways are non-navigable, above-ground watercourses, detention basins
and/or their environs which are identified by the presence of one or more of the following:
(a) All areas within 75 feet of the ordinary high water mark of a "perennial stream" as shown
on Environmental Corridors Composite Maps for the City of Lake Geneva and its environs,
prepared by the SEWRPC;
(b) All areas within 50 feet of the ordinary high water mark of an "intermittent stream" or "open
channel drainageway" as shown on Environmental Corridors Composite Maps for the City
of Lake Geneva and its environs, prepared by the SEWRPC.
(2) Purpose of Drainageway Protection Requirements: Drainageways serve in the
transporting of surface runoff to downstream areas. As such, drainageways serve to carry
surface waters, supplement floodplain, wetland, and lakeshore water storage functions in
heavy storm or melt events, filter water-borne pollutants and sediments, promote infiltration
and groundwater recharging, and provide a unique habitat at the land/water margin.
Drainageway protection requirements preserve each of these functions as well as greatly
reducing the potential for soil erosion along drainageways by protecting vegetative
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 180
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-507 Woodland Overlay Zoning
District through
Section 98-508 Steep Slope Overlay
Zoning District
groundcover in areas which are susceptible to variable runoff flows and moderate to rapid
water movement.
(3) Determination of Drainageway Boundaries: General drainageway boundaries are depicted
on the Official Zoning Map. Upon the proposal of development activity on any property which
contains a drainageway depicted on the Official Zoning Map, the petitioner shall prepare a
detailed site analysis per the requirements of Section 98-510. This analysis shall depict the
location of all drainageway areas on the subject property as related to the provisions of
Subsection (1), above.
(4) Mandatory Drainageway Protection Requirements: Drainageways shall remain in an
undisturbed state except for the land uses permitted in Section 98-204 per the requirements in
Subsection 98-206(10). Vegetation clearing to maintain drainageway functions is permitted
with the written approval of the Director of Public Works. All areas designated as
drainageways shall be located within a public easement or dedication for maintenance
purposes to preserve proper drainage flow.
Section 98-507 Woodland Overlay Zoning District
(1) Definition: Woodlands are areas of trees whose combined canopies cover a minimum of 80%
of an area of one acre or more, as shown on Environmental Corridors Composite Maps for the
City of Lake Geneva and its environs, prepared by the SEWRPC.
(2) Purpose of Woodland Protection Requirements: Woodlands provide a wide variety of
environmental functions. These include atmospheric benefits such as removing air-borne
pollutants, carbon dioxide uptake, oxygen production, and evapotranspiration returns. Water
quality benefits include substantial nutrient uptake rates (particularly for nitrogen and
phosphorus) and surface runoff reduction in terms of both volumes and velocities. Woodlands
provide unique wildlife habitats and food sources. Woodlands are excellent soil stabilizers,
greatly reducing runoff-related soil erosion. Woodlands also serve to reduce wind velocities
which further reduces soil erosion. Finally, under proper management techniques, woodlands
serve as regenerative fuel sources.
(3) Determination of Woodland Boundaries: General woodland boundaries are depicted on the
Official Zoning Map. Upon the proposal of development activity on any property which
contains a woodland depicted on the Official Zoning Map, the petitioner shall prepare a
detailed site analysis per the requirements of Section 98-908(3)(h). This analysis shall depict
the location of all woodland areas on the subject property as related to the provisions of
Subsection (1), above.
(4) Mandatory Woodland Protection Requirements: Woodlands shall remain in an undisturbed
state except for the land uses permitted in Section 98-204 per the requirements of Subsection
98-206(10) and areas subject to the following mitigation requirements. Selective cutting
operations are permitted by right in all woodland areas (per the requirements of Section 98-
206(2)(f)). Clear cutting is permitted as a conditional use in all woodland areas (per the
requirements of Section 98-206(2)(g)).
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 181
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-508 Steep Slope Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-508 Steep Slope Overlay
Zoning District
Section 98-508 Steep Slope Overlay Zoning District
(1) Definition: Steep slopes are areas which contain a gradient of 12% or greater, (equivalent to
a 10 foot elevation change in a distance of 83 feet or less), as shown on Environmental
Corridors Composite Maps for Lake Geneva and its environs, prepared by the SEWRPC.
(2) Purpose of Steep Slope Protection Requirements: Steep slopes are particularly
susceptible to damage resulting from site disruption, primarily related to soil erosion. Such
damage is likely to spread to areas which were not originally disturbed. Such erosion reduces
the productivity of the soil, results in exacerbated erosion downhill, and results in increased
sedimentation in drainageways, wetlands, streams, ponds and lakes. Beyond adversely
affecting the environmental functions of these resources areas, such sedimentation also
increases flood hazards by reducing the flood water storage capacity of hydrological system
components, thus elevating the flood level of the drainage system in effected areas. Beyond
these threats to the public safety, disruption of steep slopes also increases the likelihood of
slippage and slumping--unstable soil movements which may threaten adjacent properties,
buildings, and public facilities such as roads and utilities.
(3) Determination of Steep Slope Boundaries: General steep slope boundaries are depicted on
the Official Zoning Map. Upon the proposal of development activity on any property which
contains a steep slope depicted on the Official Zoning Map, the petitioner shall prepare a
detailed site analysis per the requirements of Section 98-510. This analysis shall depict the
location of all steep slope areas on the subject property as related to the provisions of
Subsection (1), above.
(4) Mandatory Steep Slope Protection Requirements: Steep slopes shall remain in an
undisturbed state except for the land uses permitted in Section 98-204 per the requirements of
Subsection 98-206(10).
ARTICLE V: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 182
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-601: Purpose through Section 98-602: How to Use this Article
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS
Section 98-601: Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to indicate the minimum requirements for the landscaping of
foundations, developed lots, street frontages, paved areas, permanently protected green space
areas, reforestation areas, and bufferyards.
Section 98-602: How to Use this Article
(1) This Article contains the standards which govern the amount, size, type, installation and
maintenance of required landscaping. This Article recognizes the important and diverse
benefits which landscaping provides in terms of protecting the health, safety, and general
welfare of the community, and implementing the Comprehensive Master Plan.
(2) Each section of this Article is oriented to a specific category of required landscaping. These
include Landscaping Requirements for Foundations (Section 98.604); Landscaping
Requirements for Developed Lots (Section 98.605); Landscaping Requirements for Street
Frontages (Section 98.606); Landscaping Requirements for Paved Areas (Section 98.607);
Landscaping Requirements for Permanently Protected Green Space Areas (Section
98.608); Landscaping Requirements for Reforestation (Section 98.609); and Landscaping
Requirements for Bufferyards (Section 98.610).
(3) In each instance, a "landscaping point" concept is used to provide a maximum amount of
flexibility in terms of the selection of plant materials. Section 98.603 presents sample
landscape point combination alternatives used by this chapter. At the end of this Article ,
Section 98.611 provides a listing of plant species fitting into the "climax tree", "tall
deciduous tree", "medium deciduous tree", "low deciduous tree", "tall evergreen tree",
"medium evergreen tree", "low evergreen tree", "tall deciduous shrub", "medium deciduous
shrub", "low deciduous shrub", "medium evergreen shrub", "low evergreen shrub", and
"non-contributory plants" used by this chapter. Section 98.612 provides requirements for the
installation and maintenance of required landscaping, and Section 98.613 describes the
procedure for calculating landscaping requirements for this Section.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 183
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98.603 Landscaping Points,
Landscaping Measurements and Sample
Landscaping Layouts through
Section 98.603 Landscaping Points,
Landscaping Measurements and Sample
Landscaping Layouts
Section 98.603 Landscaping Points, Landscaping Measurements and Sample Landscaping
Layouts
(1) All landscaping requirements are stated in terms of the number of landscaping points
required. The required number of landscaping points is dependent upon the type of land
use, the zoning district, and the size of the development. A different number of points are
awarded for each plant, depending upon its typical growth rate, its mature height, and
whether it is a deciduous or evergreen species. A minimum installation size is required for
each of these plant categories. These requirements are as follows:
Table 98-603: Landscaping Points and Minimum Installation Sizes
Plant Category Landscaping Points Per Plant
Minimum Permitted Installation
Size
Climax Tree 75 2” Caliper
Tall Deciduous Tree 30 1 ½” Caliper
Medium Deciduous Tree 15 6’ Tall
Low Deciduous Tree 10 4’ Tall
Tall Evergreen Tree 40 5’ Tall
Medium Evergreen Tree 20 4’ Tall
Low Evergreen Tree 12 3’ Tall
Tall Deciduous Shrub 5 36” Tall
Medium Deciduous Shrub 3 24” Tall
Low Deciduous Shrub 1 18” Tall
Medium Evergreen Shrub 5 18” Tall/Wide
Low Evergreen Shrub 3 12” Tall/Wide
Non-contributory Plants 0 N/A
Source: A Guide to Selecting Landscape Plants for Wisconsin, E. R. Hasselkus, UW-Extension Publication: A2865
(2) Depiction of Sample Landscaping Schemes
Illustration 98.603, shown on the following three pages, depicts sample landscaping
schemes that may be used for building foundations, developed lots, street frontages, paved
areas, reforestation, and bufferyards. In general, landscaping schemes similar to
Alternative A are best for building foundations, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative B
are best for developed lots, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative C are best for street
frontages, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative D are best for paved areas (including
parking lots, walkways and plazas), landscaping schemes similar to Alternative E are best
for reforestation, and landscaping schemes similar to Alternative F are best for bufferyards.
A detailed listing of which plant species fit each plant type is provided in Section 98.611.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 184
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98.603 Landscaping Points,
Landscaping Measurements and Sample
Landscaping Layouts through
Section 98.603 Landscaping Points,
Landscaping Measurements and Sample
Landscaping Layouts
Alternative A:
Best Suited for
Building
Foundations
750 Landscaping
Points:
20 medium trees
15 small shrubs
60 shrubs
Alternative B:
Best Suited for
Developed Lots
1250 Landscaping
Points:
6 climax trees
8 tall trees
20 medium trees
41 evergreen
plantings
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 185
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98.603 Landscaping Points,
Landscaping Measurements and Sample
Landscaping Layouts through
Section 98.603 Landscaping Points,
Landscaping Measurements and Sample
Landscaping Layouts
Alternative C:
Best Suited for
Street Frontages
Option 1
280 Landscaping Points:
2 climax trees
2 tall trees
8 small trees
Option 2
280 Landscaping Points:
2 climax trees
2 tall trees
4 small trees
8 evergreen shrubs
Alternative D:
Best Suited for
Paved Areas
Option 1
880 Landscaping Points:
2 climax trees
13 tall trees
68 evergreen shrubs
Option 2
880 Landscaping Points:
5 climax trees
6 tall trees
68 evergreen shrubs
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 186
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98.603 Landscaping Points,
Landscaping Measurements and Sample
Landscaping Layouts through
Section 98.603 Landscaping Points,
Landscaping Measurements and Sample
Landscaping Layouts
Alternative E:
Best Suited for
Reforestation
Alternative F:
Best Suited for
Bufferyards
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 187
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98.603 Landscaping Points,
Landscaping Measurements and Sample
Landscaping Layouts through
Section 98.604: Landscaping
Requirements for Building Foundations
(3) Measurement for Landscaping Requirements:
A minimum amount of landscaping points, based upon the zoning district, is required for the linear
feet Building Foundations, the gross floor area of buildings on Developed Lots, the linear feet of
Street Frontage, and the total combined area of Paved Areas. The following diagram illustrates the
measurement techniques used to determine these requirements:
Landscape Measurements
Landscaping Calculation Equations for this Example:
Paved Area = (P1 x P2) + (P3 x P4) + (P5 x P6) + (P7 x P8) + (P9 x P10)
Street Frontage = S1 + S2
Building Perimeter = F1 + F2 + F3 + F4 + F5 + F6 + F7 + F8
Building Floor Area = (B1 x B2) + (B3 x B4) + (B5 x B6)
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 188
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98.604: Landscaping
Requirements for Building Foundations through
Section 98.604: Landscaping
Requirements for Building Foundations
Section 98.604: Landscaping Requirements for Building Foundations
(1) This Section requires that certain buildings constructed after the effective date of this
chapter (See Section 98-011) be accented by a minimum amount of landscaping placed
near the building foundation.
(2) Landscaping required by this Section shall be placed so that at maturity, the plant's drip line
is located within 10 feet of the building foundation. Such landscaping shall not be located in
those areas required for landscaping as street frontages, paved areas, protected green
space areas, reforestation areas, or bufferyards, under Sections 98.605 - 98.609, of this
Article. See 98.603(2)(A) for a suggested scheme.
(3) For each 100 feet of building foundation perimeter, the following number of landscaping
points (per Section 98.603) shall be provided on a prorated basis, and installed and
permanently maintained per the requirements of Section 98.612.
(4) Climax trees and tall trees shall not be used to meet this requirement. The intent of this
Section is to require a visual break in the mass of buildings and to require a visual screen of
a minimum of 6 feet in height for all exterior perimeter appurtenances (such as HVAC/utility
boxes, standpipes, stormwater discharge pipes and other pipes.)
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 189
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-605: Landscaping
Requirements for Developed Lots through
Section 98-605: Landscaping
Requirements for Developed Lots
Table 98-604: Building Foundation Landscaping Requirements
Minimum Required Landscaping Points Per 100 Linear Feet of Building Foundation
Zoning District
??
Land Use (see Section 98-206)
All Other
Land Uses
Single-family Residential
(per Section 98-034)
Agricultural
(per Section 98-206(2))
Rural Holding (RH) 20 0 0
Countryside Residential
(CR-5ac)
50 0 0
Estate Residential (ER-1) 45 0 0
Single-family Residential-3
(SR-3)
40 0 0
Single-family Residential-4
(SR-4)
40 0 0
Two-family Residential-6
(TR-6)
45 0 0
Multi-family Residential-8
(MR-8)
50 0 0
Neighborhood Office (NO) 45 0 0
Planned Office(PO) 40 0 0
Neighborhood Business
(NB)
40 0 0
Planned Business (PB) 40 0 0
General Business(GB) 20 0 0
Central Business (CB) 0 0 0
Planned Industrial (PI) 40 0 0
General Industrial (GI) 20 0 0
Heavy Industrial (HI) 20 0 0
Section 98-605: Landscaping Requirements for Developed Lots
(1) This Section requires that certain lots developed after the effective date of this chapter (See
Section 98-011) contain a minimum amount of landscaping.
(2) Landscaping required by this Section is most effective if located away from those areas
required for landscaping as building foundations, street frontages, paved areas, protected
green space areas, reforestation areas, or bufferyards, under Sections 98.605 through
98.610, of this Section. See Section 98.603(2)(B) for a suggest landscaping scheme.
(3) The following number of landscaping points (as described in Section 98.603) shall be
provided on a prorated basis for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, and installed
and maintained per the requirements of Section 98.612.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 190
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-606: Landscaping
Requirements for Street Frontages through
Section 98-606: Landscaping
Requirements for Street Frontages
(4) The intent of this Section is to provide yard shade and to require a visual screen of a
minimum of 6 feet in height for all detached exterior appurtenances (such as HVAC, utility
boxes, standpipes, stormwater discharge pipes and other pipes.)
Table 98-605: Developed Lot Landscaping Requirements
Minimum Required Landscaping Points Per 1000 Square Feet of Gross Floor Area
Zoning District
??
Land Use (see Section 98-206)
All Other
Land Uses
Single-family Residential
(per Section 98-034)
Agricultural
(per Section 98-206(2))
Rural Holding (RH) 10 0 0
Countryside Residential
(CR-5ac)
30 0 0
Estate Residential (ER-1) 25 0 0
Single-family Residential-3
(SR-3)
20 0 0
Single-family Residential-4
(SR-4)
20 0 0
Two-family Residential-6
(TR-6)
20 0 0
Multi-family Residential-8
(MR-8)
20 0 0
Neighborhood Office (NO) 20 0 0
Planned Office (PO) 15 0 0
Neighborhood Business
(NB)
15 0 0
Planned Business (PB) 10 0 0
General Business (GB) 5 0 0
Central Business (CB) 0 0 0
Planned Industrial (PI) 10 0 0
General Industrial (GI) 5 0 0
Heavy Industrial (HI) 5 0 0
Section 98-606: Landscaping Requirements for Street Frontages
(1) This Section requires that street frontages on certain lots developed after the effective date
of this chapter (see Section 98-011) contain a minimum amount of landscaping in those
areas which abut the right-of-way of a public street.
(2) All landscaping used to meet this requirement shall be located within 10 feet of the public
right-of-way. In no instance shall such landscaping be located within a public right-of-way.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 191
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-606: Landscaping
Requirements for Street Frontages through
Section 98-606: Landscaping
Requirements for Street Frontages
See Section 98.603(2)(C) for a suggested landscaping scheme. Landscaping shall not
impede vehicle or pedestrian visibility.
(3) For every 100 linear feet of street frontage where a developed lot abuts a public street rightof-
way, the following number of landscaping points (as described in Section 98.603) shall
be provided on a prorated basis, and installed and maintained per the requirements of
Section 98.612.
(4) Shrubs shall not be used to meet this requirement. A minimum of 50% of all points shall be
devoted to climax and/or tall trees and a minimum of 30% of all points shall be devoted to
medium trees.
Table 98-606: Street Frontage Landscaping Requirements
Minimum Required Landscaping Points Per 100 Linear Feet of Street Frontage
Zoning District
??
Land Use (see Section 98-206)
All Other
Land Uses
Single-family Residential
(per Section 98-034)
Agricultural
(per Section 98-206(2))
Rural Holding (RH) 20 0 0
Countryside Residential
(CR-5ac)
50 0 0
Estate Residential (ER-1) 45 0 0
Single-family Residential-3
(SR-3)
40 0 0
Single-family Residential-4
(SR-4)
40 0 0
Two-family Residential-6
(TR-6)
45 0 0
Multi-family Residential-8
(MR-8)
50 0 0
Neighborhood Office (NO) 45 0 0
Planned Office (PO) 40 0 0
Neighborhood Business
(NB)
40 0 0
Planned Business (PB) 40 0 0
General Business (GB) 20 0 0
Central Business (CB) 0 0 0
Planned Industrial (PI) 40 0 0
General Industrial (GI) 20 0 0
Heavy Industrial (HI) 20 0 0
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 192
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-607: Landscaping
Requirements for Paved Areas through
Section 98-607: Landscaping
Requirements for Paved Areas
Section 98-607: Landscaping Requirements for Paved Areas
(1) This Section requires that paved areas on certain lots developed after the effective date of
this chapter contain a minimum amount of landscaping within, and within 10 feet of, the
paved area. The intent is to require a continuous visual screen of parking areas from public
rights-of-way at a minimum height of 40 inches. For every ten parking spaces, the
equivalent area of an eleventh parking space shall be provided as a landscaped island or
peninsula within the parking area.
(2) A minimum of 360 square feet of landscaped area, which shall be located within 10 feet of
the paved area, is required for the placement of every 100 landscaping points. Said area
does not have to be provided in one contiguous area. Sample configurations are depicted
in Section 98.603, above. Plants used to fulfill this requirement shall visually screen
parking, loading and circulation areas from view from public streets.
(3) All landscaping areas located adjacent to paved areas shall be separated from the paved
area by a continuous minimum 4 inch tall curb which is constructed of concrete, asphalt,
timber or like material approved by the Director of Public Works.
(4) For every 20 off-street parking stalls or 10,000 square feet of pavement (whichever yields
the greater landscaping requirement) located in a development, the following number of
landscaping points (as described in Section 98.603) shall be provided on a prorated basis,
and installed and maintained per the requirements of Section 98.612. A minimum of 30% of
all points shall be devoted to climax and/or tall trees and a minimum of 40% of all points
shall be devoted to shrubs.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 193
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
through
Section 98-608: Landscaping
Requirements for Other Permanently
Protected Green Spaces
Table 98-607: Paved Area Landscaping Requirements
Minimum Required Landscaping Points Per 10,000 Square Feet of Paved Area or 20 Parking Stalls
Zoning District
??
Land Use (see Section 98-206)
All Other
Land Uses
Single-family Residential
(per Section 98-034)
Agricultural
(per Section 98-206(2))
Rural Holding (RH) 40 0 0
Countryside Residential
(CR-5ac)
100 0 0
Estate Residential (ER-1) 90 0 0
Single-family Residential-3
(SR-3)
80 0 0
Single-family Residential-4
(SR-4)
80 0 0
Two-family Residential-6
(TR-6)
90 0 0
Multi-family Residential-8
(MR-8)
100 0 0
Neighborhood Office (NO) 95 0 0
Planned Office (PO) 80 0 0
Neighborhood Business
(NB)
80 0 0
Planned Business (PB) 80 0 0
General Business (GB) 40 0 0
Central Business (CB) 20 0 0
Planned Industrial (PI) 80 0 0
General Industrial (GI) 40 0 0
Heavy Industrial (HI) 40 0 0
Section 98-608: Landscaping Requirements for Other Permanently Protected Green
Spaces
(1) This Section requires that each acre of other permanently protected green space (Section
98-204) after the effective date of this chapter (See Section 98-011) be planted with a
minimum amount of landscaping.
(2) For every one acre of other permanently protected green space in a development, two
hundred landscaping points (as described in Section 98.603) shall be provided. In addition,
adequate ground cover shall be provided to stabilize the soil.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 194
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-609: Landscaping
Requirements for Required Reforestation through
Section 98-610 Landscaping
Requirements for Bufferyards
Section 98-609: Landscaping Requirements for Required Reforestation
(1) This Section requires that each area required to be reforested, be reforested and
maintained in a manner appropriate to site conditions.
(2) A detailed reforestation plan shall be submitted by the property owner and approved by the
City prior to clear cutting. This plan shall be reviewed by a reforestation consultant chosen
by the City, with funding for consulting services provided by the Petitioner to the City.
Rationale: The provisions of this Section are designed to ensure that reforestation efforts
required as part of woodland disruption mitigation standards result in the thorough and
reasonably rapid replacement of the important and varied environmental functions which
woodlands provide. See Section 98-507.
Section 98-610 Landscaping Requirements for Bufferyards
(1) Purpose:
This Section provides the landscaping and width requirements for bufferyards on lots
developed after the effective date of this chapter. (See Section 98-011). A bufferyard is a
combination of distance and a visual buffer or barrier. It includes an area, together with the
combination of plantings, berms and fencing, that are required to eliminate or reduce
existing or potential nuisances. These nuisances can often occur between adjacent zoning
districts. Such nuisances are dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, signs, and incompatible land
uses, buildings or parking areas.
Rationale: One of zoning's most important functions is the separation of land uses into
districts which have similar character and contain compatible uses. The location of districts
is supposed to provide protection, but in the City of Lake Geneva, this is not the case since
zoning districts permitting uses as diverse as single-family residential and industrial uses
were located next to one another long before the effective date of this chapter. Bufferyards
will operate to minimize the negative impact of any future use on neighboring uses.
(2) Required Locations for Bufferyards:
Bufferyards shall be located along (and within) the outer perimeter of a lot wherever two
different zoning districts abut one another. Bufferyards may be located in required setback
areas. In such instances, the one-half of the bufferyard requirements of this Section shall
be used instead of the street frontage landscaping required in Section 98-606, if such
requiremetns fo this Section are greater. (In such instances, the width of the right-of-way
may be counted as constributing to the width requirements for a bufferyard, however the
minimum width required along the street frontage by Section 98-606 shall be provided in all
cases.) Bufferyard plantings or structures shall not be located on any portion of any
existing, dedicated, or officially mapped right-of-way.
(3) Determination of Required Bufferyard:
The determination of bufferyard requirements is a two-staged process. First, the required
level of bufferyard opacity is determined using Table 98-610(4)(a). Opacity is a
quantitatively-derived measure which indicates the degree to which a particular bufferyard
screens the adjoining property. The required level of opacity indicated by this Table is
directly related to the degree to which the potential character of development differs
between different zoning districts. The provisions of this Subsection indicate the minimum
requirements for bufferyards located along zoning district boundaries
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 195
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-610 Landscaping
Requirements for Bufferyards through
Section 98-610 Landscaping
Requirements for Bufferyards
(a) Identification of Required Level of Opacity:
Table 98-610(4)(a) shall be used to determine the minimum level of opacity for the
required bufferyard. The required level of opacity is determined by the value given in the
cell of the Table at which the column heading along the top row of the table (representing
the subject property's zoning district) intersects with the row heading along the left hand
side of the Table (representing the adjacent property's zoning district). The value listed is
the required level of opacity for the bufferyard on the subject property.
(b) Identification of Detailed Bufferyard Requirements
1. If a proposed use adjoins a parcel for which a bufferyard is required by the presence of a
zoning district boundary, that use shall provide a bufferyard with the level of the opacity
indicated in Table 98-610(4)(a).
2. For each level of opacity listed in Table 98-610(4)(a), a wide variety of width, landscaping
point, berm, and structure combinations are possible. These are listed in Table 98-
610(4)(b). The requirements listed in Table 98-610(4)(b) pertain to the number of
landscaping points, the minimum bufferyard width, and the type of berm or fencing
required within every 100 feet of required bufferyard. A variety of landscaping point
options are available and may be mixed within distinct portions of the same bufferyard.
Section 98-603 describes the various available landscaping point alternatives. Section 98-
611 provides a listing of tree and shrub species which correspond the landscaping point
descriptions.
(4) Tables for Required Bufferyards:
See following pages for Tables 98-610(4)(a) and (b).
(a) Notes for Table 98-610(4)(a)
For properties zoned in the Rural Holding (RH), refer to the Comprehensive Master Plan's
Future Land Use Map to determine the proposed zoning district for said property.
Bufferyard requirements shall be taken from this proposal.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 196
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-610 Landscaping
Requirements for Bufferyards through
Section 98-610 Landscaping
Requirements for Bufferyards
Table 98-610(4)(a): Required Bufferyard Opacity Values
?? Adjacent Property’s Zoning District
??
??
??
?? Subject Property’s Zoning District ??
R
H
C
R
5a
c
E
R
1
S
R
3
S
R
4
T
R
6
M
R
8
N
O
P
O
P
B
N
B
G
B
C
B
P
I
G
I
H
I
RH * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
CR-
5ac
0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.6 1.0
ER
-1
0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.4 0.5 1.0
SR
-3
0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.4 0.5 1.0
SR
-4
0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.4 0.5 1.0
TR
-6
0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.4 1.0
MR
-8
0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.3 1.0
NO 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.3 0.6
PO 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.6
PB 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.6
NB 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.6
GB 0.1 0.1 0.6
CB 0.1 0.6
PI 0.2 0.6
GI 0.5
HI
* For properties zoned in the Rural Holding District (RH), refer to the Comprehensive Master Plan’s Future Land Use
Map to determine the proposed zoning district for said property. Bufferyard requirements shall be taken from this
proposal.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 197
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-610 Landscaping
Requirements for Bufferyards through
Section 98-610 Landscaping
Requirements for Bufferyards
Table 98-610(4)(b) Detailed Bufferyard Requirements
Opacity # Landscaping Points/100 feet Width Required Structure
0.05
00 10’+ Minimum 44’ picket fence*
00 10’+ Minimum 4’ wood rail fence*
40 10’ -
36 15’ -
33 20’ -
31 25’ -
29 30’ -
0.10
00 10’+ Minimum 44” picket fence*
38 10’+ Minimum 4’ wood rail fence*
91 10’ -
80 15’ -
73 20’ -
68 25’ -
65 30’ -
62 35’+ -
00 35’+ Minimum 4’ berm
0.20
00 10’+ Minimum 6’ solid fence*
84 10’+ Minimum 44” picket fence*
133 15’+ Minimum 4’ wood rail fence*
198 15’ -
173 20’ -
158 25’ -
149 30’ -
140 35’ -
10 35’+ Minimum 4’ berm
135 40”+ -
00 40’+ Minimum 5’berm
* Fences contributing to landscaping requirements are not permitted along street frontages for
nonresidential uses. Where used in combination with plant materials to meet bufferyard requirements,
a minimum of 50% of all plant materials shall be located on the exterior side (the side away from the
center of the subject property) of the fence.
NOTE: Opacity standards provided courtesy of Lane Kendig, Inc.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 198
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-610 Landscaping
Requirements for Bufferyards through
Section 98-610 Landscaping
Requirements for Bufferyards
Opacity # Landscaping Points/100 feet Width Required Structure
Continued on next page
0.30
00 10’+ Minimum 6’ solid fence*
198 15’+ Minimum 44” picket fence*
320 20’ -
240 20’+ Minimum 4’ wood rail fence*
276 25’ -
252 30’ -
235 35’ -
104 35’+ Minimum 4’ berm
223 40’ -
44 40’+ Minimum 5’berm
215 45’ -
209 50’+ -
00 50’+ Minimum 6’berm
0.40
53 10’+ Minimum 6’ solid fence*
330 20’+ Minimum 44” picket fence*
440 25’ -
362 25’+ Minimum 4’ wood rail fence*
385 20’ -
349 25’ -
208 30' -
327 35’+ -
148 35’+ -
310 -
299 -
56 -
Continued on next page
* Fences contributing to landscaping requirements are not permitted along street frontages for
nonresidential uses. Where used in combination with plant materials to meet bufferyard
requirements, a minimum of 50% of all plant materials shall be located on the exterior side (the side
away from the center of the subject property) of the fence.
NOTE: Opacity standards provided courtesy of Lane Kendig, Inc.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 199
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-610 Landscaping
Requirements for Bufferyards through
Section 98-610 Landscaping
Requirements for Bufferyards
Opacity # Landscaping Points/100 feet Width Required Structure
0.50
135 15’+ Minimum 6’ solid fence*
564 30’ -
405 30’+ Minimum 44” picket fence*
492 30’+ Minimum 4’ wood rail fence*
499 35’ -
319 35’+ Minimum 4’ berm
454 40’ -
261 40’+ Minimum 5’berm
422 45’ -
405 50’ -
160 50’+ Minimum 6’berm
388 55’ -
374 60’+ -
0.60
221 20’+ Minimum 6’ solid fence*
433 35’+ Minimum 4’ berm
541 35’+ Minimum 44” picket fence*
630 35’+ Minimum 4’ wood rail fence*
626 40’ -
379 40’+ Minimum 5’berm
570 45’ -
525 50’ -
270 50’+ Minimum 6’berm
500 55’ -
480 60’+ -
Continued on next page
* Fences contributing to landscaping requirements are not permitted along street frontages for
nonresidential uses. Where used in combination with plant materials to meet bufferyard requirements,
a minimum of 50% of all plant materials shall be located on the exterior side (the side away from the
center of the subject property) of the fence.
NOTE: Opacity standards provided courtesy of Lane Kendig, Inc.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 200
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-611: Classification of Plant
Species through
Section 98-611: Classification of Plant
Species
Opacity # Landscaping Points/100 feet Width Required Structure
0.80
415 30’+ Minimum 6’ solid fence*
655 40’+ Minimum 4’ berm
627 45’+ Minimum 5’berm
873 45’+ Minimum 44” picket fence*
910 50’ -
505 50’+ Minimum 6’berm
809 50’+ Minimum 4’ wood rail fence*
804 55’ -
744 60’ -
710 65’ -
677 70’+ -
1.00
636 40’+ Min. 6' solid fence*
732 50’+ Min. 6' berm
751 50’+ Min. 5' berm
867 55’+ Min. 4' berm
1091 60’+ Min. 44'' picket fence*
1136 60’+ Min. 4'wood rail fence*
1083 65’
994 70’
934 75’
892 80’+
* Fences contributing to landscaping requirements are not permitted along street frontages for
nonresidential uses. Where used in combination with plant materials to meet bufferyard requirements,
a minimum of 50% of all plant materials shall be located on the exterior side (the side away from the
center of the subject property) of the fence.
NOTE: Opacity standards provided courtesy of Lane Kendig, Inc.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 201
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-611: Classification of Plant
Species through
Section 98-611: Classification of Plant
Species
Section 98-611: Classification of Plant Species
For the purpose of this chapter, plant materials are classified into thirteen (13) groupings:
"climax tree", "tall deciduous tree", "medium deciduous tree", "low deciduous tree", "tall
evergreen tree", "medium evergreen tree", "low evergreen tree", "tall deciduous shrub",
"medium deciduous shrub", "low deciduous shrub", "medium evergreen shrub", "low evergreen
shrub", and non-contributory plants. Species suitable for landscaping use and compatible with
Walworth County climate and soil factors are listed in Table 98-611, below. The Zoning
Administrator (see Section 98-932) shall review proposals for, and the applicability of, species
not contained in this list and is authorized to approve appropriate similar species.
See Appendix 1 for a very detailed listing of plant species and characteristics.
Table 98-611: Classification of Plants
Climax Trees
(75 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple
Ginkgo biloba Ginko
Quercus sp. Oak: Red, White,
Pin
Tall Deciduous Trees
(30 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer sp. Maple: Red, Silver,
Norway
Fraxinus sp. Ash: White, Green
Gleditsia
triancanthos
Honeylocust
Populus
grandidentata
Bigtooth Aspen
Tilia sp Linden: Basswood,
Littleleaf, Redmond
Medium Deciduous Trees
(15 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name
Betula sp. Birch: River, Paper
Prunus sp. Cherry: Choke, Pin
Salix sp. Willow
Low Deciduous Trees
(10 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name
Amelanchier sp. Serviceberry
Crataegus sp. Hawthorn: Cockspur,
Downy, Washington
Malus sp. Crabapple sp.
Tall Evergreen Trees
(40 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name
Abies concolor White Fir
Pinus sp. Pine: Red, White,
Scots
Tsuga Canadensis Canada Hemlock
Medium Evergreen Trees
(20 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name
Thuja occidentalis American Arborvitae
Low Evergreen Trees
(12 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name
Juniperus sp. Juniper:
Mountbatten,
Redcedar
Thuja sp. Arborvitae:
Pyramidal, Techny
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 202
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-611: Classification of Plant
Species through
Section 98-611: Classification of Plant
Species
Tall Deciduous Shrubs
(5 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name
Cornus sp. Dogwood: Grey,
Pagoda
Syringa sp. Lilac: Chinese,
Hyacinth
Viburnum sp. Viburnum:
Arrowwood,
Wayfaringtree,
Nannyberry
Medium Deciduous Shrubs
(3 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name
Corylus americana American Filbert,
Hazelnut
Cotoneaster sp. Cotoneaster
Forsynthia sp Forsythia: Border,
Early, Weeping
Rosa sp. Rose: Virgina,
Rugosa
Low Deciduous Shrubs
(1 Landscaping Point)
Botanical Name Common Name
Berberis thunbergii Japanese Barberry
Spiraea sp. Spirea: Froebel,
Snowmound
Tall-Medium Evergreen Shrubs
(5 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name
Juniperus chinensis Juniper: Pfitzer
Taxus sp. Yew: Japanese
Low Evergreen Shrubs
(3 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name
Juniperus sp. Juniper: Sargent,
Creeping, Andorra
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 203
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-612: Requirements for
Installation, Maintenance & Use of
Landscaped and Bufferyard Areas through
Section 98-612: Requirements for
Installation, Maintenance & Use of
Landscaped and Bufferyard Areas
Section 98-612: Requirements for Installation, Maintenance & Use of Landscaped and
Bufferyard Areas
(1) Installation
(a) Any and all landscaping and bufferyard material required by the provisions of this chapter
shall be installed on the subject property, in accordance with the approved site plan (see
Section 98-908) within 730 days of the issuance of an occupancy permit for any building on
the subject property.
(b) Surety
1. If the subject property is to be occupied prior to the installation of all required landscaping
and bufferyard material, the property owner shall file, subject to approval by the Zoning
Administrator, a bond, a certificate of deposit, and irrevocable letter of credit, or a certified
check, in an amount equal to 110% of the estimate of landscaping materials and
installation cost.
2. If a part of a plat of subdivision is approved per the requirements of this Chapter, said
amount may be split into amounts which are applicable to phases of the plat approved per
the requirements of the City of Lake Geneva Land Division Ordinance.
3. Governmental units to which these bond and guarantee provisions apply may, in lieu of
said contract or instrument of guarantee, file a resolution or letter from officers authorized
to act in its behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this Article.
(c) Existing plant material which meets the requirements of Section 98-603 and which will be
preserved on the subject property following the completion of development, may be
counted as contributing to the landscaping requirements.
(d) All landscaping and bufferyard areas shall be seeded with lawn or native ground cover
unless such vegetation is already fully established.
(e) The exact placement of required plants and structures shall be depicted on the required
detailed landscaping plan per Section 98-908(3)(c) shall be the decision of each property
owner within the requirements of this Section, except that the following requirements
shall be met:
1. Evergreen shrubs shall be planted in clusters in order to maximize their chance for
survival.
2. Where a combination of plant materials, and/or berming and/or fencing is used in a
bufferyard, the fence and/or berm shall be located toward the interior of the subject
property and the plant material shall be located toward the exterior of the subject property.
3. A property owner may establish through a written agreement, recorded with the Register
of Deeds Office, that an adjacent property owner shall agree to provide a partial or full
portion of the required bufferyard on an immediately adjacent portion of their land, thereby
exempting the developer from providing all or a portion of the bufferyard on his property.
4. In no manner shall landscaping or bufferyard materials be selected and/or located in a
manner that results in the creation of a safety or visibility hazard. (See Section 98-703)
5. The restrictions on types of plants listed in Sections 98-604 through 98-607 shall apply.
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 204
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-613 Calculating Landscaping
and Bufferyard Requirements through
Section 98-614 Depiction on Required
Site Plan
(2) Maintenance
The continued and continual maintenance of all required landscaping and bufferyard
materials shall be a requirement of this chapter and shall be the responsibility of the owner
of the property on which said materials are required. This requirement shall run with the
property and is binding upon all future property owners. Development of any and all
property following the effective date of this chapter shall constitute an agreement by the
property owner to comply with the provisions of this Section. Upon failure to comply with
these provisions, the City may enter upon the property for the purpose of evaluating and
maintaining all required landscaping and bufferyard materials, and may specially assess
the costs thereof against the property. Failure to comply with this requirement shall be
considered a violation of this chapter, and shall be subject to any and all applicable
enforcement procedures and penalties. (See Section 98-936)
(3) Use of Required Bufferyard and Landscaped Areas
Any and all required bufferyards or landscaped areas may be used for passive recreation
activities. Said areas may contain pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails provided that: no
required material is eliminated; the total width of the required bufferyard, or the total area of
required landscaping, is maintained; and all other regulations of this chapter are met. In no
event, however, shall swimming pools, tennis courts, sports fields, golf courses, or other
such active recreation used be permitted in such areas. Furthermore, in no instance shall
any parking be permitted in such areas, nor shall any outdoor display of storage of
materials be permitted in such areas. Paving in such areas shall be limited to that required
for necessary access to, through, or across the subject property.
(4) Utility Easements
Landscaping materials, fences and berms which are located within a duly recorded utility
easement and/or a pedestrian easement shall not count toward meeting a landscaping
requirement. However, the width of such areas may be counted as part of a landscaping
requirement.
Section 98-613 Calculating Landscaping and Bufferyard Requirements
In calculating the number of required landscaping points under the provisions of this Article, all
areas and distances on which required calculations are based shall be rounded up to the
nearest whole number of square feet or linear feet. Any partial plant derived from the required
calculations of this Article (for example 23.3 canopy trees) shall be rounded up to the nearest
whole plant (24 canopy trees).
Section 98-614 Depiction on Required Site Plan
Any and all proposed landscaping on the subject property, required to meet the standards of this
chapter, shall be clearly depicted and labeled as to its location and make-up on the site plan
required for the development of the subject property. Refer to Section 98-908(3)(c).
ARTICLE VI: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 205
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-701 Purpose through Section 98-702 Access Standards
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Section 98-701 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to indicate the requirements for access, visibility, off-street parking,
off-street loading, exterior storage, exterior lighting, vibration, noise, air pollution, odors,
electromagnetic radiation, glare and heat, fire and explosion, toxic and noxious materials, waste
materials, drainage, exterior construction materials, and hazardous materials for all development
occurring within the jurisdiction of this Chapter (see Section 98-009).
Section 98-702 Access Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to alleviate or prevent congestion of public
rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing
minimum requirements for the provision of access to public rights-of-way in accordance with
the utilization of various sites.
(2) Permit Required: Each access point onto a public street or right-of-way shall have a permit
issued by the Director of Public Works per Wisconsin Statutes 86.07(2).
(3) Number of Access Points:
(a) Each lot shall have not more than two access points on any street frontage adjacent to any
lot. Said access shall require approval by the Zoning Administrator and the Director of
Public Works.
(b) In no instance shall any lot be permitted more than one access point on any one street if
its frontage on said street is less than 100 linear feet (as measured along the right-of-way
line).
(c) On arterial streets and in certain areas experiencing, or expected to experience,
congestion and/or safety problems, access to a lot may be required to be located via an
access point located on an adjacent property or another street frontage.
(d) For residential uses, two access points serving the same street frontage may be approved
as a conditional use.
(4) Residential Uses: Residential uses shall not have access points onto a nonresidential
collector or arterial street unless such street has the only available frontage.
(5) Nonresidential Uses: Nonresidential uses shall not have access points onto a residential
street unless such street has the only available frontage.
(6) Access Near Street Intersections: At its intersection with the street right-of-way line on an
arterial or nonresidential collector street, no access point shall be located closer than 100 feet
from the intersection of any two street rights-of-way unless such street is the only available
frontage on the subject property. In all cases, access points shall be located as far from an
intersection as the lot size permits.
(7) Distance Between Access Drives: The minimum distance between access drives serving
the same property shall be 25 feet (edge to edge), as measured at the property line. A
distance in excess of said 25 feet may be required if, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator
and the Director of Public Works, present or projected traffic factors warrant a greater
distance.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 206
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-703 Visibility Standards through Section 98-703 Visibility Standards
(8) Angle of Intersection with Public Right-of-Way: All access drives shall intersect with any
public right-of-way at an angle of not less than 75 degrees, and shall intersect at an angle of
90 degrees wherever possible.
(9) Distance from Property Line: The distance from an access drive to the property line of an
adjacent property shall not be less than five feet, as measured along the right-of-way line.
(10)Width of Driveways: All access drives shall have a minimum width of 10 feet for one- and
two-family dwellings, and 18 feet for all other land uses. All curb openings for access drives
shall have a maximum width of 25 feet for all residential uses, and 35 feet for all nonresidential
uses, as measured at the right-of-way line. Access drives may be flared between
the right-of-way line and the roadway up to a maximum of five additional feet.
(11)Traffic Control: The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized and controlled in a
manner which avoids congestion on public streets and other safety hazards. Traffic into and
out of all off-street parking, loading and traffic circulation areas serving six or more parking
spaces shall be forward moving, with no backing into streets or pedestrian ways. Traffic
control devices shall be required as determined by the Director of Public Works.
(12)Depiction on Required Site Plan: Any and all proposed access drives on the subject
property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan required for
the development of the subject property. (Refer to Section 98-909.)
(13)Paving of Access: All access approach areas located within a street right-of-way shall be
paved to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works with a hard, all-weather surface, and
shall be maintained so as to prevent the transport of gravel, dirt, or other eroded material from
the subject property into the right-of-way.
Section 98-703 Visibility Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to alleviate or prevent congestion of public
rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing
minimum requirements for the provision of vehicular visibility.
(2) Requirement: In order to provide a clear view of intersecting streets to motorists there shall
be a triangular area of clear vision formed by the two intersecting streets and a chord
connecting said centerlines, as determined by the Director of Public Works. Generally, the
following standards shall apply:
TABLE 98-703: VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE STANDARDS
Right-of-Way Width Distance from R-O-W Intersection
less than 50 feet 50 feet
50 feet 50 feet
51-60 feet 40 feet
61-66 feet 34 feet
67 feet-82.5 feet 15 feet
greater than 82.5 feet 15 feet
Within said triangular area, no signs, parking spaces, structures, or earthwork in excess of 30
inches, and no vegetation, fencing, nor other such obstructions between 30 inches and 8 feet
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 207
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-704 Off-Street Parking and
Traffic Circulation Standards through
Section 98-704 Off-Street Parking and
Traffic Circulation Standards
in height which exceeds an opacity of 0.2 (see Section 98-610(4)(b)) shall be permitted which
exceeds 30 inches in height above either of the centerline elevations of said two streets.
(3) Depiction on Required Site Plan: Except in the downtown where no requirement is imposed,
any and all visibility triangles located on the subject property shall be depicted as to their
location and configuration on the site plan required for the development of the subject
property. (Refer to Section 98-908.)
Section 98-704 Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to alleviate or prevent congestion of public
rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing
minimum requirements for the provision of off-street parking and circulation in accordance with
the utilization of various sites. Please refer to Section 98-717: Drainage Standards.
(2) Depiction on Required Site Plan: Any and all parking and traffic circulation areas proposed
to be located on the subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on
the site plan required for the development of the subject property. (Refer to Section 98-908.)
Each and every on-site parking space designed to serve as required parking shall not be
located farther than 300 feet, except as permitted by a conditional use permit, of shortest
walking distance from the access to all of the various areas it is designated to serve. A garage
stall, meeting the access requirements of Subsection (6)(d), below, shall be considered a
parking space. Parking spaces for any and all vehicles exceeding 18 feet in length, shall be
clearly indicated on said site plan.
(3) Use of Off-Street Parking Areas: The use of all required off-street parking areas shall be
limited to the parking of operable vehicles not for lease, rent, or sale. Within residential
districts, required parking spaces shall only be used by operable cars and trucks.
(4) Traffic Circulation and Traffic Control: Site circulation shall be designed to provide for the
safe and efficient movement of all traffic entering, exiting, and on the site. Circulation shall be
provided to meet the individual needs of the site with specific mixing of access and through
movements, and where required, shall be depicted on the required site plan. Circulation
patterns shall conform with the general rules of the road and all traffic control measures shall
meet the requirements of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(5) Maintenance of Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Areas: All off-street parking and
traffic circulation areas shall be maintained in a dust-free condition at all times. In no instance
or manner shall any off-street parking or traffic circulation area be used as a storage area,
except as provided for by Section 98-706(3).
(6) Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Design Standards
(a) Surfacing and Marking: All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas (including all
residential driveways -- except those within the RH District) shall be paved with a hard,
all-weather surface, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. Said surfaces
intended for 6 or more parking stalls shall be marked in a manner which clearly indicates
required parking spaces.
(b) Curbing: All off-street parking areas designed to have head-in parking within 6½ feet of
any lot line shall provide a tire bumper or curb of adequate height and which is properly
located to ensure that no part of any vehicle will project beyond the required setbacks of
this Chapter (see Sections 98-402 and 98-403.)
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 208
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-704 Off-Street Parking and
Traffic Circulation Standards through
Section 98-704 Off-Street Parking and
Traffic Circulation Standards
(c) Lighting: All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas serving 6 or more cars shall be
lit so as to ensure the safe and efficient use of said areas during the hours of use. An
illumination level of between 0.4 and 1.0 footcandles is recommended for said areas, and
said illumination level shall not exceed the standards of Section 98-707.
(d) Access: Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or
driveway that is wide enough and designed to provide a safe and efficient means of
vehicular access to the parking space without directly backing or maneuvering a vehicle
into a public right-of-way exceeding 82.5 feet in width. All off-street parking and traffic
circulation facilities shall be designed with an appropriate means of vehicular access to a
street or alley, in a manner which least interferes with traffic movements. No driveway
across public property, or requiring a curb cut, shall exceed a width of 40 feet for
commercial and industrial land uses, or 25 feet for residential land uses. (See also Table
98-704(6)(j).) Off-street parking spaces for residential uses may be stacked or in front of
one-another for the same building unit. Parking spaces located behind an enclosed
garage and located directly off a through aisle shall be a minimum of 30 feet deep.
(e) Signage: All signage located within, or related to, required off-street parking or traffic
circulation shall comply with the requirements of Article VIII.
(f) Handicapped Parking Spaces: Parking for the handicapped shall be provided at a size,
number, location, and with signage as specified by State and Federal regulations.
(g) Parking Space Design Standards: Other than parking required to serve the
handicapped, every and all provided off-street parking space shall comply with the
minimum requirements of Table 98-704(6)(j). The minimum required length of parking
spaces shall be 17.0 feet, plus an additional 1.5 foot vehicle overhang area at the end of
the stall. All parking spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of at least seven feet.
(h) Snow Storage: Required off-street parking and traffic circulation areas shall not be used
for snow storage.
(i) Parking Lot Design Standards: Horizontal widths for parking rows, aisles, and modules
shall be provided at widths no less than listed in Table 98-704(6)(j), and shown on the
following page.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 209
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-704 Off-Street Parking and
Traffic Circulation Standards through
Section 98-704 Off-Street Parking and
Traffic Circulation Standards
Table 98-704(6)(j): Parking Layout Dimensions
?? Minimum Permitted Dimensions ?? ?? Parking Angle in Degrees (??) ??
0??
(parallel)
45?? 60?? 75?? 90??
Stall Width at Parking Angle (SW) 9.0' 9.0' 9.0' 9.0' 9.0'
Stall Width Parallel to Aisle (WP) 17.90' 12.7' 10.4' 9.3' 9.0'
Stall Depth to Wall (D) 9.0'1 17.5'1 19.0' 19.5'1 18.5'1
Stall Depth to Interlock (DI) -- 15.3' 17.5' 18.8' --
Stall Length (including 1.5' curb overhang) (SL) 18.5' 18.5' 18.5' 18.5' 18.5'
Aisle Width (AW) 12.0'2 12.0'2 16.0'2 17.20'2 26.0'2
Throat Length (right-of-way to parking area) (T) Refer to Requirements in Table 98-704(7)(f).
Parking Module Width (PMW):
Wall to Wall (Single-Loaded) (W1) 21.0' 29.5' 35.0' 42.5' 44.5'
Wall to Wall (Double Loaded) (W2) 30.0' 47.0' 54.0' 62.0' 63.0'
Wall to Interlock (Double Loaded) (W3) -- 44.8' 52.5' 61.3' --
Interlock to Interlock (Double Loaded) (W4) -- 42.6' 51.0' 60.6' --
1 Parking spaces located behind an enclosed garage & located directly off a through aisle shall be at least 30 feet
deep.
2 This dimension represents (AW) for one-way traffic. For two-way traffic, add 8.0 feet to a maximum (AW) of 26.0
feet.
Diagram for Table 98-704(6)(j): Typical Parking Layout Dimensions
(7) Calculation of Minimum Required Parking Spaces
(a) General Guidelines for Calculating Required Parking Spaces: The requirements of
Subsection (c), below, shall be used to determine the minimum required number of off-site
parking spaces which must be provided on the subject property. Requirements are
generally tied to the capacity of the use; the gross floor area of the use; or the number of
employees which work at the subject property during the largest work shift. The term
"capacity" as used herein means the maximum number of persons that may be
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 210
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-704 Off-Street Parking and
Traffic Circulation Standards through
Section 98-704 Off-Street Parking and
Traffic Circulation Standards
accommodated by the use as determined by its design or by State Building Code
regulations, whichever number is greater. References herein to "employee(s) on the
largest work shift" means the maximum number of employees working at the facility during
a single given day, regardless of the time period during which this occurs, and regardless
of whether any such person is a full-time employee. The largest work shift may occur on
any particular day of the week or during a lunch or dinner period in the case of a
restaurant. In all cases, one reserved parking space shall be provided for each vehicle
used by the operation during business hours. Said spaces shall be in addition to those
required by Subsection (c), below. Where said parking needs of any land use exceed the
minimum requirements of this Chapter, additional parking spaces sufficient to meet the
average maximum weekly peak-hour parking space demand shall be provided by said
land use.
(b) Joint and Off-Site Parking Facilities
1. Parking facilities which have been approved by the Director of Public Works to provide
required parking for one or more uses, shall provide a total number of parking spaces
which shall not be less than the sum total of the separate parking needs for each use
during any peak hour parking period when said joint parking facility is utilized at the
same time by said uses.
2. Each parking space designed to serve as joint parking shall not be located farther than
300 feet, except as permitted by a conditional use permit, from the access to all of the
various areas it is designated to serve. See Section 98-206(6)(a).
3. The applicant(s) for approval of a joint parking facility shall demonstrate to the Director
of Public Work’s satisfaction that there is no substantial conflict in the demand for
parking during the principal operating hours of the two of more uses for which the joint
parking facility is proposed to serve.
4. A legally binding instrument, approved by the City Administrator, shall be executed by
any and all parties to be served by said joint parking facility. This instrument shall be
recorded with the Register of Deeds Office, and filed with the City Clerk. A fee shall be
required to file this instrument (see Section 98-935).
(c) Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements for Land Uses:
1. The off-street parking requirements for each land use are listed within Section 98-206.
2. Potential Reduction in Parking. The Plan Commission may, through the conditional use
process, decrease the required number of off street automobile parking spaces by up
to 25 percent of the normal requirements based upon technical documentation
furnished by the applicant that indicates, to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission,
that actual off-street parking demand for that particular use is less than the required
standard set forth in this Chapter or that adequate public parking is available within the
vicinity of the subject property. Ord. 12-07
(d) Provision of Fee-in-Lieu of Parking Spaces Development: Within the Central Business
(CB) District, the parking requirements of this Chapter are hereby waived.
(e) Locational Prohibitions for Off-Street Parking Areas
1. Off-street parking shall not be located between the principal structure on a residential
lot and a street right-of-way, except within residential driveways and parking lots
designated on the approved site plan (see Section 98-908).
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 211
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
through
Section 98-705 Off-Street Loading
Standards
2. No private parking shall occur on street terraces, driveways, or any other areas located
within a public right-of-way not explicitly designated by the Director of Public Works.
(f) Minimum Permitted Throat Length: The Table 98-704(7)(f) on the following page shall
be used to determine the minimum permitted throat length of access drives serving
parking lots, as measured from the right-of-way line along the centerline of the access
drive:
TABLE 98-704(7)(f): Minimum Permitted Throat Length
LAND USE TYPE
SCALE OF
DEVELOPMENT
TYPE OF ACCESS STREET
COLLECTOR ARTERIAL
RESIDENTIAL Any Residential 0-100 dwelling units 25 feet
101-200 dwelling units 50 feet 75 feet
201+ dwelling units 75 feet 125 feet
COMMERCIAL Office 0-50,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 50 feet
50,000-100,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 75 feet
100,001-200,000 gross sq. ft. 50 feet 100 feet
200,001+ gross sq. ft. 100 feet 150 feet
In-Vehicle Sales 0-2,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 75 feet
2,001+ gross sq. ft. 50 feet 100 feet
Indoor Entertainment 0- 15,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 50 feet
15,001+ gross sq. ft. 25 feet 75 feet
Commercial Lodging 0-150 rooms 25 feet 75 feet
151+ rooms 25 feet 100 feet
Other Commercial Uses 0- 25,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 50 feet
25,001-100,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 75 feet
100,001-500,000 gross sq. ft. 50 feet 100 feet
500,001+ gross sq. ft. 75 feet 200 feet
INDUSTRIAL All Industrial Uses 0-100,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 50 feet
100,001-500,000 gross sq. ft. 50 feet 100 feet
501,001+ gross sq. ft. 50 feet 200 feet
ALL OTHER
USES:
6+ parking spaces 25 feet 50 feet
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 212
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-705 Off-Street Loading
Standards through
Section 98-705 Off-Street Loading
Standards
Section 98-705 Off-Street Loading Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to prevent congestion of public rights-of-way and
private lots so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing
minimum requirements for the provision of loading facilities on various sites.
(2) Applicability: Any use which has a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet or more, and which
requires deliveries or makes shipments, shall provide off-street loading facilities in accordance
with the regulations of this Section.
(3) Location: All loading berths shall be located 25 feet or more from the intersection of two street
right-of-way lines. Loading berths shall not be located within any required front yard or street
yard setback area. Access to the loading berth shall be located in conformance with Section
98-702. All loading areas shall be located on the private lot and shall not be located within, or
so as to interfere with, any public right-of-way.
(4) Size of Loading Area: The first required loading berth shall be designed in accordance with
Table 98-705(4). All remaining required loading berths shall be a minimum of 25 feet in length.
All required loading berths shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet. The following
standards shall be the minimum used to design loading areas:
Table 98-705(4): Loading Standards
Design Vehicle
Length in
Feet (L)
Dock
Angle (a)
Clearance in
Feet (D)
Berth
Width in
Feet (W)
Apron Space
in Feet (A)
Total Offset
in Feet (F)
WB-40 50
90?? 50
10 63 113
12 56 106
14 52 102
60?? 44
10 46 90
12 40 84
14 35 79
45?? 36
10 37 73
12 32 68
14 29 65
WB-50 55
90?? 55
10 77 132
12 72 127
14 67 122
60?? 48
10 55 103
12 51 99
14 46 94
45?? 39
10 45 84
12 40 79
14 37 76
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 213
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
through
(5) Access to Loading Area: Each loading berth shall be located so as to facilitate access to a
public street or alley, and shall not interfere with other vehicular or pedestrian traffic per
Section 98-704, and shall not interfere with the function of parking areas. In no instance
shall loading areas rely on backing movements into public rights-of-way.
(6) Surfacing and Marking: All required loading areas shall be paved and maintained in a dusfree
condition at all times. Said surface shall be marked in a manner which clearly indicates
required loading areas.
(7) Use of Required Loading Areas: The use of all required loading areas shall be limited to the
loading and unloading of vehicles. Said area shall not be used to provide minimum required
parking spaces.
(8) Lighting: All loading areas shall be lit so as to not exceed the standards of Section 98-707.
(9) Signage: All signage located within, or related to, loading areas shall comply with the
requirements of Article VIII.
(10)Depiction on Required Site Plan: Any and all required loading areas proposed to be located
on the subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan
required for the development of the subject property. (Refer to Section 98-908.)
(11)Calculation of Required Loading Spaces
(a) Indoor Institutional Land Uses: One loading berth shall be required for each building
having a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet to 29,999 square feet. For such uses
located in buildings having a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater, two loading
berths shall be required.
(b) Commercial (except Offices), Storage/Disposal, Transportation, and Industrial Land
Uses: One loading berth shall be required for each building having a gross floor area of
6,000 square feet to 29,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross
floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater, an additional loading berth shall be required for
any portion of each 50,000 square feet of gross floor area in addition to the original 29,999
square feet.
(c) Office Land Uses: One loading berth shall be required for each building having a gross
floor area of 6,000 square feet to 99,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings
having a gross floor area of 100,000 square feet or greater, an additional loading berth
shall be required for any portion of each 100,000 square feet of gross floor area in addition
to the original 99,999 square feet.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 214
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-706 Exterior Storage
Standards for Residential, Office and
Commercial Districts through
Section 98-706 Exterior Storage Standards
for Residential, Office and Commercial
Districts
Section 98-706 Exterior Storage Standards for Residential, Office and Commercial Districts
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to control the use of residential, office and
commercial property for exterior storage so as to promote the safety and general welfare of
the public. For exterior storage in agricultural and industrial districts, refer to Section 98-206.
(2) Requirements for Exterior Storage in Residential Zoning Districts: No person shall park
or store recreational vehicles on a lot in a residential district except within a fully enclosed
structure or except as provided herein.
(a) For the purposes of this Ordinance, a recreational vehicle or equipment shall include
boats, boats with trailers, motor homes, motor coaches, pickup campers, camping trailers,
travel trailers, fifth-wheel trailers, large utility trailers, race cars and their trailers, canoes or
kayaks and their trailers, tent campers, folding campers, utility trailers, carnival equipment
and their trailers, and cases or boxes used to transport recreational vehicles or their
equipment, and similar equipment and vehicles.
(b)Outside parking of recreational vehicles and equipment are subject to the following
provisions:
1. No more than two (2) recreational vehicles may be parked or stored outside a fully
enclosed structure in the rear yard.
2. A recreational vehicle may be parked or stored in a front or side yard on an existing
driveway, from Memorial Day until Labor Day, as long as it is on a concrete, asphalt, or
paving brick surface. Vehicles may not be used as living quarters in this situation. If
rear of lot is not accessible through driveway, a recreational vehicle may be parked
long term on the side yard as long as no portion extends past the plane of the house
which abuts a public Right of Way other than an alley way.
3. A recreational vehicle shall be located not closer than three (3) feet to a side or rear lot
line.
4. The recreational vehicle shall be maintained and be in good condition and safe for
effective performance for the function in which it was intended. The exterior of the
vehicle shall be intact.
5. Recreational vehicles shall be roadworthy. Vehicles that require a license shall be
properly licensed.
6. No recreational vehicles or equipment shall be parked or stored in any open space
outside a building unless such equipment is wholly owned by the property owner who
shall be in residence at the property in question. If the property is rented, such storage
shall be permitted to the tenant only provided that such equipment is owned by the
tenant.
7. All equipment shall be parked or stored as inconspicuously as possible on the
property. The area around the equipment or vehicle must be kept weed free and free
of accumulation of other storage material.
8. Under no circumstances shall a recreational vehicle be parked uncoupled from the tow
vehicle in a public Right of Way, including an Alley way.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 215
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-707 Exterior Lighting
Standards (Ord. No. 14-12, January 22,
2015) through
Section 98-707 Exterior Lighting Standards
(Ord. No. 14-12, January 22, 2015)
(3) Requirements for Exterior Storage in Office and Commercial Districts: In all office and
commercial zoning districts (See Section 98-102 for a listing of these districts), all materials
and equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building except for the following
which shall not be located within any front yard or required street yard (except for vehicles in
designated parking spaces) and shall be stored a minimum of five (5) feet from any and all
property lines: screened refuse containers; construction materials, landscape materials and
related equipment connected within on-site construction; and off-street parking.
(4) Inoperative Motor Vehicles and Junk: Refer to the City Code of Ordinances.
Section 98-707 Exterior Lighting Standards (Ord. No. 14-12, January 22, 2015)
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the spill-over of light and glare on
operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in the vicinity of a light source in
order to promote traffic safety and prevent the creation of nuisances. A further purpose of
this Section is to regulate outdoor night lighting fixtures to preserve and enhance the area’s
dark sky while promoting safety, conserving energy, and preserving the environment for
astronomy.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all private exterior lighting within the
jurisdiction of this Chapter, except for lighting within public rights of way and/or lighting
located on public property. For the purpose of this Section, “Exterior lighting” means an
outdoor artificial illuminating device, whether permanent or portable used for illumination or
advertisement, including general lighting fixtures, searchlights, spotlights and floodlights,
whether for architectural lighting, parking lot lighting, landscape lighting, signage or other
purposes. “Shielded” means a fixture that is shielded in such a manner that light rays
emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected
at least fifteen degrees below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the
fixture where light is emitted.
(3) Depiction on Required Site Plan: Any and all exterior lighting shall be depicted as to its
location, orientation and configuration on the site plan required for the development of the
subject property. (Refer to Section 98-908).
(4) Requirements:
(a) Orientation of Fixture: all exterior lighting shall be shielded, except for UL-rated fixtures
of 1,600 lumens or less. In no instance shall an exterior lighting fixture be oriented so
that the lighting element (or a transparent shield) is visible from a property located within
a residential zoning district, except where a clear glass, decorative/ornamental fixture is
used with a UL-rated fixture of 1,600 lumens or less. The use of shielded luminaries and
careful fixture placement is required so as to facilitate compliance with this requirement.
All floodlighting and spotlighting fixtures shall be shielded.
(i) Exceptions are as follows:
(1) Landscape Lighting: Unshielded landscape lighting is permitted and is not
required to be angled downward, provided that the lighting element or
transparent shield is not visible from adjoining properties and that each UL-rated
fixture has a light output of 1,600 lumens or less.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 216
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-707 Exterior Lighting
Standards (Ord. No. 14-12, January 22,
2015) through
Section 98-707 Exterior Lighting Standards
(Ord. No. 14-12, January 22, 2015)
(2) Driveway/Walkway, Identity Sign or Decorative Lighting: Unshielded lighting
at entryways, including driveways and walkways and lighting for property identity
signs, gates, fences, and post top entrances is permitted, and the fixture is not
required to be angled downward, provided that each UL-rated fixture has a light
output of 1,600 lumens or less.
(3) Architectural Lighting: All architectural lighting shall use UL-rated fixtures of
1,600 lumens or less. All exterior lighting during such period shall have a
minimum of 90 percent of their light fall onto the illuminated structure, rather than
into sky or space beyond the structure. Under no circumstances shall the
illumination of architecture be permitted between 11 P.M. and 7 A.M.
(b) Intensity of Illumination and Filtering: In no instance shall the amount of illumination
attributable to exterior lighting, as measured at the property line, exceed 0.50
footcandles above ambient lighting conditions on a cloudless night. In addition to this
requirement, all exterior lighting fixtures shall not exceed the illumination levels
recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of America (IES) as given in
Appendix A. All metal halide fixtures shall be filtered by a smoke, tinted, or frosted glass
or acrylic enclosure. Quartz glass shall not be considered as meeting this requirement.
(c) Maximum Light Output: For all residential uses, the maximum light output of all
nonexempt exterior lighting shall not exceed a total on any given property under single
ownership equal to 10,000 lumens multiplied by the total number of acres of such
property. For all nonresidential uses, the maximum light output of all nonexempt exterior
lighting shall not exceed a total on any given property under single ownership equal to
50,000 lumens multiplied by the total number of acres of such property. Lighting beneath
a gas station canopy shall be exempted from this total; however, such lighting may not
exceed a maximum light output of 25 footcandles.
(d) Maximum Height: The maximum fixture mounting height shall be as follows:
(i) CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, and TR-6 districts: 8 feet
(ii) MR-8, NB, and NO districts: 12 feet
(iii) PI, GI, and HI districts:30 feet
(iv) All other districts: 20 feet
(v) For sports lighting, see Section 98-707(7).
(e) Location: Light fixtures shall not be located within required bufferyards.
(f) Minimum Lighting Standards: All areas designated on required site plans for vehicular
parking, loading, or circulation and used for any such purpose after sunset shall provide
artificial illumination in such areas at a minimum intensity as recommended in the
Lighting Tables of Appendix A.
(g) Lamp Types: In an effort to foster sustainability, the City requires energy-efficient
exterior light sources. High-pressure sodium, fluorescent, low-pressure sodium
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 217
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-707 Exterior Lighting
Standards (Ord. No. 14-12, January 22,
2015) through
Section 98-707 Exterior Lighting Standards
(Ord. No. 14-12, January 22, 2015)
lamps,light emitting diodes (LED), or metal halide shall be used for all light fixtures ULrated
to be lamped greater than 1,800 lumens. All light bulbs and fixtures not
incompliance with this regulation may continue to be used, but replacement light bulbs
and fixtures must conform to the requirements of this Section.
(h) Nonconforming Lighting: All lighting fixtures existing prior to the effective date of this
Chapter shall be considered as legal conforming structures, (see Section 98-207).
However, such nonconforming fixtures are encouraged to be extinguished by 11 P.M. All
replacement fixtures shall fully comply with the requirements of this Section.
(i) Special Events Lighting: Any temporary use using exterior lighting which is not in
complete compliance with the requirements of this Section shall secure a temporary use
permit. Refer to Section 98-906.
(j) Hours of Operation:
(i) Display Lot Lighting: Display lot lighting shall be extinguished within 30 minutes
after closing of the business. Under no circumstances shall the illumination of display
lots be permitted between 11 P.M. and 7 A.M. All exterior lighting during such period
shall be at LOW levels for security purposes only.
(ii) Lighting of Commercial and Industrial Uses: Lighting shall be extinguished within
30 minutes after closing of the business, except in the case of a special event in
which a temporary use permit has been granted under Section 98-906.The Zoning
Administrator may permit security lighting or lighting for after-hours and maintenance
employees, provided such lighting is on separate circuits, and provided that the
areas to remain lighted are located or screened in such a way to reduce impact
substantially from the normal lighting.
(iii) Landscape Lighting: Landscape lighting shall not be operated between the hours of
11 P.M. to dawn, except solar-powered landscape lighting lacking an on/off switch
may be operated between the hours of 11 P.M. to dawn, provided that such lighting
does not exceed 0.1 footcandle of illumination, subject to Subsections 4(a)(i)(1) and
(4)(c) of this Section.
(5) Exempt Lighting: The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:
(a) Security lighting.
(b) Doorway lighting within residential zoning districts.
(c) All temporary emergency lighting necessary to ensure public safety as determined by
the City of Lake Geneva Police Department, Fire Department, or other emergency
service providers.
(d) Lighting used in the undertaking of municipal road construction, emergency repair or
maintenance of utility lines, sewer, water mains or similar public infrastructure.
(e) Holiday lighting between October 20 and January 31 of the following year.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 218
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-707 Exterior Lighting
Standards (Ord. No. 14-12, January 22,
2015) through
Section 98-707 Exterior Lighting Standards
(Ord. No. 14-12, January 22, 2015)
(f) Upward lighting of flags in the form of a single, ground mounted, narrow cone spotlight
located at the base of the flagpole which confines the illumination to the flag itself.
(g) Underwater lighting used for swimming pools, provided such lighting meets all relevant
electrical codes.
(h) Temporary lighting reviewed and approved in connection with a permit issued by the City
provided that the lighting is extinguished and removed according to the permit.
(i) Lighting for radio, communication and navigation towers, provided that the owner or
occupant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City that Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) regulations can only be met through the use of lighting that does
not comply with this Section, and that the provisions of this Section are otherwise met to
the fullest extent possible. Lighting for any wireless communications facility shall not be
permitted unless required by the FAA; in which case, required lighting shall be of the
lowest allowed intensity that meets FAA requirements.
(j) Lighting for outdoor activities, including: pool areas, tennis courts, paddle courts, hockey
and/or skating rinks, horse arenas; provided such lighting shall be extinguished by 11
P.M.
(k) Lighting that is used for a specified period of time which is necessary for a specific task
or purpose while said task or purpose is actively being performed.
(6) Prohibited Lighting: The following lighting shall not be permitted within the City:
(a) Mobile or ground mounted searchlights, except those used for governmental or
emergency purposes.
(b) Strobe lights and laser lights, including laser light shows and aerial laser lights.
(c) Rope lighting, except by conditional use permit.
(d) Neon lights.
(e) Flashing, blinking, flickering, scrolling, rotating, pulsating, tracing lights or revolving
lighting, unless temporarily triggered by a security system and extinguished within 30
minutes after the time of security response. Refer to Section 98-804(1)(c).
(f) Lighting which is used to outline a building, structure, or window, including but not limited
to rope, neon, and fluorescent tube lighting.
(g) Any light fixture that may be construed as or confused with a traffic signal, traffic control
device or maritime navigational markers.
(h) Lighting that is determined by the Cityof Lake Geneva Police Department to contribute to
a condition of disabling or distracting glare into a public roadway.
(i) Lighting used to illuminate property other than that on which the fixture is located and
which constitutes light trespass.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 219
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-708 Vibration Standards through Section 98-708 Vibration Standards
(j) Mercury vapor exterior lighting fixtures installed after August 14, 2000.
(7) Sports Lighting: “Sports lighting” refers to light fixtures used to illuminate courts, arenas,
riding arenas, fields, tracks and other recreational areas generally utilizing high light output
fixtures, higher light levels and are mounted on higher than average freestanding poles. For
sports lighting the following shall apply:
(a) Light fixtures shall be shielded as designed and installed.
(b) Light levels shall not exceed the appropriate Illuminating Engineering Society of America
(IES) recommended level of spectator/play for the activity.
(c) Sports lighting shall be set to automatically shut off when there is no scheduled play and
shall be extinguished no later than 11 P.M. Lower light levels for off the field lighting may
be provided for an additional 30 minutes for safe egress.
(d) The mounting height for sports lighting shall be no greater than one-fourth the distance
to the nearest property line from where the sports lighting is located.
(e) Sports lighting trespass shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle of illumination at any point on
the property line.
(f) Designs for all sports lighting shall be submitted to the City prior to installation to assure
that the requirements of this Section are satisfied.
Section 98-708 Vibration Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of vibration which adversely
affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the
general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all uses and activities which create
detectable vibrations, except that these standards shall not apply to vibrations created during
the construction of the principal use on the subject property.
(3) Depiction on Required Site Plan: Any activity or equipment which create detectable
vibrations outside the confines of a building shall be depicted as to its location on the site plan
required for the development of the subject property. (See Section 98-908.)
(4) Requirements: No activity or operation shall cause or create earthbone vibrations in excess
of the displacement values given below.
(5) Method of Measurement: Measurements shall be made at or beyond the adjacent lot line or
the nearest residence district boundary line, as described below. Vibration displacements shall
be measured with an instrument capable of simultaneously measuring in three mutually
perpendicular directions. The Maximum permitted displacements shall be determines in each
zoning district by the following formula:
D = K/f where D = displacement in inches
K = a constant to be determined by reference to the tables below
f = the frequency of vibration transmitted through the ground, cycles per second
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 220
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-708 Vibration Standards through Section 98-708 Vibration Standards
(6) Standards in the General Industrial District: In the General Industrial District, the maximum
earth displacement permitted at the points described below shall be determined by use of the
formula above and the appropriate K constant shown in the table below.
LOCATION K
On or beyond the any adjacent lot line
Continuous 0.015
Impulsive 0.030
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.075
On or beyond any residence district boundary line
Continuous 0.003
Impulsive 0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.015
(7) Standards in the Heavy Industrial District: In the Heavy Industrial District, the maximum
earth displacement permitted at the points described below shall be determined by use of the
formula above and the appropriate K constant shown in the table below.
LOCATION K
On or beyond the any adjacent lot line
Continuous 0.030
Impulsive 0.060
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.150
On or beyond any residence district boundary line
Continuous 0.003
Impulsive 0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.015
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 221
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
through Section 98-709 Noise Standards
(8) Standards in the Planned Industrial District: In the Planned Industrial District, the
maximum earth displacement permitted at the points described below shall be determined by use
of the formula above and the appropriate K constant shown in the table below.
LOCATION K
On or beyond any residence district boundary line
Continuous 0.003
Impulsive 0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.015
Section 98-709 Noise Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of noise which adversely
affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the
general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all uses and activities which create
detectable noise, except that these standards shall not apply to noise created during the
construction of the principal use on the subject property, or by incidental traffic, parking,
loading, maintenance or agricultural operations.
(3) Requirements: All noise shall be muffled so as not be objectionable due to intermittence, beat
frequency or shrillness. In no event shall the sound-pressure level of noise radiated
continuously from a facility exceed at the lot line of the subject property the values given in
Table 98-709(3)(a) (set out hereafter) as measured by, at the minimum, a Type 2 sound meter
that is in compliance with ANSI standard S1.4-1983, where said lot abuts property within any
residential, office, commercial zoning district, or the Planned Industrial (PI) District. (See
Section 98-102.)
Table 98-709(3)(a): Maximum Permitted Noise Level at Lot Line
For Noise Radiated Continuously*
Zoning District Increase in Noise Level
over Ambient Level (dBA)
RH, CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, TR-6, MR-8 plus 3 dBA
NO, PO, PB, NB, GB, CB, PI plus 5 dBA
GI, HI plus 8 dBA
* If the noise is not smooth and continuous or is present only during day time hours, one or more
of the corrections, in Table 98-709(3)(b) on the following page, shall be added to or subtracted
from each of the decibel levels given above in Table 98-709(3)(a).
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 222
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-710 Air Pollution Standards through
Section 98-712 Electromagnetic Radiation
Standards
(4) Noises that were in effect as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall be considered legal
nonconforming noises. The burden of proof to demonstrate that said noises were in effect
prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be the responsibility of the noise producer.
Table 98-709(3)(b) Adjustment Factors for Maximum Noise Levels
Type of Operation in Character of Noise Correction in Decibels
Daytime operation only plus 5
Noise source operates less than 20%of any one-hour period plus 5*
Noise source operates less than 5% of any one-hour period plus 10*
Noise source operates less than 1% of any one-hour period plus 15*
Noise of impulsive character (Hammering, etc.) minus 5
Noise of periodic character (hum, speech, etc.) minus 5
Error! Bookmark not defined.* Apply one of these corrections only.
Section 98-710 Air Pollution Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of air pollution which
adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to
promote the general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities, except
that these standards shall not apply to air pollution created during the construction of the
principal use on the subject property, or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance
operations.
(3) Standards:
(a) The emission, from all sources within any lot, of particulate matter containing a particle
diameter larger than 44 microns is prohibited.
(b) Emission of smoke or particulate matter of density equal to, or greater than Number 2 on
the Ringelmann Chart (US Bureau of Mines) is prohibited at all times.
(c) Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage
areas, yards, and roads within the boundaries of any lot shall be kept to a minimum by
appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling or other acceptable means.
(d) All applicable state and federal standards.
Section 98-711 Odor Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of odor which adversely
affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the
general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities, except
that these standards shall not apply to odors created during the construction of the principal
use on the subject property, or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance
operations. Public landfills and public sanitary sewage treatment plants shall be exempted
from the requirements of this Section as essential public services.
(3) Standards: Except for food preparation and cooking odors emanating from residential land
uses, and odors associated with property development and maintenance (such as
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 223
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-712 Electromagnetic Radiation
Standards through
Section 98-714 Fire and Explosion
Standards
construction, lawn care, and the painting and roofing of structures), no odor shall be created
for periods exceeding a total of 15 minutes per any day which are detectable (by a healthy
observer such as the Zoning Administrator or a designee who is unaffected by background
odors such as tobacco or food) at the boundary of the subject property, where said lot abuts
property within any residential, office, commercial zoning district, or the Planned Industrial (PI)
District. (See Section 98-102.)
Section 98-712 Electromagnetic Radiation Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of electromagnetic radiation
which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and
to promote the general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities.
(3) Standards: It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any planned or intentional
source of electromagnetic radiation for such purposes as communication, experimentation,
entertainment, broadcasting, heating, navigation, therapy, vehicle velocity measurement,
weather survey, aircraft detection, topographical survey, personal pleasure, or any other use
directly or indirectly associated with these purposes which does not comply with the then
current regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding such sources of
electromagnetic radiation. Further, said operation in compliance with the Federal
Communications Commission shall be unlawful if such radiation causes an abnormal
degradation in performance of other electromagnetic radiators or electromagnetic receptors of
quality and proper design because of proximity, primary field, blanketing, spurious radiation,
harmonic content, modulation or energy conducted by power or telephone lines. The
determination of "abnormal degradation in performance" and "of quality and proper design"
shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the latest
principles and standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of Radio
Engineers, and the Electronic Industries Association. In case of any conflict between the latest
standards and principles of the above groups, the following precedence in the interpretation of
the standards and principles shall apply: (1) American Institute of Electrical Engineers, (2)
Institute of Radio Engineers, and (3) Electronic Industries Association.
Section 98-713 Glare and Heat Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of glare or heat which
adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to
promote the general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities, except
that these standards shall not apply to glare created during the construction of the principal
use on the subject property, or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance
operations.
(3) Standards: No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from temperature
processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the lot line of the
subject property shall be permitted. (See also, Section 98-707.) Furthermore, there shall be no
transmission of heat or heated air so as to be discernible (by a healthy observer such as the
Zoning Administrator or a designee) at the lot line. Solar systems regulated by Wisconsin
Statutes 66.03 shall be entitled to the protection of its provisions.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 224
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-714 Fire and Explosion
Standards through Section 98-717 Drainage Standards
Section 98-714 Fire and Explosion Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of fire and/or explosion
hazards which adversely effect adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of
nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities.
(3) Standards: Any use involving materials which could decompose by detonation shall locate
such materials not less than 400 feet from any residential or office zoning district (see Section
98-102), except that this standard shall not apply to the storage or usage of liquefied
petroleum or natural gas for normal residential or business purposes. All activities and storage
of flammable and explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate safety and
fire fighting devices in accordance with all fire prevention codes of the State of Wisconsin.
Section 98-715 Toxic or Noxious Material Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the handling of toxic or noxious material
which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and
to promote the general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities.
(3) Standards:
(a) No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the subject property, or through
percolation into the subsoil, toxic or noxious material in such concentration as to be
detrimental to, or endanger, the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or
damage to the property or business.
(b) No use shall discharge at any point into any public or private sewage disposal system or
stream, or into the ground, any liquid or solid materials except in accordance with the
regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Public Health.
Section 98-716 Waste Material Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the handling of waste material which
adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to
promote the general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities.
(3) Standards:
(a) No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the subject property, or through
percolation into the subsoil, toxic or noxious material in such concentration as to be
detrimental to, or endanger, the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or
damage to the property or business.
(b) No use shall discharge at any point into any public or private sewage disposal system or
stream, or into the ground, any liquid or solid materials except in accordance with the
regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 225
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-717 Drainage Standards through
Section 98-719 Hazardous Materials
Standards
Section 98-717 Drainage Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of drainage which adversely
affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the
general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities.
(3) Standards: No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water
runoff which causes property damage, a nuisance, and/or erosion on adjacent properties.
Such runoff shall be properly conveyed to a public storm drain, drainageway or other such
public drainage facility per the approval of the Director of Public Works. All parking lots four
thousand (4,000) square feet or larger shall be internally drained with catch basins connected
to a municipal storm sewer.
Section 98-718 Exterior Construction Material Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the use of certain exterior construction
materials creation so as to attain a degree of uniformity in exterior appearance, and thus
maintain and enhance the attractiveness and property value of certain zoning districts.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities.
(3) Standards for all Residential, Office, Commercial, and the PI Zoning Districts: Except for
exposed foundations not to exceed three feet in height from the adjacent grade, all non-single
family development located within the RH, CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, TR-6, MR-8, NO, PO,
NB, PB, GB, CB, and PI districts shall employ only high-quality, decorative exterior
construction materials on the visible exterior of the following portions of all structures and
buildings:
(a) any portion of the building or structure visible from adjacent residentially zoned property;
(b) any portion of the building or structure located within 50 feet of a public right-of-way; or,
(c) any other portion of the building or structure visible from a public street and/or situated at
an angle of 60 degrees or less: from a line which is parallel to the nearest right-of-way (for
uncurved rights-of-way); or from a line which is parallel to a chord connecting the
right-of-way boundary on the inside side of the curve at points located at, or opposite from,
the two outer boundaries of the subject property along the right-of-way line (for curved
rights-of-way).
The following exterior construction materials shall not be considered "high quality, decorative:"
non-decorative concrete block or cinder block, non-decorative concrete foundation walls or
panels, corrugated or other metal with exposed fasteners, non-decorative plywood, asphaltic
siding, or other materials using exposed fastener systems or non-decorative surfaces as
determined by the Plan Commission.
(4) Trademark architecture shall not be permitted.
(5) Architectural design is subject to the Site Plan Review process, (see Section 98-908).
(6) Exceptions: The Conditional Use Process (per Section 98-905) may be used to propose the
use of a material otherwise prohibited by subsection (3) above.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 226
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-719 Hazardous Materials
Standards through Section 98-720 Fencing Standards
Section 98-719 Hazardous Materials Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to provide information to the City regarding the nature
of land uses which involve research, production, storage, disposal, handling, and/or shipment
of hazardous materials.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities involving
any one or more of the following:
(a) Micro-Organism Cultures subject to Wisconsin Statutes 94.65;
(b) Pesticides subject to Wisconsin Statutes 94.67(25);
(c) Biological Products subject to Wisconsin Statutes 95.39;
(d) Hazardous Substances subject to Wisconsin Statutes 100.37(1)(c);
(e) Toxic Substances subject to Wisconsin Statutes 101.58(2)(j);
(f) Infectious Agents subject to Wisconsin Statutes 101.58(2)(f) or;
(g) Any material for which the State of Wisconsin requires notification of a local fire
department
(h) Any other uses, activities, or materials which are subject to County, State, or Federal
hazardous, or related, materials regulations.
(3) Standards: All land uses involving such hazardous materials shall submit a written description
of such materials and the operations involving such materials conducted on their property as
part of the required site plan submittal. (See Section 98-908)
Section 98-720 Fencing Standards
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the materials, location, height, and
maintenance of fencing, landscaping walls and decorative posts in order to prevent the
creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all fencing, landscape walls and
decorative posts equal to, or exceeding, 30 inches in height, for all land uses and activities.
(3) Standards:
(a) Materials:
1. Residential Districts: Acceptable materials for constructing fencing, landscape walls,
and decorative posts include wood, stone, brick, wrought iron, chain link, vinyl and wire
mesh, except that wire mesh and chain link fencing is not permitted within required
front yard or street yard areas. Any fence within a street yard, including along property
lines which intersect a right-of-way, shall be a maximum of 60% opaque, except with
the granting of a conditional use permit per Section 98-905.
2. Nonresidential Districts: Acceptable materials for constructing fencing, landscape
walls, and decorative posts include wood, stone, brick, wrought iron, chain link, and
wire mesh. Barbed wire fencing shall not be permitted. Any fence within a street yard,
including along property lines which intersect a right-of-way, shall be a maximum of
60% opaque, except with the granting of a conditional use permit per Section 98-905.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 227
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-721 Signal Receiving
Antennas (Satellite Dishes) Standards through
Section 98-721 Signal Receiving Antennas
(Satellite Dishes) Standards
3. Temporary Fencing: Temporary fencing, including the use of wood or plastic snow
fences for the purposes of limiting snow drifting between November 1 and April 1,
protection of excavation and construction sites, and the protection of plants during
grading and construction is permitted for up to 180 consecutive days and no more than
180 consecutive days per calendar year.
4. Snow Fences: Snow fences constructed of wood and wire, and/or plastic shall be
permitted only as temporary fences.
(b) Location: On all properties, no fence, landscape wall, or decorative post shall be located
closer than 2 feet to the front yard or street yard property line. Fences may be located on
any property line abutting a side or rear yard.
(c) Maximum Height: The maximum height of any fence, landscape wall, or decorative post
shall be the following:
1. Fences in excess of 36" tall shall not be permitted within a required yard setback,
including street front yard, street side yard, and street rear yard, except with the
granting of a conditional use permit per Section 98-905. (Ord. No. 98-11 11/9/98)
2. 6 feet when located on any residentially zoned property, but not within a required front
yard setback or a required street yard setback; and
3. 8 feet when located on any nonresidentially zoned property, but not within a required
front yard or a required street yard, except that security fences may exceed this height.
(d) Orientation: Any and all fences, landscape walls, or decorative posts shall be erected so
as to locate visible supports and other structural components toward the subject property.
(e) Maintenance: Any and all fences, landscape walls, or decorative posts shall be
maintained in a structurally sound and attractive manner.
(f) Swimming Pools: Fencing for swimming pools shall be provided per the Model
Swimming Pool Enclosure Code established by the National Spa and Pool Institute
(NSPI), which is available from the City Public Works Department.
Section 98-721 Signal Receiving Antennas (Satellite Dishes) Standards
(1) Purpose: This Section regulating the placement of signal receiving antennas (including roofmounted
antennas which are greater than 15 feet and satellite dishes which are greater than
18 inches) is adopted to:
(a) Provide uniform regulation of all signal receiving antenna devices;
(b) Secure placement of such antennas in an aesthetically sensitive manner while allowing
users reasonable reception of signals;
(c) Protect the public from injury from antennas that are inadequately mounted, unduly
susceptible to wind pressure, improperly installed and wired, or are placed on structures
insufficiently designed or constructed to safely support the antenna; and
(d) Provide for placement of such antennas in locations that preserve access to rear property
areas by firefighting apparatus and emergency personnel.
(2) Permit Required: No owner shall, within the City of Lake Geneva, build, construct, use or
place any type of signal receiving antenna until a permit shall have first been obtained from
the Zoning Administrator.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 228
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-721 Signal Receiving
Antennas (Satellite Dishes) Standards through
Section 98-721 Signal Receiving Antennas
(Satellite Dishes) Standards
(3) Definitions:
(a) For purposes of this Section, a "signal receiving antenna" is defined as any apparatus
capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in a
planetary orbit. This definition includes all types of signal receiving antennas, including,
without limitation, parabolic antennas, home earth stations, satellite television disks, UHF
and VHF television antennas, and AM, FM, ham and short-wave radio antennas,
regardless of the method of mounting.
(b) "Owner" means the holder of record of an estate in possession of fee simple, or for life, in
land or real property, or a vendee of record under a land contract for the sale of an estate
in possession in fee simple or for life but does not include the vendor under a land
contract. A tenant in common or joint tenant shall be considered such owner to the extent
of his interest. The personal representative of at least one (1) owner shall be considered
an owner.
(4) Application: Application for a signal receiving antenna permit shall be made in writing to the
Zoning Administrator. With such application, there shall be submitted a fee (see Section 98-
935) and a sufficient set of mounting plans and specifications, including a general plot plan
showing the location of the proposed signal receiving antenna with respect to streets, lot lines
and buildings. If such application meets all requirements of this Section, the application shall
be approved.
(5) Installation Standards: Signal receiving antennas installed in any zoning district within the
City shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) Setbacks:
1. Any signal receiving antenna and its mounting post shall be located a minimum of ten
(10) feet from any property line.
2. Subject to the provisions herein, signal receiving antennas shall only be located in the
rear yard of any lot. If reasonable reception of signals is not possible with a rear yard
placement due to the physical characteristics of the lot and area, the signal receiving
antenna shall be placed in the side yard of the lot. In the event that reasonable
reception of signals is not possible by locating the signal receiving antenna on the rear
or side yard of the property, such antenna may be placed in the front yard or on the
roof of structures on the property. For corner lots, a side yard is only a yard that does
not face a street.
3. If side yard, front yard or roof mounting is requested, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine where reasonable reception is possible, based on evidence provided by the
person seeking to erect or construct the antenna.
(b) Mounting: Signal receiving antennas attached to the wall or roof of any principal or
accessory structure shall be permitted only if the structure is properly constructed to carry
all imposed loading and complies with applicable state and local building code
requirements. The Zoning Administrator may require engineering calculations.
(c) Diameter: the diameter of the signal receiving antenna shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in
diameter for commercial uses or ten (10) feet in diameter for residential uses, except for
systems used to provide community antenna television services.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 229
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-721 Signal Receiving
Antennas (Satellite Dishes) Standards through
Section 98-721 Signal Receiving Antennas
(Satellite Dishes) Standards
(d) Height:
1. A ground-mounted signal receiving antenna, including any platform or structure upon
which said antenna is mounted or affixed, may not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height,
as measured from the ground to the highest point of the dish.
2. A roof-mounted antenna may not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height above the
surrounding roof line as measured from the lowest point of the existing roof line.
(e) Wind Pressure: All signal receiving antennas shall be permanently mounted in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for installation. All such installations
shall meet a minimum wind load design velocity of eighty (80) MPH.
(f) Electrical Installations: Electrical installations in connection with signal receiving
antennas, including grounding of the system, shall be in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code, Wisconsin State Electrical Code and the instructions of the
manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter requirements shall govern. All cable used to
conduct current or signals from the signal receiving antenna to the receivers shall be
installed underground unless installation site conditions preclude underground. If a signal
receiving antenna is to be used by two (2) or more residential property owners, all
interconnecting electrical connections, cables and conduits must also be buried. The
location of all such underground lines, cables and conduits shall be shown on the
application for a permit. All signal receiving antennas shall be grounded against direct
lightning strikes.
(g) Temporary Placement: No portable or trailer-mounted signal receiving antenna shall be
allowed, except for temporary installation for on-site testing and demonstration purposes
for periods not exceeding five (5) days. However, such trial placement shall be in
accordance with all provisions of this Section. Failure to comply shall result in a citation
being issued for violation of this Section. Any person making such temporary placement
shall first give written notice to the Zoning Administrator of the date when such placement
shall begin and end.
(h) Advertising: No form of advertising or identification, sign or mural is allowed on the signal
receiving antenna other than the customary manufacturer's identification plates.
(i) Interference with Broadcasting: Signal receiving antennas shall be filtered and/or
shielded so as to prevent the emission or reflection of an electromagnetic radiation that
would cause any harmful interference with the radio and/or television broadcasting or
reception on adjacent properties. In the event that harmful interference is caused
subsequent to its installation, the owner of the signal receiving antenna shall promptly take
steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with Federal Communications
Commission regulations.
(j) Compliance with Federal Regulations: The installation and use of every signal receiving
antenna shall be in conformity with the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984
and regulations adopted thereunder.
(k) Aesthetic Considerations: Signal receiving antennas shall be located and designed to
reasonably reduce visual impact from surrounding properties at street level.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 230
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-722 Wind Energy Systems
Standards through
Section 98-722 Wind Energy Systems
Standards
(6) Enforcement:
(a) It shall be unlawful to construct, use, build or locate any signal receiving antenna in
violation of any provisions of this Section. In the event of any violation, the Common
Council or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation may
institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this Section.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this Section
shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty found in Section 98-936.
Section 98-722 Wind Energy Systems Standards
(1) Construction of Wind Energy Systems: No person shall construct or operate a wind energy
conversion system (WECS) without having fully complied with the provisions of this Section.
(2) Permits Required:
(a) A zoning permit shall be obtained to allow construction of a WECS.
(b) A WECS permit shall be obtained from the City Zoning Administrator for the construction of
all WECS.
(3) Application Requirements: An application for a permit to build a wind energy system shall
include the following:
(a) The property lines of the proposed site of construction.
(b) Proposed location of the WECS.
(c) Location and description of all structures located on the property where the WECS site is
proposed.
(d) Location of all above-ground utility lines within a radius equal to two (2) times the height of
the proposed WECS.
(e) Location of all underground utility lines on the property where a WECS site is proposed.
(f) Dimensional representation of the structural components of the tower construction
including the base and footings.
(g) Schematic of electrical systems associated with the WECS including all existing and
proposed electrical connections.
(h) Manufacturer's specifications and installation and operation instructions or specific WECS
design information.
(i) Certification by a registered professional engineer that the tower design is sufficient to
withstand wind load requirements for structure as defined by the Uniform Building Code.
(4) Blade Clearance: The minimum distance between the ground and any protruding blade(s)
utilized on a WECS shall be fifteen (15) feet, as measured at the lowest point of the arc of the
blades. The minimum distance shall be increased as necessary to provide for vehicle
clearance in locations where over-sized vehicles might travel.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 231
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-722 Wind Energy Systems
Standards through
Section 98-722 Wind Energy Systems
Standards
(5) Climbing Towers, Tower Access: Access to towers shall be controlled by fences six (6) feet
in height around the tower and anti-climbing devices. Existing local regulations regarding
attractive nuisances shall cover wind systems as well. A sign indicating shock hazard shall be
placed on the tower. Such sign shall state: "Warning. Electrical shock hazard. No unauthorized
persons on tower. No Trespassing." Cables, ropes or wires used to secure the WECS shall be
appropriately marked to prevent accidental bodily harm.
(6) Tower Construction: Tower construction shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of
the Wisconsin State Building Code including, but not limited to, ILHR Sections 50.12, 53.10,
53.12, 62.37, 62.38, 62.39, 62.40, 62.41, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and any future
amendments, additions, and/or revisions to the same.
(7) Utility Interconnection: The WECS, if interconnected to a utility system, shall meet the
requirements for interconnection and operate as set forth in the electrical utility's then-current
service regulations applicable to WECS; these standards are subject to review by the Public
Service Commission.
(8) Setback Requirements:
(a) No WECS shall be constructed in any setback, dedicated easement, or dedicated
roadway.
(b) Installation of any WECS may not be nearer to any property lines or right-of-way for
overhead electrical transmission or distribution lines than three (3) times the height of the
WECS structure.
(9) Noise: During all operations, from commencement through abandonment, all noise and
vibrations shall conform with the requirements of the City of Lake Geneva Code of
Ordinances.
(10)Interference with Navigational Systems: No WECS shall be installed or operated in such a
manner that is not in compliance with Federal Aviation Administration regulations.
(11)Electrical Distribution Lines: All WECS electrical distribution lines shall be located
underground.
(12)Required Safety Features:
(a) All WECS shall be designed with an automatic overspeed control to render the system
inoperable when winds are blowing in excess of the speeds for which the machine is
designed.
(b) All WECS shall have a manually operable method to render the system inoperable in the
event of a structural or mechanical failure of any part of the system including the automatic
overspeed control.
(c) All WECS shall be designed with an automatic control to render the system inoperable in
case of loss of utility power to prevent the WECS from supplying power to a de-energized
electrical distribution system.
(d) Any WECS thereof declared to be unsafe by the Zoning Administrator by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or
abandonment is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
City of Lake Geneva Code of Ordinances.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 232
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-723 Swimming Pools
Standards through
Section 98-723 Swimming Pools
Standards
(13)Maintenance: The Zoning Administrator or his representative shall have the right, at any
reasonable time, to enter, in the company of the owner or his agent, the premises on which a
WECS has been constructed to inspect all parts of said WECS installation and require that
repairs or alterations be made within thirty (30) days if, in his judgment, there exists a
deficiency in the structural stability of the system.
(14)Inspections: A yearly inspection at a fee to be determined from time to time by resolution of
the Common Council shall be made by the Zoning Administrator to certify the safety and
maintenance of the WECS and accessory structures.
Section 98-723 Swimming Pools Standards
(1) Definition: A "swimming pool" is a body of water or an outdoor structure containing a body of
water in a receptacle or other container having a depth for water at any point greater than one
and one-half (1-1/2) feet located above or below the surface of ground elevation, installed in
such a manner that the pool will remain in place as a fixture throughout the full year and will
be considered as a permanent or semi-permanent structure on the land. The term includes all
structural facilities, appliances and appurtances, equipment and other items used and
intended to be used for the operation and maintenance of a private or residential swimming
pool.
(2) Exempt Pools: Storable children's swimming or wading pools, with a maximum dimension of
fifteen (15) feet and a maximum wall height of fifteen (15) inches and which are so constructed
that it may be readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to its original integrity are
exempt from the provisions of this Section.
(3) Permit Required: Before work is commenced on the construction or erection of private or
residential swimming pools or on any alterations, additions, remodeling or other
improvements, an application for a swimming pool building permit to construct, erect, alter,
remodel or add must be submitted in writing to the Building Inspector. Plans and specifications
and pertinent explanatory data should be submitted to the Building Inspector at the time of
application. No work or any part of the work shall be commenced until a written permit for such
work is obtained by the applicant. The required building permit fee pursuant to the City
Building Code shall accompany such application.
(4) Construction Requirements: In addition to such other requirements as may be reasonably
imposed by the Building Inspector, the Building Inspector shall not issue a permit for
construction as provided for in subsection (2), above, unless the following construction
requirements are observed:
(a) Approved Materials: All materials and methods of construction in the construction,
alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvements and pool installation shall be in
accord with all state regulations and code and with any and all ordinances of the City now
in effect or hereafter enacted.
(b) Plumbing: All plumbing work shall be in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the
City and all state codes. Every private or residential swimming pool shall be provided with
a suitable draining method, and in no case shall waters from any pool be drained into the
sanitary sewer system, onto lands of other property owners adjacent to that on which the
pool is located or in the general vicinity.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 233
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-724 Outdoor Storage of
Firewood Standards through
Section 98-724 Outdoor Storage of
Firewood Standards
(c) Electrical Installations: All electrical installations, including lighting and heating but not
limited thereto, which are provided for, installed and used in conjunction with a private
swimming pool shall be in conformance with the state laws and City ordinances regulating
electrical installations.
(5) Setbacks and Other Requirements:
(a) Private swimming pools shall be erected or constructed on rear or side lots only and only
on a lot occupied by a principal building. No swimming pool shall be erected or
constructed on an otherwise vacant lot. A lot shall not be considered vacant if the owner
owns the contiguous lot and said lot is occupied by a principal building.
(b) All swimming pools shall be at least ten (10) feet from any lot line or building unless
designed and approved as an addition to a building.
(6) Enclosure:
(a) Fence; In-Ground Pools: All outdoor, in-ground swimming pools shall have a fence or
other solid structure not less than four (4) feet in height completely enclosing the pool with
no opening therein (other than doors or gates) larger than three (3) inches square. All
gates or doors opening through the enclosure shall be kept securely closed and locked at
all times when not in actual use and shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching
device designed to keep and be capable of keeping such door or gate securely locked at
all times when not in actual use.
(b) Above-Ground Pools; Pool Wall Barrier:
1. An approved barrier shall consist of a solid wall of durable material of which the pool
itself is constructed and shall extend directly above the vertical water enclosing wall of
the pool. Such walls shall extend more than three (3) feet above the level of the
ground immediately adjacent to the pool. Such a solid pool wall barrier shall not be
located within six (6) feet of any other wall or fence or other structure which can be
readily climbed by children. Every entrance to a pool, such as a ladder, must be
secured or adequately safeguarded to prevent unauthorized entry into the pool.
2. The pool enclosure may be omitted where portable pools are installed above ground
and have a raised deck around the entire pool perimeter with an attached enclosed
railing a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches high on the top.
(7) Compliance: All swimming pools existing at the time of passage of this Chapter not
satisfactorily fenced shall comply with the fencing requirements of this Section or when water
is placed in the pool. Enclosures on existing pools shall be inspected by the Building Inspector
for compliance. Variations in enclosure requirements that do not adversely affect the safety of
the public may be approved.
(8) Draining and Approval Thereof: No private swimming pool shall be constructed so as to
allow water therefrom to drain into any sanitary sewer nor to overflow upon or cause damage
to any adjoining property. Provisions may be made for draining the contents of any swimming
pool into a storm sewer, but such installation shall be subject to prior approval by the Plumbing
Inspector.
(9) Filter System Required: All private swimming pools within the meaning of this Chapter must
have, in connection therewith, some filtration system to assure proper circulation of the water
therein and maintenance of the proper bacterial quality thereof.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 234
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-724 Outdoor Storage of
Firewood Standards through
Section 98-725 Design Requirements for
Large Developments (Ord. No. 99-2
2/22/99)
(10)Dirt Bottoms Prohibited: All swimming pools of a permanent nature shall have the sides and
bottom of a smooth finish, and no sand or dirt bottom shall be permitted.
Section 98-724 Outdoor Storage of Firewood Standards
(1) No person shall store firewood in the front yard on residentially zoned property, except that
firewood may be temporarily stored in the front yard for a period of thirty (30) days from the
date of its delivery.
(2) Firewood should be neatly stacked and may not be stacked closer than two (2) feet to any lot
line and not higher than six (6) feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence where firewood can
be stacked against the fence as high as the fence. Fences as used in this Section shall not
include hedges and other vegetation.
(3) All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be promptly and properly
disposed of and shall not be allowed to remain on the premises.
(4) Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting disease to healthy trees
and woodpiles that harbor or are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are public
nuisances and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of this Code of Ordinances.
(5) Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the side and rear yard may be used for storage of
firewood at any one (1) time.
Section 98-725 Design Requirements for Large Developments (Ord. No. 99-2 2/22/99)
The following conditional use standards shall apply to all new indoor sales and service-oriented
buildings in the General Business (GB) and Planned Business (PB) zoning districts within the City
of Lake Geneva in excess of 60,000 gross square feet. These conditions shall also be applied to
all building additions to existing buildings, which brings the total building size to over 60,000 gross
square feet. Such conditions shall apply to both new development and to portions of development
prior to the adoption of this ordinance. This 60,000 square foot limit shall apply to individual freestanding
buildings and to Group Developments in which the combined total of all structures within
a development (regardless of diverse lotting, use or tenancy) combine to more than 60,000 gross
square feet.
(1) Building exterior materials shall be of high aesthetic quality on all sides of the structure, such
as, glass, brick, decorative concrete block, or stucco. Decorative architectural metal with
concealed fasteners may be approved with special permission from the City.
(2) Building exterior design shall be unified in design and materials throughout the structure, and
shall be complementary to other structures in the vicinity. However, the development shall
employ varying building setbacks, height, roof, treatments, door and window openings, and
other structural and decorative elements to reduce the apparent size and scale of the
structure. A minimum of 20 percent of the combined facades of the structure shall employ
actual façade protrusions or recesses. A minimum of 20 percent of all of the combined linear
roof eave or parapet lines of the structure shall employ differences in height of eight feet or
more as measured eave to eave or parapet to parapet. Roofs with particular slopes may be
required by the City to complement existing buildings or otherwise establish a particular
aesthetic objective.
(3) Mechanical equipment, refuse containers and any permitted outdoor storage shall be fully
concealed from on-site and off-site ground level views, with materials identical to those used
on the building exterior.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 235
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-725 Design Requirements for
Large Developments (Ord. No. 99-2
2/22/99) through
Section 98-725 Design Requirements for
Large Developments (Ord. No. 99-2
2/22/99)
(4) Standard Corporate Trademark building designs, materials, architectural elements, and colors
all shall be acceptable, as determined by the City, only as subtlety integrated into the more
generic design of the building as a whole. Color schemes of all architectural elements shall be
muted, neutral, non-reflective and non-use nor tenant specific.
(5) Public entryways shall be prominently indicated from the building’s exterior design, and shall
be emphasized by on-site traffic flow patterns. All sides of the building that directly face or abut
a public street or public parking area shall have, or appear to have, public entrances.
(6) Loading areas shall be completely screened from surrounding roads, residential, office, and
commercial properties. Said screening may be through internal loading areas, screen wall
which will match the building exterior in materials and design, fully opaque landscaping at time
of planting, or combinations of the above. Gates and fencing may be used for security
purposes, but not for screening, and shall be of high aesthetic quality.
(7) Vehicle access from public streets shall be designed to accommodate peak on-site traffic
volumes without disrupting traffic on public streets from inadequate parking lot design or
capacity, inadequate access drive entry throat length, improper access drive width or design,
or inadequate driveway location. The impact of traffic generated by the proposed development
shall be demonstrated by a traffic impact analysis performed by the applicant’s traffic engineer
to not adversely impact off site public roads, intersections, interchanges during the peak hour
of on-site traffic – as determined as coinciding with a full parking lot. Where the project shall
adversely impact off-site traffic, the City may deny the application, may require a size
reduction in the proposed development, or may require off-site improvements.
(8) Parking lot design shall employ interior landscaped islands wit a minimum of 400 square feet
at all parking isle ends, and in addition shall provide a minimum of one landscaped island of a
minimum of 400 square feet in each parking isle for every 20 cars in that aisle. Aisle-end
islands shall count toward meeting this requirement. Landscaped medians shall be used to
break large parking areas into distinct pods, with a minimum of 100 spaces in any one pod.
(9) A minimum of one two hundred square foot cart return area shall be provided for every parking
area pod. There shall be no exterior cart return nor cart storage areas located within twentyfive
feet of the building in areas located between the building and a public street.
(10) The applicant shall demonstrate full compliance with City standards for stormwater
management, sanitary sewerage, public water, erosion control and public safety.
(11) On site landscaping shall be provided per the landscaping requirements of the Lake Geneva
zoning ordinance except that building foundation landscaping and paved area landscaping
shall be provided at 1.5 times the required landscape points for development in the Planned
Business Zoning District.
(12) A conceptual plan for exterior signage shall be provided at time of GDP that provides for
coordinated and complimentary exterior sign location, configurations, and colors throughout
the planned development. All freestanding signage within the development shall compliment
the on-building signage. Free standing sign materials and design shall compliment building
exterior, and may not exceed the maximum height requirement of the zoning ordinance.
(13) The entire development shall provide for full and safe pedestrian and bicycle access within
the development, and shall provide appropriate connections to the existing and planned
pedestrian and bicycle facilities in the community and in surrounding neighborhoods, including
sidewalk connections to all building entrances from all existing or planned public sidewalks or
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 236
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-730 Administration &
Enforcement of Performance Standards through
Section 98-730 Administration &
Enforcement of Performance Standards
pedestrian/bike facilities. The development shall provide secure bicycle parking and
pedestrian furniture in appropriate quantities and location.
(14) Where such developments are proposed to provide a new location for a business already
located within the community, a required condition of approval for the new development shall
be a prohibition on conditions of sale, lease, or use of the previously occupied building or site
which provide limits beyond the range of applicable local, state or federal regulations. If such
limits are required, the applicant may seek City approval to demolish the previously occupied
structure and prepare the site for some future development.
(15) The applicant shall provide adequate evidence that the proposed development and uses shall
not hinder or undermine the City’s community character objectives as stated and elaborated in
the City’s Comprehensive Master Plan.
(16) The applicant shall provide adequate evidence that the proposed development shall not have
the likely result of creating long-term vacancies for the tenants’ current location. Or long-term
vacancies in specialized buildings related to the potential closure of competing local
businesses.
(17) The applicant shall provide adequate evidence that the proposed development shall not have
the likely result of hindering the preservation or attainment of the community’s desired small
city community character as exemplified by certain off-site impacts, including new lane
additions, traffic signals, stormwater management problems, sudden declines in road levels of
service or substantial impacts on city facilities or services.
(18) The granting of a conditional use for such a project shall require a five vote majority of the
City Council. (Ord. No. 00-1 1/24/00)
Section 98-730 Administration & Enforcement of Performance Standards
(1) Determinations necessary for administration and enforcement of performance standards set
forth herein range from those which can be made with satisfactory accuracy by a reasonable
person using normal senses and no mechanical equipment, to those requiring great technical
competence and complex equipment for precise measurement. It is the intent of this Chapter
that:
(a) Where determinations can be made by the Zoning Administrator using equipment normally
available to the City or obtainable without extraordinary expense, such determinations
shall be so made before notice of violations is issued.
(b) Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it unreasonable for the City to
maintain the personnel or equipment necessary for making difficult or unusual
determinations, procedures shall be available for causing corrections or apparent
violations of performance standards, for protecting individuals from arbitrary, capricious,
and unreasonable administration and enforcement of performance standard regulations,
and for protecting the general public from unnecessary costs for administration and
enforcement.
1. The Zoning Administrator shall give written notice, by Certified mail or other means,
ensuring a signed receipt for such notice to the person or persons responsible for the
alleged violations. The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and
the reasons why the Zoning Administrator believes there is a violation in fact, and shall
require an answer or correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 237
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-730 Administration &
Enforcement of Performance Standards through
Section 98-730 Administration &
Enforcement of Performance Standards
2. The notice shall state, and it is hereby declared, that failure to reply or to correct the
alleged violation to the satisfaction of the administrative official within the time limit set
constitutes admission of violation of the terms of this Chapter. The notice shall further
state that upon request of those to whom it is directed, technical determination as
described in this Chapter will be made, and that if violations as alleged are found,
costs of such determinations shall be charged against those responsible for the
violation, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate, but that if it is
determined that no violation exists, the cost of the determination will be paid by the
City.
(2) Enforcement of the provisions of this Article shall be per Section 98-936.
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 238
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-801 Purpose through Section 98-802 Sign Permits
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS
Section 98-801 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to establish standards for the fabrication, erection, and use of signs
and signage for all properties within the City of Lake Geneva. This Article regulates the location,
type, size, and height of signage in order to protect and promote the public welfare, health, and
safety of persons within the community; to aid in the development and promotion of business and
industry; and to ensure implementation of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Lake Geneva
within the City's zoning districts. The adoption of this Article reflects the formal finding of fact on
the part of the City of Lake Geneva Plan Commission and the Lake Geneva Common Council that
regulation of signage furthers four compelling governmental interests:
(1) To promote the public welfare, health, and safety of all persons using the public thoroughfares
and right-of-ways within the City of Lake Geneva as to the signage displayed thereon, or
overhanging, or projecting into such public spaces;
(2) To advance the aesthetic goals of the City throughout the community, and to ensure the
effectiveness and flexibility in the design of, and the creativity of, the use of such devices
without creating detriment to the general public;
(3) To reduce the visual clutter caused by advertising signage which the City has determined is a
significant cause of unsafe traffic and visibility conditions; and
(4) To limit the spread of unattractive strip commercial development, of which signs are a primary
contributor, so as to be respectful of the reasonable rights of other advertisers and business
entities whose messages are also displayed in such areas.
Furthermore, the City of Lake Geneva advocates that this regulation leaves ample and adequate
alternative channels of commercial speech communication for the messages portrayed on such
advertising signage, namely, print media, broadcast media, and point-of-purchase display, and is
narrowly defined so as to limit any prohibitions on commercial speech on exterior signage.
Section 98-802 Sign Permits
(1) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (2) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move, or convert any sign in the City, or cause the same to be
done, without first obtaining a sign permit for each sign from the City of Lake Geneva Zoning
Administrator as required under this Article. This Section shall apply and be construed to
require a permit for a change of copy on any sign or for any conversions or changes in the
sign structure for which a permit has been previously issued. This Section shall not apply for a
repainting with the same sign copy, cleaning, repair, or other normal maintenance of the sign
or sign structure. No new permit is required for signs which have permits on the date in which
this Chapter was adopted and which conform with the requirements of this Article on the date
of its adoption unless and until the sign is altered or relocated in any way.
(2) The following sign uses and purposes are permitted in all zoning districts without the need for
a sign permit. Such signs shall not count as part of the maximum permitted sign area as
regulated by Section 98-806.
(a) Address numerals and identification signs not exceeding four square feet in area.
(b) Legal notices and other signs established, or ordered, by any governmental agency.
(c) Memorial signs and tablets displayed in cemeteries.
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 239
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-802 Sign Permits through Section 98-802 Sign Permits
(d) On-premise directional signs which bear no advertising if under four square feet, and if
limited to business site or business name or logo.
(e) Temporary signs which conform to the requirements of Section 98-807.
(f) Political signs and flags of government, religious, fraternal, or civic organizations.
(g) Auxiliary signs per Subsection 98-803(1)(b), if under four square feet.
(h) Menu Board signs per Subsection 98-803 (1)(j), if under four square feet.
(3) Community information signs shall be permitted only as a conditional use within all zoning
districts and upon any property within the jurisdiction of the City of Lake Geneva Zoning Code.
As such, the review of a request for the erection of a community information sign shall comply
with the requirements of Section 98-905 of the City of Lake Geneva Zoning Code. The
proposed size, configuration, and design of the sign shall be described as part of the
conditional use requirements. As a conditional use, the City of Lake Geneva may revoke the
designation of an approved community information sign if such sign fails to comply with the
requirements of this Article. Such action shall proceed per the requirements of Subsection 98-
802(8). Upon revocation, the owner of said sign shall have 30 days to remove the sign at the
owner's expense.
(a) Such sign shall only display information regarding events and information of general
interest to the residents of Lake Geneva. Copy which may be considered as advertising a
product, private or restricted participation event, or activity for private profit shall be
prohibited.
(b) Such sign may be located on private or public property (except for residential properties
within the ER-1, SR-3, and SR-4 zoning districts.)
(c) Such sign shall conform to the visibility requirements of Subsection 98-804(1)(i).
(d) Such sign shall not be counted as adding to the area of signage on the subject property for
the purposes of regulating sign area per Subsection 98-806(6).
(4) Permit Requirements:
(a) The sign permit fee shall be required for all new signs and any modifications of any
existing sign face or sign structure (See Section 98-935).
(b) Any sign permit fee granted hereunder may not be assigned or transferred to any other
sign or modified sign face or sign structure.
(c) Only those permanent or temporary signs which have been granted a permit from the
Zoning Administrator in accordance with the provisions of this Section may be erected,
installed, constructed or maintained.
(d) For all other signs (excluding free-standing signs) the owner or tenant may include all such
signs at one premise under one permit if provisions of Subsection 98-802(5) are complied
with.
(e) All signs which are located over a public right-of-way shall require the property owner or
tenant to procure public liability insurance in a company licensed to transact business in
Wisconsin for the principal sum of not less than $25,000 liability to any one person or
$50,000 liability on account of any one accident. Such policy shall further have an
endorsement protecting the City of Lake Geneva or its interest as the result of any
accident or injury for which the City might become liable.
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 240
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-802 Sign Permits through Section 98-802 Sign Permits
(5) Application Procedure: Each initial application for a sign permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator on forms to be provided by that office, prior to installation of a new sign or
modification of an existing sign face or sign structure. Application shall include:
(a) The name and address of the permit applicant.
(b) A legible scaled drawing with description and dimensions of the sign(s) to be erected or
maintained under that permit and the sign's proposed location on the building or site.
(c) Written proof of consent from the property owner upon which the sign(s) are to be erected
and maintained.
(d) Proof of payment of the appropriate sign permit fee, when required.
(e) Evidence of liability, insurance policy, or bond as required herein for signs located over a
public right-of-way per Subsection 98-802(4), above.
(f) Any other item of information that may be reasonably required by the Zoning Administrator
or Plan Commission for the purpose of application evaluation.
(6) Granting and Issuance:
(a) All sign permit applications shall be reviewed by the City staff, who shall deny or grant
such applications, within ten business days of receipt of the complete application and
payment of fee per (1)-(5), above. Upon granting, the Zoning Administrator shall issue the
sign permit.
(b) No permit for a sign issued hereunder shall be deemed to constitute permission or
authorization to maintain an unlawful sign nor shall any permit issued hereunder constitute
a defense in an action to abate an unlawful sign.
(7) Basis for Granting: In reviewing a sign permit application, the City staff may consider the
following factors in deciding whether or not to grant the issuance of a sign permit.
(a) Whether the sign is compatible with the surroundings, pursuant to the objectives of proper
design and zoning criteria.
(b) Whether the sign is designed, installed, and maintained to meet the sign users needs
while at the same time promoting the surrounding environment desired by the general
public.
(c) Whether the sign is designed, constructed, installed, or maintained in such a manner that
it does not endanger public safety or traffic safety.
(d) Whether the sign is legible, readable, and visible in the circumstances in which it is to be
used.
(e) Whether the sign, including size, height, illumination and location, is respectful of
reasonable rights of other advertisers whose messages are displayed in the area.
(f) Whether the sign is in compliance with the provisions of this Article.
(g) Whether the sign is in compliance with the provisions of the City of Lake Geneva General
Ordinances relating to traffic safety, traffic visibility setbacks, and the Zoning Ordinance.
(8) Revocation:
(a) Upon Class I notice and after a public hearing conducted by the Plan Commission, any
permit may be revoked by the Plan Commission in the event that the applicant has failed
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 241
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-803 Signage Definitions and
General Signage Standards through
Section 98-803 Signage Definitions and
General Signage Standards
to comply with the provisions of these regulations or any conditions that may have
accompanied the permit at the time of granting.
(b) Any sign permit issued by the Zoning Administrator shall be null and void and
automatically revoked in the event that construction, installation, or manufacture of the
sign has not been commenced within 180 days from the date of the issuance of such
permit. If work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90
days any time after the work is commenced, the original permit shall become null and void.
A new permit shall first be obtained to complete the work, and a new permit fee shall be
required.
(c) Upon any revocation the sign(s) subject to such revoked permits, whether free-standing,
overhanging, or projecting shall be removed by the licensee within 45 days of such
revocation.
(d) Revocation shall not give cause to a right of total or partial reimbursement of license fees
paid.
(9) Appeals: Any permit application reviewed by the City staff and/or the Historic Preservation
Commission, which is denied or any revocation, under (8) above, shall be subject to appeal to
the Plan Commission per the requirements of the conditional use process. Charges for said
appeal shall be returned if said appeal is successful.
(10)Signs in Historic and Special Districts: In addition to these sign regulations, all signs within
any historic or special district shall be subject to the provisions of Ordinance 96-2: City of Lake
Geneva Historic Preservation Ordinance.
(11)Enforcement: Any person, firm, or corporation violating any such provision of this article will
be subject to issuance of a citation under this subsection without written notice or warning.
(Ord. No. 01-20 4/9/01)
(a) Penalty: Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this Article shall be
subject to a penalty, upon conviction thereof, by forfeiture under Section 98-936, together
with the costs of prosecution. Each separate offense and each day a violation continues or
occurs, shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Other Remedies in Law or Equity: Nothing under this Subsection shall prevent the City
of Lake Geneva from exercising any other remedies, in law or equity, and the penalties
outlined herein are cumulative and in addition to any other such remedies.
(c) Removal of Defective or Dangerous Signs by the City: The Zoning Administrator shall
cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public safety or health and extends or
projects into any public thoroughfare or right-of-way within the City such as abandoned,
dangerous, or materially defective signs or signs for which no permit has been issued.
(Ord. No. 01-20 4/9/01)
(d) Revocation of General Business License: In addition to all other penalties any person,
firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article for a fifteen (15) day period shall
have their General Business License revoked for non-compliance with this section. (Ord.
No. 01-20 4/9/04)
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 242
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-803 Signage Definitions and
General Signage Standards through
Section 98-803 Signage Definitions and
General Signage Standards
Section 98-803 Signage Definitions and General Signage Standards
The following definitions shall be used by this Article to assist in the establishment of clear cut
signage regulations. In general, Sign Purposes refers to where or how a sign is used. Sign Types
refers to the style of the sign, and Sign Measurement explains how the dimensions of a sign are
determined.
Sign: Any object, device, display, structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors and in view of the
general public, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means,
including words, letters, figures, logos, symbols, fixtures, projected images, or in-window signs
(described as signs located inside buildings and visible from and located within five (5) feet of a
window). Signs do not include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state, city,
religious, fraternal, or civic organization; also merchandise and pictures or models of products or
services incorporated in a window display, works of art which in no way identify a product, or
scoreboards located on athletic fields. Building colors and outline lighting which do not convey a
logo or message specific to the use (as determined by the Zoning Administrator) are not
considered signs. Definitions of particular functional, locational, and structural types of signs are
listed in this Section. (Traffic control and other public agency signs located within a right-of-way
are not included within this definition and are not regulated by the provisions of this Article.) (Ord.
No. 01-20 4/9/01)
(1) Sign Purposes:
(a) Advertising sign (Off-premise sign): A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the
premises where the sign is displayed. Advertising signs include billboards. (Refer to
Subsection 98-804(1)(j).) No new off-premise advertising signs shall be permitted within
the City.
(b) Auxiliary sign: A sign which provides special information such as price, hours of
operation, or warning and which does not include brand names, or information regarding
product lines or services. It may contain a business logo if the logo is under one square
foot in area. Examples of such signs include "no trespassing" signs and signs which list
prices of gasoline, up to one price listing sign per type of fuel, which must be displayed on
a single structure.
(c) Business sign (On-premise sign): A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, offered, or manufactured upon the
premises where the sign is located. Refer to Section 98-806.
(d) Community information sign: A permanent sign approved with a conditional use permit
which may have changeable copy and which is limited to the display of information of
interest to the general community regarding scheduled public events and public activities.
Refer to Subsection 98-802(3).
(e) Directional sign, Off-premise: A sign which indicates only the name, direction, and/or
distance of a governmental facility. Refer to Subsection 98-804(1)(f). This definition does
not pertain to off-premise advertising signs. Refer to Subsection 98-803(1)(a).
(f) Directional sign, On-premise: A sign which indicates only the name, logo (if under one
square foot), and or direction of a pedestrian or traffic facility, or a particular building within
a complex of structures, on the property on which said facility or building is located.
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 243
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-803 Signage Definitions and
General Signage Standards through
Section 98-803 Signage Definitions and
General Signage Standards
(g) Group sign: A sign displaying the collective name of a group of uses such as the title of a
shopping center, office park, or industrial park and its tenants. No sales or price
information shall be permitted. Portions of the sign containing names of individual tenants
shall be considered as part of the area of a group sign. Group signs shall only be
permitted within developments serving two or more non-residential tenants, and are
permitted on any form of permitted business or identification signage.
(h) Identification sign: A sign indicating the name and/or address of the project, property
owner, tenant and/or manager of the property, address, and name and phone number of
the property manger.
(i) Temporary sign: A sign or advertising display (including festoons, pennants, banners,
pinwheels and similar devices) intended to be displayed for a certain period of time (as
permitted by Section 98-807). Included in the definition of "temporary signs" are retailers'
signs temporarily displayed for the purpose of informing the public of a "sale" or special
offer. If a sign display area is permanent but the message displayed is subject to periodic
changes, that sign shall not be considered as temporary. A mobile or portable sign shall
not be considered a temporary sign or used for such a purpose. Refer to Section 98-807.
(j) Menu Board Sign: Menu board signs are on-building signs containing information about a
business’s menu, daily specials, or sales. One menu board sign can be mounted to the
buildings front (street) façade per business on that property. Menu board signs are
considered to be Wall signs.
(2) Sign Types:
(a) Awning sign: A type of projecting, on-building sign (see (f), below) consisting of a fabric or
fabric-like sheathing material.
(b) Freestanding sign: A self-supporting sign resting on or supported by means of poles,
standards, or any other type of base on the ground. This type of sign includes monument
signs and pylon signs. (Refer to Subsections (e) and (g), below.) The base and support(s)
of any and all freestanding signs shall be concealed and shall comply with the State
Building Code. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured per Subsection (3)(a).
Refer to Subsection 98-804(3)(a).
(c) Marquee sign: A type of projecting, on-building sign (see (f), below) sheltering the
entrance and/or entrance approaches of a theater, auditorium, fairground, museum or
other use, which advertises present and scheduled events.
(d) Mobile sign: A sign mounted on a frame or chassis designed to be easily relocated,
including vehicles and/or trailers whose principal commercial use is for signage. Refer to
Subsection 98-804(3)(b).
(e) Monument sign: A type of freestanding sign (See (2)(b), above) whose bottom edge is
located within one foot of a ground-mounted pedestal and whose top edge is located no
more than six feet high. Refer to Subsections 98-804(1)(i) and (2)(a).
(f) Projecting sign: A type of on-building sign, other than a wall sign which is attached to and
projects more than one foot, generally perpendicular from a structure or building face.
Refer to Subsection 98-804(3)(b).
(g) Pylon sign: A type of freestanding sign (See (2)(b), above) whose bottom edge is located
more than one foot above a ground-mounted pedestal or whose top edge is located more
than six feet high (see monument sign).
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 244
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-803 Signage Definitions and
General Signage Standards through
Section 98-803 Signage Definitions and
General Signage Standards
(h) Wall sign: A type of on-building sign mounted parallel to a building facade or other vertical
building surface. Refer to Subsection 98-804(3)(c).
(i) Personal greeting and congratulatory sign: A temporary sign which is limited to thirtytwo
(32) square feet, and which is limited to a non-commercial, personal greeting or
message used to announce, congratulate, or greet members of a family or work staff.
(j) In-Window Sign: A sign located within a building that is located attached to the inside face
of an exterior window and visible from the exterior of the building. (Ord. No. 01-20 4/9/04)
(k) Flags: This section applies to Corporate Flags for Registered Corporation and decorative
flags. (Ord. No. 03-04 3/24/03)
1. Flag poles shall not exceed 35’ in height and shall be setback a minimum of 5 feet
from any property line;
2. Any flag flown in conjunction with the United States flag shall follow Federal Flag Code
established by Congress;
3. No more than one Corporate Flag or one decorative flag shall be flown on any one
site;
4. A Corporate Flag shall only be permitted in the GB, PB, PBP, PI, GI, HI, and PD
Zoning Districts. The maximum size of any Corporate Flag shall not exceed 60 square
feet;
5. Corporate flag content is limited to the following:
A. Corporate logo.
B. Corporate colors.
C. Other solid color background.
D. Any combination of Corporate logo, Corporate colors or solid color background.
6. No corporate or decorative flag may contain a slogan, price information, product
information or image, or any other message that would make the flag appear to be a
banner.
(3) Sign Measurement:
(a) Ground level: The average elevation of the ground upon which the sign supports are
placed, except when the sign supports rest upon a berm or other area elevated above the
surrounding ground. In such cases, the average elevation of the base of such berm or
other area shall be considered as the ground level.
(b) Sign area shall be measured in the following manner:
1. In the case of a sign placed within a frame, a marquee sign, or other structure, sign
area consists of the entire surface area of the sign on which copy could be placed. The
supporting structure or bracing of a sign, including the supports of monument signs not
used for copy, shall not be counted as a part of the sign face area unless such
structure or bracing is made a part of the sign's message. Where a freestanding onpremise
sign (monument or pylon) has two or more display faces, the total area of all
of the display faces which can be viewed from any single location shall be considered
the sign face area.
2. In the case of a sign whose message is fabricated together with the background which
borders or frames that message, sign face area shall be the total area of the entire
background.
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 245
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-804 General Signage
Regulations through
Section 98-804 General Signage
Regulations
3. In the case of a sign whose message is applied to a background which provides no
border or frame (such as individual letters to a building face or awning), sign face area
shall be the combined areas of the smallest rectangles which can encompass each
word, letter, figure, emblem, and other element of the sign message per a scaled, fully
dimensioned drawing approved by the Zoning Administrator. Where such drawing is
not provided, said area shall be the smallest area enclosed in a single rectangle.
4. Signs less than one square foot in area are not regulated by this Article.
5. The illustration on the following page demonstrates how sign face area is measured.
Section 98-804 General Signage Regulations
The regulations contained in this Section apply to signs in all districts.
(1) Sign Prohibitions and Limitations:
(a) No sign shall use any word, phrase, symbol, shape, form, or character in such manner as
to interfere with moving traffic, including signs which incorporate typical street-type and/or
traffic control-type signage designs and colors.
(b) Except for sequin-like eyecatcher devices, flags (as permitted by Subsection 98-
803(2)(k)), and temporary signs (as permitted by Section 98-807), no fluttering, undulating,
swinging, rotating, or otherwise moving signs or other decorations shall be permitted.
(c) No illuminated flashing signs shall be permitted. Flashing signs are those which change
their appearance more than once every 60 seconds. Electronic message center signs and
time/temperature signs are permitted with a conditional use permit. Chasing lights shall be
not be allowed.
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 246
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-804 General Signage
Regulations through
Section 98-804 General Signage
Regulations
(d) No illuminated sign shall be permitted unless the illumination of the sign is so designed
that the lighting element (except neon signs) is not visible from any property within a
residential zoning district. All illuminated signs shall comply with the State Electrical Code.
(e) No mobile signs shall be permitted.
(f) Off-premise directional signs shall be permitted only for governmental uses.
(g) No inflatable signs shall be permitted, except as temporary signs.
(h) No advertising vehicle signs shall be permitted, except as temporary signs. Refer to
Subsection 98-804(3)(d).
(i) No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility.
(j) No off-premise advertising signs shall be permitted except for the small blue highway
information signs as provided within the right-of-way of USH 12 and STHs 50 and 120 per
applicable State of Wisconsin Statutes. Existing legal off-premise advertising signs made
nonconforming by this Article shall be permitted to continue as legal, nonconforming
structures. These signs may not be relocated, structurally modified, or replaced if
damaged over 50%. These legal nonconforming signs include the following list:
1. Large single faced billboard with two off-premise businesses advertised and one onpremise
business advertised located near the intersection of STH 50 and STH 12 on
Tax Parcel ZYUP-168.
2. Large two faced billboard sign adjacent to and above the building located at 721
Williams Street. Tax Parcel No. ZF-28B.
3. Three large single face billboard signs located at the southwest corner of the
intersection of Sage Street and Sheridan Springs Road. Tax Parcel No. ZGC-11.
4. Two smaller two faced pole signs located near the west side of the intersection of
Grant Street and Elkhorn Road. Tax Parcel No. ZYUP-44A.
5. Small wall sign on south face of the building located at 264 Center Street. Tax Parcel
No. ZOP-259.
6. Large single faced billboard located on north side of STH 120 near the intersection of
STH 12 on Tax Parcel No. ZYUP-137I. Currently unused for several years, in a
dilapidated condition, and under orders to remove.
7. Large single faced billboard at the south lot line near CTH H right-of-way. Tax Parcel
No. ZOP-373.
8. Large two faced billboard sign near the southwest corner of Edwards Boulevard and
Townline Road. Tax Parcel No. ZA4362 00003.
*This will include a sunset date of March 14, 2041 as depicted in the Pre-annexation
agreement that was approved by the City upon the annexation of the property that
occurred March 14, 2011. (Ord. No. 11-35)
(k) No pylon signs shall be permitted.
(l) Obstructing windows with paper covering is specifically prohibited under this section.
This section applies to regulations under Section 98-806. (Ord. No. 01-20 4/9/01)
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 247
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-804 General Signage
Regulations through
Section 98-804 General Signage
Regulations
(m) In-Window Signs shall be limited to a maximum area of written sign text message that
does not exceed fifteen (15%) percent of the area of the window. The area of the text
message shall be the smallest rectangular area that contains the entire text message. Text
messages shall include letters, numerals, symbols, and product or company logos.
Images, product displays, and wall boards that do not contain written text messages are
not regulated by this rule. Area devoted to In-Window Signs shall not be counted as
another type of sign area. There is no limit in the number of In-Window Signs and In-
Window Signs shall not be subject to the design criteria of the Downtown Design District or
other Overlay District regulations. All signage in the City shall come into compliance with
this requirement as of May 1, 2001. (Ord. No. 01-20 4/9/01)
(2) Sign Location Requirements:
(a) No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by reason of its position,
wording, illumination, size, shape, or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with
the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device.
Freestanding signs may not locate within vision triangles nor otherwise impede traffic or
pedestrian visibility. Freestanding sign setbacks from right-of-way lines vary by zoning
district -- refer to Sections 98-805 and 98-806.
(b) No sign shall be located within a required bufferyard or within a permanently protected
green space area. Refer to the City of Lake Geneva Zoning Code.
(c) No sign shall be mounted or displayed on the roof of a structure.
(d) No sign, temporary or otherwise, shall be displayed on private property without the
owner's or renter's permission.
(e) Private signs shall not be allowed within road right-of-way lines.
(f) Projecting signs shall only be permitted as new signs per the rules of this Ordinance and
may be maintained as legal nonconforming signs only if they exist as of the effective date
of this Chapter, and are a minimum of seven feet over the elevation of a pedestrian way.
(g) Freestanding signs shall be located a minimum of twelve feet from property lines or
equivalent to their maximum height, whichever is lesser, except that on-premise directional
signs less than 36 inches tall shall be located a minimum of one foot from a property line.
(h) Awnings made of cloth are permitted. Such awnings shall be free of backlighting and only
contain a lettering band with a single line of copy less than eight inches tall located on the
vertical face of the awning and shall be located a minimum of seven and one-half feet for
the fabric, and eight feet for the frame, over pedestrian ways.
(i) No person shall erect, construct, or maintain any sign upon any property or building
without the express consent of the owner or person entitled to possession of the property
or building or their authorized representative.
(3) Sign Configuration Requirements:
(a) Freestanding sign configuration: A freestanding sign shall not be erected so that it
impedes visibility for safe pedestrian and/or vehicular circulation. The footing and related
supporting structure of a freestanding sign including bolts, flanges, brackets, etc., shall be
concealed by the sign exterior, masonry covering, earth and permanent groundcover, or
through the use of evergreen shrubs. Refer to Subsection 98-803(2)(b).
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 248
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-805 Regulations for the CR-
5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, TR-6, and MR-8
Districts through
Section 98-805 Regulations for the CR-
5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, TR-6, and MR-8
Districts
(b) Projecting sign configuration: The bottom edge of a projecting sign shall be located a
minimum of seven (7) feet from the ground level directly under the sign. Such sign shall be
mounted directly to a building. In no instance shall such sign be projecting more than four
(4) feet into and over a public right-of-way or private street, drive, or parking area. (Ord.
No. 01-24 8/13/01)
(c) Wall sign configuration: A wall sign shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall or other
surface to which it is mounted, nor shall it project more than twelve (12) inches from its
surface. The height of a wall sign shall be measured from the base of the building below
the sign to the top of the sign face. The top of the sign shall be no higher than the nearest
portion of the building to which it is mounted without a conditional use permit. Signs
painted directly on a wall or other portion of a building are not permitted. Refer to
Subsection 98-803(2)(h).
(d) Advertising vehicle sign configuration: No persons shall park any vehicle or trailer on a
public right-of-way or on private properties so as to be seen from a public right-of-way,
which has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device for the basic
purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business activity
located on the same or nearby property or any other premise. Licensed business vehicles
containing typical business signage and which are actively used on a daily basis for
business purposes, are exempt from this prohibition. Refer to Subsection 98-804(1)(h).
(e) Menu Board Configuration: Menu board sign surface area and its surrounding frame
and structure shall not exceed four square feet. Menu board signs shall not extend
beyond the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted, nor shall they
project more than three inches from the wall on which they are mounted. Moving signs
such as traveling message boards, electronic message boards, and video screens are
prohibited. Anything attached to a menu board sign shall not project outside the perimeter
of the sign face nor project in excess of one inch from the sign face.
Section 98-805 Regulations for the CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, TR-6, and MR-8 Districts
(1) Rules for all Signs:
(a) Signs shall comply with all provisions of this Article, including Section 98-803 and Section
98-804 for general signage definitions and regulations.
(b) Signage on a lot shall be limited to the combined total of all signs listed under Subsection
(2), below, or as otherwise modified by conditional use, planned development, deed
restriction or other site specific regulation, restriction or requirement. The owner of a
property containing more than one tenant shall allocate signs to the tenants, up to the
allowed maximum for the entire property. This provision will allow the property owner to
allocate all of the allowed signage to one tenant and none to another tenant if they saw fit
to do so.
(2) Rules for Particular Sign Purposes:
(a) Identification Sign
1. For one-family, two-family, three-family or four-family dwelling:
a. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign
b. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One
c. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Two square feet
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 249
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-806 Regulations for the RH,
NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI and UI
Districts through
Section 98-806 Regulations for the RH,
NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI and UI
Districts
2. For multi-family dwelling of five or more units, or institutional use:
a. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign, Canopy Sign or Monument Sign
b. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One monument, plus one wall or canopy
c. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Twenty-Four square feet
3. For group development or subdivision:
a. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign, Canopy Sign or Monument Sign
b. Maximum Permitted Number per Development: Per Plat or Conditional Use
c. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Thirty-Two square feet
d. Maximum Combined Permitted Area of All Signs: Per Plat or Conditional Use
(b) Auxiliary Sign (such as "Beware of Dog" or "No Trespassing" for all land uses):
1. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign
2. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: Two
3. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Two square feet
(c) On-Premise Directional Sign (for multi-family, group development or institutional use):
1. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign or Monument Sign
2. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One sign for each vehicular entrance, one sign
for each vehicular exit, one sign for each parking area conditions list. Institutional uses
may use any additional number of signs as needed.
3. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Nine square feet
(d) Temporary Sign (per Section 98-807)
(e) On-Premise Business Sign (for legal, non-conforming business only): Shall comply with
provisions of Section 98-806.
(f) Off-Premise Directional Sign (for governmental facility only):
1. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign or Monument Sign
2. Maximum Permitted Number per Development: Per Conditional Use Permit
3. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Four square feet
4. Maximum Permitted Area of All Signs: Per Conditional Use Permit
(g) Community Information Sign (per Section 98-802(3))
(h) Menu Board Signs:
1. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign
2. Maximum Permitted Number per Parcel: One per Business
3. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Four square feet
Section 98-806 Regulations for the RH, NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI and UI Districts
(1) Rules for all Signs:
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 250
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-806 Regulations for the RH,
NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI and UI
Districts through
Section 98-806 Regulations for the RH,
NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI and UI
Districts
(a) Signs shall comply with all provisions of this Article, including Section 98-803 and Section
98-804 for general signage definitions and regulations.
(b) Signage on a lot shall be limited to the combined total of all signs listed under Subsection
(3), below, or as otherwise modified by conditional use, planned development, deed
restriction or other site specific regulation, restriction or requirement. The owner of a
property containing more than one tenant shall allocate signs to the tenants, up to the
allowed maximum for the entire property. This provision will allow the property owner to
allocate all of the allowed signage to one tenant and none to another tenant if they saw fit
to do so.
(2) Rules for Particular Sign Purposes (All Residential and Institutional Land Uses): Shall
comply with provisions of Section 98-805.
(3) Rules for Particular Sign Purposes (All Office, Commercial and Industrial Land Uses):
(Ord. No. 01-21 4/9/01)
(a) For RH, PO, NB, PB, and PI Zoning Districts
1. Permitted Sign Type: On-Building (Wall or Awning) Sign:
a. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: Two On-Building Signs per each business
fronting on that wall, for each exposed side of the principal use building not directly
adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
b. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: One square foot of signage for every linear foot
of exposed exterior wall length on that supporting wall for all combined signage on
that wall regardless of the number of business. A maximum sign area of 200
square feet for all combined sign faces may be used for any single business on a
wall.
2. Permitted Sign Type: Monument Sign or Projecting Sign:
a. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One Monument Sign per lot, for any lot
containing more than four public parking space or One Projecting Sign per each
business entrance for each exposed side of the principal building not directly
adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
b. Maximum Permitted Area per Monument Sign: One-Quarter square foot of signage
for every foot of the adjacent public street frontage selected for the lot – up to a
maximum sign area of 50 square feet for all combined sign faces seen at one time.
c. Maximum Permitted Monument Sign Height: 8 feet
d. Maximum Permitted Monument Sign Setback: equivalent or greater to sign height
e. Maximum Permitted Area per Projecting Sign: 3 square feet
3. Permitted Sign Type: Menu Board:
a. Menu board signs are permitted in all zoning districts.
b. Configuration Requirements for Menu Board Signs. 98-804(3)(e)
c. Menu Board Signs shall be securely affixed to the exterior wall of the building
containing the use.
d. Menue Board Signs may be made of any material and must be in an approved
locking case.
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 251
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-806 Regulations for the RH,
NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI and UI
Districts through
Section 98-806 Regulations for the RH,
NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI and UI
Districts
e. Menu Board Signs may not be illuminated by any means other than an ambient
light source such as the sun or a street light.
(b) For CB Zoning District
1. Permitted Sign Type: On-Building (Wall, Awning, or Marquee) Sign:
a. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One On-Building Sign per each business
fronting on that wall, for each exposed side of the principal use building not directly
adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
b. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: One square foot of signage for every linear foot
of exposed exterior wall length on that supporting wall for all combined signage on
that wall regardless of the number of business. A maximum sign area of 25 feet
may be used for any single business on a wall.
2. Permitted Sign Type: Monument Sign or Projecting Sign:
a. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One Monument Sign per lot, One Projecting
Sign per each business entrance for each exposed side of the principal use
building not directly adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
b. Maximum Permitted Area per Monument Sign: One-Quarter square foot of signage
for every foot of the adjacent public street frontage selected for the lot – up to a
maximum sign area of 50 square feet for all combined sign faces seen at one time.
c. Maximum Permitted Monument Sign Height: 8 feet
d. Maximum Permitted Monument Sign Setback: equivalent of greater to sign height
e. Maximum Permitted Area per Projecting Sign: 3 square feet
3. Permitted Sign Type: Menu Board:
a. Menu board signs are permitted in all zoning districts.
b. Configuration Requirements for Menu Board Signs. 98-804(3)(e)
c. Menu Board Signs shall be securely affixed to the exterior wall of the building
containing the use.
d. Menu Board Signs may be made of any material and must be in an approved
locking case.
e. Menu Board Signs may not be illuminated by any means other than an ambient
light source such as the sun or a street light.
f. Menu Boards in the designated Downtown Design District are subject to the
requirements of the Downtown Design District.
(c) For NO Zoning District:
1. Permitted Sign Type: On-Building (Wall, Awning, or Marquee) Sign:
a. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One On-Building Sign per each business
fronting on that wall, for each exposed side of the principal use building not directly
adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 252
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-806 Regulations for the RH,
NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI and UI
Districts through
Section 98-806 Regulations for the RH,
NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI and UI
Districts
b. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: One square foot of signage for every linear foot
of exposed exterior wall length on that supporting wall for all combined signage on
that wall regardless of the number of business. A maximum sign area of 25 feet
may be used for any single business on a wall.
2. Permitted Sign Type: Monument Sign or Projecting Sign:
a. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One Monument Sign per lot, One Projecting
Sign per each business entrance for each exposed side of the principal use
building not directly adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
b. Maximum Permitted Area per Monument Sign: One-Quarter square foot of signage
for every foot of the adjacent public street frontage selected for the lot – up to a
maximum sign area of 50 square feet for all combined sign faces seen at one time.
c. Maximum Permitted Monument Sign Height: 8 feet
d. Maximum Permitted Monument Sign Setback: equivalent or greater to sign height
e. Maximum Permitted Area per Projecting Sign: 3 square feet
3. Permitted Sign Type: Menu Board:
a. Menu board signs are permitted in all zoning districts.
b. Configuration Requirements for Menu Board Signs. 98-804(3)(e)
c. Menu Board Signs shall be securely affixed to the exterior wall of the building
containing the use.
d. Menu Board Signs may be made of any material and must be in an approved
locking case.
e. Menu Board Signs may not be illuminated by any means other than an ambient
light source such as the sun or a street light.
(d) For GB, BI, and HI Zoning Districts:
1. Permitted Sign Type: On-Building (Wall or Awning) Sign:
a. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: Two On-Building Signs per each business
fronting on that wall, for each exposed side of the principal use building not directly
adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
b. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: One square foot of signage for every linear foot
of exposed exterior wall length on that supporting wall for all combined signage on
that wall regardless of the number of business. A maximum sign area of 250 feet
may be used for any single business on a wall.
2. Permitted Sign Type: Monument Sign or Projecting Sign:
a. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One Monument Sign per lot, One Projecting
Sign per each business entrance for each exposed side of the principal use
building not directly adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
b. Maximum Permitted Area per Monument Sign: One-Quarter square foot of signage
for every foot of the adjacent public street frontage selected for the lot – up to a
maximum sign area of 50 square feet for all combined sign faces seen at one time.
c. Maximum Permitted Monument Sign Height: 8 feet
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 253
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-807 Temporary Signs through Section 98-807 Temporary Signs
d. Maximum Permitted Monument Sign Setback: equivalent or greater to sign height
e. Maximum Permitted Area per Projecting Sign: 3 square feet
3. Permitted Sign Type: Menu Board:
a. Menu board signs are permitted in all zoning districts.
b. Configuration Requirements for Menu Board Signs. 98-804(3)(e)
c. Menu Board Signs shall be securely affixed to the exterior wall of the building
containing the use.
d. Menu Board Signs may be made of any material and must be in an approved
locking case.
e. Menu Board Signs may not be illuminated by any means other than an ambient
light source such as the sun or a street light.
(e) Auxiliary Sign (such as required Gas Price Signs or "No Trespassing" sign):
1. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign or Freestanding sign
2. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: Per approved site plan.
3. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Combined area of all auxiliary signs shall not
exceed an area equivalent to 50% of the permitted freestanding or on-building sign
area, whichever is greater.
(f) On-Premise Directional Sign:
1. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign or Monument Sign
2. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One sign for each vehicular entrance, one sign
for each vehicular exit, one sign for each parking area conditions list.
3. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Nine square feet
(g) Temporary Sign (per Section 98-807)
(h) Off-Premise Directional Sign (for governmental facility only):
1. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign or Monument Sign
2. Maximum Permitted Number per Development: Per Conditional Use Permit
3. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Four square feet
4. Maximum Permitted Area of All Signs: Per Conditional Use Permit
(i) Community Information Sign (per Section 98-802(3))
Section 98-807 Temporary Signs
For all temporary signs, the owner or tenant must contact the Zoning Administrator and provide
the name and address of the applicant, and the description and location of the sign to be erected
prior to actual installation. Only one temporary sign may be displayed on a property at any one
time. Except as provided by (1) through (5) below, any one lot is permitted to display a temporary
sign for a maximum of thirty (30) days within any twelve (12) month period. Furthermore, any one
lot is limited to a maximum of two temporary signs in any twelve (12) month period (political signs
are exempt from this restriction). A portable sign is not a temporary sign.
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 254
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-808 Appearance,
Construction, and Maintenance of
Signage through
Section 98-808 Appearance, Construction,
and Maintenance of Signage
(1) For each lot: one "For Sale," "For Rent," or "Garage Sale" sign, not more than six (6) square
feet in area, up to thirty-two (32) square feet for vacant commercial and industrial properties.
(2) For construction on or development of a lot, one sign not more than thirty-two (32) square feet
in area, indicating the name of the contractors, engineers or architect, or products being used
in the construction of a building but only during the time that construction or development is
actively under way.
(3) For a temporary event of public interest such as a neighborhood garage sale or church fair,
one sign, not over thirty-two (32) square feet in area located upon the site of the event. Such
sign shall not be erected more than 30 days before the event and shall be removed
immediately after the event.
(4) Temporary political signs are permitted without restriction so long as they locate per the
requirements of 98-804 (2)(d) and (e), do not impair vision, or do not otherwise create a public
nuisance. Such sign shall not be erected more than 30 days before the election and shall be
removed within 48 hours after the election.
(5) For each real estate subdivision that has been approved in accordance with the City of Lake
Geneva Land Division Regulations, two temporary development project identification signs are
permitted to be located on some portion of the subject subdivision. Each such sign shall be
not more than thirty-two (32) square feet in area. These signs shall comply with the visibility
standards of Subsection 98-804(1)(i). These signs shall be permitted to remain within the
subject subdivision until a time at which building permits have been issued for 80 percent or
more of the lots in the subdivision.
(6) One personal greeting/congratulatory sign per premises shall be permitted for up to seven
days, which is limited to eight feet in height and thirty-two (32) square feet in dimension and
which is not intended for commercial purposes.
Section 98-808 Appearance, Construction, and Maintenance of Signage
(1) All signage within the jurisdiction of this Article shall remain in a state of proper maintenance.
Refer to Subsection 98-808(2), below.
(2) Proper maintenance shall be the absence of loose materials (including peeling paint, paper or
other material), the lack of excessive rust, the lack of excessive vibration or shaking, and the
presence of the original structural integrity of the sign, its frame and other supports, its
mounting, and all components thereof.
(3) The repainting, changing of parts, and preventive maintenance of signs which completely
conform to the requirements of this Article, and result in absolutely no change in the
appearance of the sign from that originally approved, shall not be deemed alterations requiring
a sign permit.
(4) The owner, lessee, or manager of a sign, and the owner of the land on which the same is
located, shall keep grass or weeds and other growth cut and debris and rubbish cleaned up
and removed from the lot on which the sign is located.
(5) Any signs which may be, or may hereafter become rotted, unsafe, or in a state which is not
properly maintained shall be repaired or removed by the licensee or owner of the sign, or
owner of the property upon which the sign stands upon notice of the Zoning Administrator.
(6) All signs shall be constructed and mounted so as to comply with State Building Codes.
(7) All signs shall be constructed and maintained to conform with State Electrical Codes.
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 255
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-809 Nonconforming Signs through Section 98-809 Nonconforming Signs
(8) The base of signs shall be landscaped so as to conceal footings, mountings, brackets, and
related structural elements.
(9) All signs shall in no instance create a traffic visibility or other safety hazard.
(10)Signage found to be in violation of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to the
provisions of the City of Lake Geneva Building Code.
Section 98-809 Nonconforming Signs
(1) Nonconforming Signs
(a) Signs legally existing as of the effective date of this Chapter which do not conform to the
provisions of this Article, shall be nonconforming signs and shall be subject to the
provisions of Subsection 98-809(2). Nonconforming signs may be maintained. No
nonconforming on-premise sign shall be altered or moved to a new location without being
brought into compliance with the requirements of this Article. Refer to Subsection 98-
809(2)(a), below.
(b) Business signs on the premises of a nonconforming use or building may be continued per
Subsection 98-809(2), but new signs for such uses shall not be allowed, nor shall expand
in number, area, height, or illumination. New signs, not to exceed the maximum allowable
aggregate sign area may be erected only upon the complete removal of all other signs
existing at the time of adoption of this Article.
(c) Closing businesses must remove their signs within 60 days of closing. (Ord. No. 99-14
10/11/99)
(d) Signage not in compliance with the provisions of this Section shall be subject to the
provisions of Subsection 98-809(2).
(e) Whenever there is a change in the sign user (excluding off-premise signs), owner, or
owner of the property on which the sign is located, the new sign user, owner, or new
property owner shall forthwith notify the Zoning Administrator of the change. No new sign
permit is required unless there is modification of the sign face or sign structure.
(2) Removal of Nonconforming Signs
(a) Alteration of Signs
1. For the purpose of this Article, alteration of a sign is considered to be any change to
the exterior appearance of any part of the sign, its frame, its supporting structure, or its
lighting including: changing the message (except for marquee or off-premise
advertising signs), symbols, color, material, height, location, or any other alterations as
determined by the Zoning Administrator. With the granting of a Conditional Use Permit,
nonconforming signs may be altered in sign face appearance in any manner, and may
be altered in sign frame, supporting structure and lighting in any manner that does not
increase the degree for non-conformance. The consideration of said permit shall
evaluate the quality and character of the proposed non-conforming sign with the
character of nearby development and community objectives. This conditional use shall
expire ten (10) years after date of issuance. (Ord. No. 99-14 10/11/99) The ten year
expiration period shall not be extended by subsequent conditional use approvals for
modification of the same non-conforming sign unless specifically stated in the
subsequent conditional use approval. (Ord. No. 08-12 08/11/08)
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 256
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-809 Nonconforming Signs through Section 98-809 Nonconforming Signs
2. Altering a sign does not include maintaining the existing appearance of the sign;
replacing the sign face or the supporting structure with identical materials, colors, and
messages; changing the message of a marquee sign; or changing the face of an offpremise
advertising sign.
3. For a period extending ten years from the Effective Date of this Ordinance, a tenant
sign which comprises part of a group Sign may be replaced to accommodate a new
tenant sign without triggering the need to bring the entire Group Sign, or any of its
parts, into compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
(b) The penalties of the City of Lake Geneva Building Code shall be applicable to violations of
the provisions of this Article.
(3) Exemptions for Historic Signs
(a) The following historic signs shall be exempt from this Section and may be maintained with
altered messages: the Pillsbury sign on the south wall of Dunn Lumber and True Value
Hardware, 826 North Street.
ARTICLE VIII: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 257
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-901 Purpose of Procedural
Regulations through
Section 98-902 Amendment of Zoning
Regulations
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 98-901 Purpose of Procedural Regulations
The purpose of this portion of the Article is to establish the procedural requirements for zoning text
amendments, zoning map amendments, conditional use review and approval, temporary use
review and approval, sign permits, site plan review and approval, certificates of occupancy,
variances, zoning provision interpretations by the Zoning Administrator, and appeals of zoning
provision interpretations to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 98-902 Amendment of Zoning Regulations
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure
and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed amendments to
provisions of this Chapter. (Refer to the requirements of Wisconsin Statutes 62.23(7)(d)).
(2) Initiation of Request for Amendment to this Chapter: Proceedings for amendment of this
Chapter may be initiated by any one of the following three methods:
(a) an application by any member of the general public;
(b) a recommendation of the Plan Commission; or
(c) by action of the Common Council.
(3) Application Requirements: All applications for proposed amendments to this Chapter,
regardless of the party of their initiation per (2) above shall be approved as complete by the
Zoning Administrator prior to the formal initiation of this procedure. The submittal of an
application to the City Clerk to initiate this procedure shall not occur until the Zoning
Administrator has certified acceptance of the complete application to the City Clerk. No
placement of the application on any agenda, as an item to be acted upon, shall occur unless
said certification has occurred. The item may be placed on any agenda as a discussion-only
item, with the permission of the Zoning Administrator, without an application. Prior to the
submittal of the Official Notice regarding the application to the newspaper by the City Clerk,
the Applicant shall provide the City Clerk with 20 copies of the complete application as certified
by the Zoning Administrator. Said complete application shall be comprised of all of the
following:
(a) A copy of the portion of the current provisions of this Chapter which are proposed to be
amended, with said provisions clearly indicated in a manner which is clearly reproducible
with a photocopier;
(b) A copy of the text which is proposed to replace the current text; and
(c) As an optional requirement, the applicant may wish to provide written justification for the
proposed text amendment, consisting of the reasons why the Applicant believes the
proposed text amendment is in harmony with the recommendation of the City of Lake
Geneva Comprehensive Master Plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the
standards set out in subsection (4)(c)1.-5., below.
(4) Review by the Zoning Administrator: The proposed text amendment shall be reviewed by
the Zoning Administrator as follows:
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills
the requirements of this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 258
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-902 Amendment of Zoning
Regulations through
Section 98-902 Amendment of Zoning
Regulations
application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Chapter, he shall
return the application to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is complete, he shall so notify Applicant.
(b) Upon notifying the Applicant that his application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall
review the application and evaluate and comment on the written justification for the
proposed text amendment which may be provided in the application per Subsection (3)(a)-
(c), above.
(c) The Zoning Administrator may also evaluate the application to determine whether the
requested text amendment is in harmony with the recommendations of the City of Lake
Geneva's Comprehensive Master Plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the
standards of Subsection (4)(c)1.-5., below:
1. The proposed text amendment furthers the purposes of this Chapter as outlined in
Section 98-005.
2. The proposed text amendment furthers the purposes of the general Article in which the
amendment is proposed to be located.
3. The proposed text amendment furthers the purposes of the specific Section in which
the amendment is proposed to be located.
4. The following factors have arisen that are not properly addressed in the current zoning
text:
a. The provisions of this Chapter should be brought into conformity with the
Comprehensive Plan. (If a factor related to the proposed amendment, note
pertinent portions of the Comprehensive Plan.);
b. A change has occurred in the land market, or other factors have arisen which
require a new form of development, a new type of land use, or a new procedure to
meet said change(s);
c. New methods of development or providing infrastructure make it necessary to alter
this Chapter to meet these new factors;
d. Changing governmental finances require amending this Chapter in order to meet
the needs of the government in terms of providing and affording public services.
5. If the proposed text amendment is concerned with the provisions of Article II and/or III:
The proposed amendment maintains the desired overall consistency of land uses, land
use intensities, and land use impacts within the pertinent zoning districts.
(d) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the report per (4)(b), and if prepared the report per
(4)(c), to the Plan Commission for the Commission's review and use in making its
recommendation to Common Council. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of the City's Comprehensive Master Plan,
the Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
(5) Review, Public Hearing, and Recommendation by the Plan Commission: Common
Council shall not make an amendment to this Chapter without allowing for a recommendation
from the Plan Commission per the provisions of this Subsection.
(a) The Plan Commission shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public hearing to
consider the application within 45 days after the acceptance and determination of the
complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The Applicant may
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 259
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-903 Amendment of Official
Zoning Map through
Section 98-903 Amendment of Official
Zoning Map
appear in person, by agent, and/or by attorney. Notice of the proposed amendment and
the public hearing shall conform to the requirements of Section 62.23(7)(d) of the
Wisconsin Statutes. Said notice shall contain a description of the proposed text change. In
addition, at least ten days before said public hearing, the City Clerk shall mail an identical
notice to the Applicant, and to the Clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within
1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this Chapter. Failure to mail said notice,
provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this Section.
(b) Within 60 days after the public hearing (or within an extension of said period requested in
writing by the Applicant and granted by the Plan Commission), the Plan Commission shall
make a written report to the Common Council stating its findings regarding Subsection (4),
above, and its recommendations regarding the application as a whole. Said report shall
include a formal finding of facts developed and approved by the Plan Commission
concerning the requirements of (4)(b)1. through 5., above.
(c) If the Plan Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after the filing of said
complete application (and in the absence of a Applicant-approved extension per (b),
above), then the Common Council may hold a public hearing within 30 days after the
expiration of said 60 day period. Failure to receive said written report from the Plan
Commission per Subsection (5)(a), above, shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions
of Common Council. If such a public hearing is necessary, Common Council shall provide
notice per the requirements of Subsection (a), above. State Law Reference: Section
62.23(7)(d).
(d) If the Plan Commission recommends approval (or denial) of an application, it shall state in
the minutes or in a subsequently issued written decision, its conclusion and any finding of
facts supporting its conclusion as to the following: that the potential public benefits of the
proposed amendment outweigh (or do not outweigh) any and all potential adverse impacts
of the proposed amendment, as identified in Subsections (4)(b)1.-5. above, after taking
into consideration the proposal by the Applicant.
(6) Review and Action by Common Council: Common Council shall consider the Plan
Commission's recommendation regarding the proposed text amendment. The Council may
request further information and/or additional reports from the Plan Commission, Zoning
Administrator, and/or the Applicant. The Council may take final action on the application at the
time of its initial meeting, or may continue the proceedings at the Applicant's request. Common
Council may approve the amendment as originally proposed, may approve the proposed
amendment with modifications (per the recommendations of the Zoning Administrator, the
Plan Commission, authorized outside experts, or its own members), or may deny approval of
the proposed amendment. If the Common Council wishes to make significant changes in the
proposed text amendment, as recommended by the Plan Commission, then the procedure set
forth in Section 62.23(7)(d) of the Wisconsin Statutes shall be followed prior to Council action.
Any action to amend the provisions of the proposed amendment, or to reverse the
recommendation of the Plan Commission, requires five votes of the Council regardless of
quorum size. The Common Council's approval of the requested amendment shall be
considered the approval of a unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any
other proposed amendment.
(7) Effect of Denial: No application which has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be
resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds
of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
(8) Fee: A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 98-935.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 260
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-903 Amendment of Official
Zoning Map through
Section 98-903 Amendment of Official
Zoning Map
Section 98-903 Amendment of Official Zoning Map
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure
and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed amendments to
provisions of the Official Zoning Map (see Sections 98-103 and 98-107). (Refer to the
requirements of Wisconsin Statutes 62.23(7)(d)).
(2) Initiation of Request for Amendment to Official Zoning Map: Proceedings for amendment
of the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by any one of the following three methods:
(a) an application of the owner(s) of the subject property;
(b) a recommendation of the Plan Commission; or
(c) by action of the Common Council.
(3) Application Requirements: All applications for proposed amendments to the Official Zoning
Map, regardless of the party of their initiation per (2) above, shall be filed in the office of the
Zoning Administrator, and shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator prior to
the formal initiation of this procedure. The submittal of an application to the City Clerk to
initiate this procedure shall not occur until the Zoning Administrator has certified acceptance of
the complete application to the City Clerk. No placement of the application on any agenda, as
an item to be acted upon, shall occur unless said certification has occurred. The item may be
placed on any agenda as a discussion-only item, with the permission of the Zoning
Administrator, without an application. Prior to the submittal of the Official Notice regarding the
application to the newspaper by the City Clerk, the Applicant shall provide the City Clerk with
20 copies of the complete application as certified by the Zoning Administrator. Said complete
application shall be comprised of all of the following:
(a) A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the zoning is proposed to be
amended, and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property,
together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the
same appear on the current tax records of the City of Lake Geneva. Said map shall clearly
indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s)
which maintains that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be
submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a
scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject
property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided;
(b) A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location of the subject property
in relation to the City as a whole; and
(c) As an optional requirement, the applicant may wish to provide written justification for the
proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map, consisting of the reasons why the
Applicant believes the proposed map amendment is in harmony with the
recommendations of the City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive Master Plan, particularly as
evidenced by compliance with the standards set out in Subsection (4)(c)1.-3, below.
(4) Review by the Zoning Administrator: The proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map
shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as follows:
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills
the requirements of this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Chapter, he shall
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 261
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-903 Amendment of Official
Zoning Map through
Section 98-903 Amendment of Official
Zoning Map
return the application to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is complete, he shall so notify the Applicant.
(b) Upon notifying the Applicant that his application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall
review the application and evaluate and comment on the written justification for the
proposed map amendment which may be provided in the application per Subsection
(3)(a)-(c), above.
(c) The Zoning Administrator may also evaluate the application to determine whether the
requested amendment to the Official Zoning Map is in harmony with the recommendations
of the City of Lake Geneva's Comprehensive Master Plan, particularly as evidenced by
compliance with the standards of Subsection (4)(c)1.-3., below:
1. The proposed Official Zoning Map amendment furthers the purposes of this Chapter
as outlined in Section 98-005 and the applicable rules and regulations of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
2. The following factors have arisen that are not properly addressed on the current
Official Zoning Map:
a. The designations of the Official Zoning Map should be brought into conformity with
the Comprehensive Plan;
b. A mistake was made in mapping on the Official Zoning Map. (That is, an area is
developing in a manner and purpose different from that for which it is mapped.)
NOTE: If this reason is cited, it must be demonstrated that the discussed
inconsistency between actual land use and designated zoning is not intended, as
the City may intend to stop an undesirable land use pattern from spreading;
c. Factors have changed, (such as the availability of new data, the presence of new
roads or other infrastructure, additional development, annexation, or other zoning
changes), making the subject property more appropriate for a different zoning
district;
d. Growth patterns or rates have changed, thereby creating the need for an
Amendment to the Official Zoning Map.
3. The proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map maintains the desired
consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land use impacts as related to the
environs of the subject property.
(d) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the report per (4)(b), and if prepared the report per
(4)(c), to the Plan Commission for the Commission's review and use in the making its
recommendation to Common Council. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of the City's Comprehensive Master Plan,
the Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
(5) Review, Public Hearing, and Recommendation by the Plan Commission: Common
Council shall not make an amendment to the Official Zoning Map without allowing for a
recommendation from the Plan Commission per the provisions of this Subsection.
(a) The Plan Commission shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public hearing to
consider the application within 45 days of the acceptance and determination of the
complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The Applicant may
appear in person, by agent, and/or by attorney. Notice of the proposed amendment and
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 262
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-903 Amendment of Official
Zoning Map through
Section 98-903 Amendment of Official
Zoning Map
the public hearing shall conform to the requirements of Section 62.23(7)(d) of the
Wisconsin Statutes. Said notice shall contain a description of the subject property and the
proposed change in zoning. In addition, at least ten days before said public hearing, the
City Clerk shall mail an identical notice to the Applicant; to all property owners within 200
feet of the boundaries of the subject property as identified in Subsection (3)(a), above; and
to the Clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of
the jurisdiction of this Chapter. Failure to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall
not invalidate proceedings under this Section.
(b) Within 60 days after the public hearing (or within an extension of said period requested in
writing by the Applicant and granted by the Plan Commission), the Plan Commission shall
make a written report to the Common Council stating its findings regarding Subsection (4),
above, and its recommendations regarding the application as a whole. Said report shall
include a formal finding of facts developed and approved by the Plan Commission
concerning the requirements of (4)(b)1. through 3., above.
(c) If the Plan Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after the filing of said
complete application (and in the absence of an Applicant-approved extension per (b),
above), then the Common Council may hold a public hearing within 30 days after the
expiration of said 60 day period. Failure to receive said written report from the Plan
Commission per Subsection (5)(a), above, shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions
of Common Council. If such a public hearing is necessary, Common Council shall provide
notice per the requirements of Subsection (a), above. State Law Reference: Section
62.23(7)(d).
(d) If the Plan Commission recommends approval (or denial) of an application, it shall state in
the minutes or in a subsequently issued written decision, its conclusion and any finding of
facts supporting its conclusion as to the following: (1) that the potential public benefits of
the proposed amendment outweigh (or do not outweigh) any and all potential adverse
impacts of the proposed amendment, as identified in Subsections (4)(b)1.-3. above, after
taking into consideration the proposal by the Applicant.
(6) Review and Action by Common Council: Common Council shall consider the Plan
Commission's recommendation regarding the proposed amendment to the Official Zoning
Map. The Council may request further information and/or additional reports from the Plan
Commission, the Zoning Administrator, and/or the Applicant. The Council may take final action
on the application to the Official Zoning Map at the time of its initial meeting, or may continue
the proceedings at Applicant's request. Common Council may approve the amendment as
originally proposed, may approve the proposed amendment with modifications (per the
recommendations of the Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission, authorized outside
experts, or its own members) or may deny approval of the proposed amendment. If the
Common Council wishes to make significant changes in the proposed amendment to the
Official Zoning Map, as recommended by the Plan Commission, then the procedure set forth
in Section 62.23(7)(d) of the Wisconsin Statutes shall be followed prior to Council action. Any
action to amend the Official Zoning Map, or to reverse the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, requires five votes of the Council regardless of quorum size. The Common
Council's approval of the requested amendment shall be considered the approval of a unique
request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed amendment.
(7) Effect of Denial: No application which has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be
resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds
of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 263
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-905 Conditional Use Review
and Approval through
Section 98-905 Conditional Use Review
and Approval
(8) Fee: A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 98-935.
(9) Floodland District Boundary Changes Limited: The Common Council shall not permit
changes to the floodland district boundaries that are inconsistent with the purpose and intent
of this Chapter or in conflict with the applicable rules and regulations of the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
(a) Changes in the Floodway Overlay District boundaries shall not be permitted where the
change will increase the flood stage elevation by 0.1 foot or more, unless the applicant has
made appropriate legal arrangements with all affected units of government and all property
owners affected by the stage increase. The only way the 1.0 foot limit may be exceeded is
through obtaining a waiver from the Federal Emergency Management Agency for a
specific project that necessarily exceeds the one foot increase in flood elevation.
Applications for Floodway Overlay District changes shall show the affects of the change
within the associated floodfringe, and shall provide adjusted water surface profiles and
adjusted floodland limits to reflect the increased flood elevations.
(b) Changes in the Floodplain Conservancy Overlay District boundaries shall not be permitted
where the change will increase the flood stage elevation by 0.1 foot or more, unless the
application has made appropriate legal arrangements with all affected units of government
and all property owners affected by the stage increase. In no event shall a change be
permitted that would increase the flood stage elevation by more than 1.0 foot. Applications
for Floodplain Conservancy Overlay District changes shall show the affects of the change
within the associated floodfringe, and shall provide adjusted water surface profiles and
adjusted water surface profiles and adjusted floodland limits to reflect the increased flood
elevations.
(c) Removal of land from the floodland districts shall not be permitted unless the land has
been filled to an elevation at least two feet above the elevation of the regional flood and
provided that such land is contiguous to lands lying outside of the floodlands.
(d) Amendment of floodlands which were delineated by approximate methods shall not be
permitted unless the Applicant provides the City with engineering data showing the flood
profile, necessary river cross-sections, flood elevations, and any effect the establishment
of a floodway/floodfringe will have on flood stages. The effects shall be limited as set forth
above for changes in subparagraphs (1) and (2) above. If the proposed development is
less than five acres in area, and where the cost of the proposed development is estimated
to be less than $125,000.00, the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) will assist the
Applicant in determining the required flood elevations.
(e) No river or stream shall be altered or relocated until a floodland zoning change has been
applied for and granted in accordance with the requirements of this Section, and until all
adjacent communities have been requested to review and comment on the proposed
alteration or relocation. The flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse
shall not be reduced to less than the flood carrying capacity before the water-course was
altered or relocated. All necessary state and federal permits shall be obtained.
(f) Notice to and approvals by DNR and FEMA. A copy of all notices for amendments or
rezoning in the Floodland Districts shall be transmitted to the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) at
least 10 days prior to the public hearing. No amendments to the floodland district
boundaries or regulations shall become effective until approved by the DNR and reviewed
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 264
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-905 Conditional Use Review
and Approval through
Section 98-905 Conditional Use Review
and Approval
by the FEMA. In the case of floodland district boundary changes, an official letter of map
amendment from the FEMA may also be required.
Section 98-905 Conditional Use Review and Approval
(1) Purpose
(a) The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure and
requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed conditional uses.
(b) Certain uses in situations which are of such a special nature, or are so dependent upon
actual contemporary circumstances, as to make impractical the predetermination of
permissibility, or the detailing in this ordinance of specific standards, regulation, or
conditions which would permit such determination in each individual situation, may be
permitted as conditional uses.
(c) Under this Chapter, a proposed conditional use shall be denied unless the Applicant can
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the City, that the proposed Conditional Use will not
create undesirable impacts on nearby properties, the environment, nor the community as
a whole.
(d) Limited Conditional Uses: Limited conditional uses are the same as regular conditional
uses excepting that further, in the considered findings of the Common Council and the
granting thereof, because of any of the following: Their particularly specialized nature, their
particular locations within a district, the peculiar unique relationships or needed
compatibility of uses to involved individuals, or any other reason(s) the Common Council
deems specially relevant and material to delimit the scope thereof.. should be of lesser
permanence than regular conditional uses and the duration or term of existence may be
established until time certain or be limited to a future happening or event at which time the
same shall terminate.
(2) Initiation of Request for Approval of a Conditional Use: Proceedings for approval of a
conditional use may be initiated by an application of the owner(s) of the subject property.
(3) Application Requirements: All applications for proposed conditional uses shall be approved
as complete by the Zoning Administrator prior to the initiation of this procedure. The submittal
of an application to the City Clerk to initiate this procedure shall not occur until the Zoning
Administrator has certified acceptance of the complete application to the City Clerk. No
placement of the application on any agenda, as an item to be acted upon, shall occur unless
said certification has occurred. The item may be placed on any agenda as a discussion-only
item, with the permission of the Zoning Administrator, without an application. Prior to the
submittal of the Official Notice regarding the application to the newspaper by the City Clerk,
the Applicant shall provide the City Clerk with 20 copies of the complete application as certified
by the Zoning Administrator. Said complete application shall be comprised of all of the
following:
(a) A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the conditional use is proposed,
and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with
the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on
the current records of the Register of Deeds of Walworth County (as provided by the City
of Lake Geneva). Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property
and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. Said map and all its
parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 265
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-905 Conditional Use Review
and Approval through
Section 98-905 Conditional Use Review
and Approval
photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot
dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided;
(b) A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location of the subject property
in relation to the City as a whole;
(c) A written description of the proposed conditional use describing the type of activities,
buildings, and structures proposed for the subject property and their general locations;
(d) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development. Said site plan shall
conform to any and all the requirements of Section 98-908(3). If the proposed conditional
use is a cluster development (per Section 98-206(1)(b) through (f)) or a group
development (per Section 98-208) a proposed preliminary plat or conceptual plat may be
substituted for the required site plan, provided said plat contains all information required on
said site plan per Section 98-908;
(e) As an optional requirement, the Applicant may wish to provide written justification for the
proposed conditional use consisting of the reasons why the Applicant believes the
proposed conditional use is appropriate, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the
standards set forth in Subsection (4)(b)1.-6., below.
(4) Review by The Zoning Administrator: The proposed conditional use shall be reviewed by
the Zoning Administrator as follows:
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills
the requirements of this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Chapter, he shall
return the application to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is complete, he shall so notify Applicant.
(b) Upon notifying the Applicant that his application is complete the Zoning Administrator shall
review the application and evaluate and comment on the written justification for the
proposed conditional use provided in the application per Subsection (3)(e), above. The
Zoning Administrator shall also evaluate the application to determine whether the
requested is in harmony with the recommendations of the City's Comprehensive Master
Plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards of Subsection (4)(b)1.-6.
below:
1. The proposed conditional use (the use in general, independent of its location) is in
harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the City of
Lake Geneva Comprehensive Plan, this Chapter, and any other plan, program, or
ordinance adopted, or under consideration pursuant to official notice by the City.
2. The proposed conditional use (in its specific location) is in harmony with the purposes,
goals, objectives, policies and standards of the City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive
Plan, this Chapter, and any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted, or under
consideration pursuant to official notice by the City.
3. The proposed conditional use, in its proposed location and as depicted on the required
site plan (see (3)(d), above), does not result in a substantial or undue adverse impact
on nearby property, the character of the neighborhood, environmental factors, traffic
factors, parking, public improvements, public property or rights-of-way, or other matters
affecting the public health, safety, or general welfare, either as they now exist or as
they may in the future be developed as a result of the implementation of the provisions
of this Chapter, the Comprehensive Plan, or any other plan, program, map, or
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 266
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-905 Conditional Use Review
and Approval through
Section 98-905 Conditional Use Review
and Approval
ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official notice by the City or
other governmental agency having jurisdiction to guide development.
4. The proposed conditional use maintains the desired consistency of land uses, land
use intensities, and land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject property.
5. The proposed conditional use is located in an area that will be adequately served by,
and will not impose an undue burden on, any of the improvements, facilities, utilities or
services provided by public agencies serving the subject property.
6. The potential public benefits of the proposed conditional use outweigh all potential
adverse impacts of the proposed conditional use (as identified in Subsections 1.
through 5., above), after taking into consideration the Applicant's proposal and any
requirements recommended by the Applicant to ameliorate such impacts.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the report per (4)(b) to the Plan Commission for the
Commission's review and use in making its recommendation to Common Council. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of
the City's Comprehensive Master Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall note this
determination in the report.
(5) Review, Public Hearing, and Recommendation by the Plan Commission: Common
Council shall not approve a conditional use without allowing for a recommendation from the
Plan Commission per the provisions of this Subsection.
(a) The Plan Commission shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public hearing to
consider the application within 45 days after the acceptance and determination of the
complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The Applicant may
appear in person, by agent, and/or by attorney. Notice of the proposed conditional use and
the public hearing shall conform to the requirements of Section 62.23(7)(d) of the
Wisconsin Statutes. Said notice shall contain a description of the proposed conditional
use. In addition, at least ten days before said public hearing, the City Clerk shall mail an
identical notice to the Applicant, and to the Clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are
within 1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this Chapter. Failure to mail said
notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this Section.
(b) Within 60 days after the public hearing (or within an extension of said period requested in
writing by the Applicant and granted by the Plan Commission), the Plan Commission shall
make a written report to the Common Council stating its findings regarding Subsection (4),
above, and its recommendations regarding the application as a whole. Said report shall
include a formal finding of facts developed and approved by the Plan Commission
concerning the requirements of (4)(b)1. through 6., above.
(c) If the Plan Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after the filing of said
complete application (and in the absence of a Applicant-approved extension per (b),
above), then the Common Council may hold a public hearing within 30 days after the
expiration of said 60 day period. Failure to receive said written report from the Plan
Commission per Subsection (5)(a), above, shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions
of Common Council. If such a public hearing is necessary, Common Council shall provide
notice per the requirements of Subsection (a), above. State Law Reference: Section
62.23(7)(d).
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 267
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-905 Conditional Use Review
and Approval through
Section 98-905 Conditional Use Review
and Approval
(d) If the Plan Commission recommends approval (or denial) of an application, it shall state in
the minutes or in a subsequently issued written decision, its conclusion and any finding of
facts supporting its conclusion as to the following: (1) that the potential public benefits of
the proposed conditional use outweigh (or do not outweigh) any and all potential adverse
impacts of the proposed conditional use, as identified in Subsections (4)(b)1.-6. above,
after taking into consideration the proposal by the Applicant.
(6) Review and Action by Common Council: Common Council shall consider the Plan
Commission's recommendation regarding the proposed conditional use. The Council may
request further information and/or additional reports from the Plan Commission, Zoning
Administrator, and/or the Applicant. The Council may take final action on the application at the
time of its initial meeting, or may continue the proceedings at the Applicant's request. Common
Council may approve the conditional use as originally proposed, may approve the proposed
conditional use with modifications (per the recommendations of the Zoning Administrator, the
Plan Commission, authorized outside experts, or its own members), or may deny approval of
the proposed conditional use. If the Common Council wishes to make significant changes in
the proposed conditional use, as recommended by the Plan Commission, then the procedure
set forth in Section 62.23(7)(d) of the Wisconsin Statutes shall be followed prior to Council
action. Any action to amend the provisions of the proposed conditional use, or reverse the
recommendation of the Plan Commission, requires five votes of the Council regardless of
quorum size. The Common Council's approval of the requested conditional use shall be
considered the approval of a unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any
other proposed conditional use.
(7) Effect of Denial: No application which has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be
resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds
of new evidence, or proof of change of factors, is found to be valid by the Zoning
Administrator.
(8) Termination of an Approved Conditional Use: Upon approval by Common Council, the
Applicant must demonstrate that the proposed conditional use meets all general and specific
conditional use requirements in the site plan required for initiation of development activity on
the subject property per Section 98-908. Once a conditional use is granted, no Erosion Control
Permit, Site Plan approval (per Section 98-908), Certificate of Occupancy (per Section 98-
909), or Building Permit shall be issued for any development which does not comply with all
requirements of this Chapter. Any conditional use found not to be in compliance with the terms
of this Chapter shall be considered in violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to all
applicable procedures and penalties. A conditional use may be revoked for such a violation by
majority vote of the Common Council, following the procedures outlined in Subsections (2)
through (7), above.
(9) Time Limits on the Development of Conditional Use: The start of construction of any and
all conditional uses shall be initiated within 365 days of their approval by Common Council and
shall be operational within 730 days of said approval. Failure to initiate development within this
period shall automatically constitute a revocation of the conditional use. For the purposes of
this Section, "operational" shall be defined as the granting of a Certificate of Occupancy for the
conditional use. Prior to such a revocation, the Applicant may request an extension of this
period. Said request shall require formal approval by Common Council and shall be based
upon a showing of acceptable justification (as determined by Common Council).
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 268
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-906 Temporary Use Review
and Approval through
Section 98-906 Temporary Use Review
and Approval
(10)Discontinuing an Approved Conditional Use:Any and all conditional uses which have been
discontinued for a period exceeding 365 days shall have their conditional use invalidated
automatically. The burden of proof shall be on the property owner to conclusively demonstrate
that the subject conditional use was operational during this period.
(11)Change of Ownership: All requirements of the approved conditional use shall be continued
regardless of ownership of the subject property, except where limited explicitly by the
Common Council. Modification, alteration, or expansion of any conditional use in violation as
approved per (6), above, without approval by Common Council, shall be grounds for
revocation of said conditional use approval per (8), above. For Bed and Breakfast land uses
the granting of a Conditional Use Permit shall be valid while said property is owned by the
owner at time of conditional use approval.
(12)Recording of Conditional Use Requirements: Except for conditional use approvals for
temporary uses, a certified copy of the authorizing resolution, containing identifiable
description and any specific requirements of approval, shall be recorded by the City with the
County Register of Deeds office.
(13)Notice to the DNR: The Plan Commission shall transmit a copy of each application for a
conditional use for conservancy regulations in the Shoreland-Wetland, Floodway, Floodplain,
or Floodfringe Overlay Zoning Districts to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
(DNR) for review and comment at least 10 days prior to any public hearings. Final action on
the application shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR has made its recommendation,
whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions relating to conditional uses for shorelandwetland
conservancy regulations or to floodland regulations shall be transmitted to the DNR
within 10 days of the date of such decision.
(14)Uses Now Regulated as Conditional Uses which were Approved as Legal Land Uses --
Permitted by Right or as Conditional Uses -- Prior to the Effective Date of this Chapter:
A use now regulated as a conditional use which was approved as a legal land use -- either
permitted by right or as a conditional use -- prior to the Effective Date of this Chapter shall be
considered as a legal conforming land use so long as the previously approved conditions of
use and site plan are followed. Any modification of the previously approved conditions of use
or site plan shall require application and City consideration under this Section.
(15)Fee: One or more fees are required for this procedure. Refer to Section 98-935(1)(d).
Section 98-906 Temporary Use Review and Approval
(1) Purpose
(a) The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure and
requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed temporary use.
(b) Temporary uses are those uses which have the potential to create undesirable impacts on
nearby properties if allowed to develop simply under the general requirements of this
Chapter. In addition to such potential, temporary uses also have the potential to create
undesirable impacts on nearby properties which potentially cannot be determined except
on a case by case basis. In order to prevent this from occurring, all temporary uses are
required to meet certain procedural requirements applicable only to temporary uses, in
addition to the general requirements of this Chapter and the requirements of the zoning
district in which the subject property is located. A public hearing process is not required to
review a request for a temporary use.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 269
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-907 Sign Permit through Section 98-907 Sign Permit
(c) Land uses proposed which fail to meet one of the requirements for temporary uses of
Section 98-206, may be reviewed as a conditional use. (See Section 98-202(3)(b).)
(2) Regulations Applicable to All Temporary Uses: No public hearing is required to develop a
temporary use, however, a demonstration that the developer proposes to meet all temporary
use requirements of this Article and Article IV must be made at time of site plan application
(see Section 98-908). Furthermore, no Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be
issued for any development which does not comply with all requirements of this Chapter (see
Section 98-909). Any temporary use found not to be in compliance with the terms of this
Chapter shall be considered in violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to all applicable
procedures and penalties.
(3) Application Requirements: All applications for proposed temporary uses, shall be approved
as complete by the Zoning Administrator prior to the formal initiation of this procedure. Said
complete application shall be comprised of all of the following:
(a) A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the temporary use is proposed,
and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. Said map shall
clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and the
jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments
shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be
at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject
property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided;
(b) A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location of the subject property
in relation to the City as a whole;
(c) A written description of the proposed temporary use describing the type of activities,
buildings, and structures proposed for the subject property and their general locations; and
(d) The Zoning Administrator may require a site plan of the subject property. Said site plan
shall conform to any and all the requirements of Section 98-908(3).
(4) Approval by Zoning Administrator: Approval of a temporary use shall be by the Zoning
Administrator following review of said complete application per (3) above.
(5) Fee: A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 98-935.
Section 98-907 Sign Permit
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to provide a procedure and requirement for obtaining
a Sign Permit prior to the erection of certain signs.
(2) General Requirement: Unless specifically exempted by Article VIII, no sign shall be erected,
altered, or relocated after the effective date of this Chapter (see Section 98-011) until a Sign
Permit has been secured from the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Application Requirements: All applications for sign permits shall be made in writing on a
form supplied by the City of Lake Geneva Zoning Administrator. Said application shall be
submitted with all required information provided and shall contain or have attached thereto the
following information:
(a) The approved site plan for the subject property (per Section 98-908), (or if not previously
required, a site plan for the subject property with requirements as determined by the
Zoning Administrator), showing the location and dimensions of all buildings, structures,
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 270
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval through
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval
and signs on the subject property; said subject property boundaries; and the location of
the proposed sign;
(b) The configuration of the proposed sign listing the height, width, total square footage,
method of attachment, method of illumination, and sign materials;
(c) The subject property's zoning designation; and
(d) The total area of all signs on the subject property both before and after the installation of
the proposed sign.
(4) Procedure: The Zoning Administrator shall review the submitted application for compliance
with the requirements of Subsection (3), above and per Section 98-802. Upon the receipt of a
complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall review said application for compliance
with the requirements of this Chapter, and shall issue an approved or denied Sign Permit
based on the submitted application within five working days of the acceptance of the complete
application.
(5) Termination of a Sign Permit: Any sign found not to be in compliance with the terms of this
Chapter shall be considered in violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to all applicable
procedures and penalties.
(6) Fee: A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 98-935.
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and Approval
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to specify the requirements and procedures for the
review and approval of site plan applications. The provisions of this Section are designed to
ensure that all proposed land use and development activity complies with the requirements of
this Chapter. Specifically, this Section requires that the initiation of all development activity
(including building permits, zoning certificates, occupancy permits for a change of use of an
existing lot or structure where there is contemplated a site plan revision, clear cutting, grading
or filling) require the approval of site, building and operational plans by the City staff before the
building, occupancy, and zoning permits can be issued -- except, however, that development
activity associated with an approved final plat of subdivision or certified survey map for singlefamily
and/or duplex dwelling units, and development activity associated with the full and
complete implementation of a project approved within the PD phase of the Planned
Development District [PD] is exempt from this requirement; however, a survey prepared and
certified by a registered surveyor shall be prepared for any proposed development activity for
such uses.
(2) Procedure
(a) Initiation of Request for Approval of a Site Plan: Proceedings for approval of a site plan
shall be initiated by the owner(s) of the subject property, or their legally authorized
representative(s).
(b) Pre-Application Meeting: The petitioner shall first meet with the Zoning Administrator and
other applicable City Staff to discuss preliminary concepts and plans for the development.
Guidance will be provided to the Petitioner on technical requirements and procedures, and
a timetable for project review may be discussed.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 271
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval through
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval
(c) Application for Site Plan Review and Review by Zoning Administrator: The petitioner
shall apply to the Zoning Administrator for the scheduling of an appearance before the City
staff. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the petitioner of the date and time of the
applicable meeting. The meeting with the City staff shall not be scheduled unless the
application is approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator per the requirements of
Subsection (3), below. The review of the submitted application shall be completed within
ten working days of application submittal. Once the application is approved as complete by
the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator may schedule a meeting with City staff
a minimum of two weeks from the date of complete application acceptance. At time of
acceptance and meeting scheduling, the Zoning Administrator shall forward copies of the
complete application (as provided by the Petitioner) to the all pertinent City staff.
(3) Application Requirements: All applications for proposed site plans shall be approved as
complete by the Zoning Administrator prior to the formal initiation of this procedure. The
submittal of an application to the Zoning Administrator to initiate this procedure shall not occur
until the Zoning Administrator has certified acceptance of the complete application. No
placement of the application on any agenda, as an item to be acted upon, shall occur unless
said certification has occurred. Said complete application shall be comprised of all of the
following:
(a) Written Description of the intended use describing in reasonable detail the:
1. existing zoning district(s) (and proposed zoning district(s) if different);
2. land use plan map designation(s);
3. Natural Resources Site Evaluation Worksheet (Section 98-303);
4. current land uses present on the subject property;
5. proposed land uses for the subject property (per Section 98-206);
6. projected number of residents, employees, and daily customers;
7. proposed amount of dwelling units, floor area, impervious surface area, and landscape
surface area, and resulting site density, floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio,
and landscape surface area ratio;
8. operational considerations relating to hours of operation, projected normal and peak
water usage, sanitary sewer or septic loadings, and traffic generation;
9. operational considerations relating to potential nuisance creation pertaining to
noncompliance with the performance standards addressed in Article VII (Sections 98-
701-98-721) including, street access, traffic visibility, parking, loading, exterior storage,
exterior lighting, vibration, noise, air pollution, odor, electromagnetic radiation, glare
and heat, fire and explosion, toxic or noxious materials, waste materials, drainage, and
hazardous materials. If no such nuisances will be created (as indicated by complete
and continuous compliance with the provisions of Article VII), then the statement "The
proposed development shall comply with all requirements of Article VII." shall be
provided;
10. exterior building and fencing materials (Sections 98-718 and 98-720);
11. possible future expansion and related implications for 1-10, above, and:
12. any other information pertinent to adequate understanding by the Plan Commission of
the intended use and its relation to nearby properties.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 272
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval through
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval
(b) A Small Location Map at 11" x 17" showing the subject property, all properties within 300
feet, and illustrating its relationship to the nearest street intersection. (A photocopy of the
pertinent section of the City's Official Zoning Map with the subject property clearly
indicated shall suffice to meet this requirement.)
(c) A Property Site Plan drawing (and reduction at 11" x 17") which includes:
1. A title block which indicates the name, address and phone/fax number(s) of the current
property owner and/or agent(s) (developer, architect, engineer, planner) for project;
2. The date of the original plan and the latest date of revision to the plan;
3. A north arrow and a graphic scale. Said scale shall not be smaller than one inch
equals 100 feet;
4. A legal description of the subject property;
5. All property lines and existing and proposed right-of-way lines with bearings and
dimensions clearly labeled;
6. All existing and proposed easement lines and dimensions with a key provided and
explained on the margins of the plan as to ownership and purpose;
7. All required building setback lines;
8. All existing and proposed buildings, structures, and paved areas, including building
entrances, walks, drives, decks, patios, fences, utility poles, drainage facilities, and
walls;
9. The location and dimension (cross-section and entry throat) of all access points onto
public streets;
10. The location and dimension of all on-site parking (and off-site parking provisions if they
are to be employed), including a summary of the number of parking stalls provided
versus required by this Chapter;
11. The location and dimension of all loading and service areas on the subject property
and labels indicating the dimension of such areas;
12. The location of all outdoor storage areas and the design of all screening devices;
13. The location, type, height, size and lighting of all signage on the subject property;
14. The location, height, design/type, illumination power and orientation of all exterior
lighting on the subject property -- including the clear demonstration of compliance with
Section 98-707;
15. The location and type of any permanently protected green space areas;
16. The location of existing and proposed drainage facilities; and
17. In the legend, data for the subject property:
a. Lot Area;
b. Floor Area;
c. Floor Area Ratio (b/a);
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 273
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval through
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval
d. Impervious Surface Area;
e. Impervious Surface Ratio (d/a); and
f. Building Height.
(d) A Detailed Landscaping Plan of the subject property, at the same scale as the main plan
(and reduction at 11" x 17"), showing the location of all required bufferyard and
landscaping areas, and existing and proposed Landscape Point fencing and berm options
for meeting said requirements. The Landscaping Plan shall demonstrate complete
compliance with the requirements of Article VI. (NOTE: the individual plant locations and
species, fencing types and heights, and berm heights need to be provided.)
(e) A Grading and Erosion Control Plan at the same scale as the main plan (and reduction at
11" x 17") showing existing and proposed grades, including retention walls and related
devices, and erosion control measures per the following detailed requirements:
(f) Elevation Drawings of proposed buildings or proposed remodeling of existing buildings
showing finished exterior treatment shall also be submitted, with adequate labels provided
to clearly depict exterior materials, texture, color and overall appearance. Perspective
renderings of the proposed project and/or photos of similar structures may be submitted,
but not in lieu of adequate drawings showing the actual intended appearance of the
buildings. (Refer to Section 98-718.)
(g) A Certified Survey may be required by the Zoning Administrator in instances where he
determines compliance with setback requirements may be difficult. The survey shall be
prepared by a registered land surveyor and shall depict property lines, and proposed
buildings, structures, and paved areas.
(h) A Detailed Site Analysis per the following submission and review process:
1. Purpose: The detailed site analysis required by this Article is designed to provide the
clear identification of permanently protected green space areas on a site which is
proposed for development. The detailed survey work required to identify these areas
accurately on a map is not required prior to the initiation of development concept plans
for an area. A detailed site analysis shall be performed in conjunction with required
land division documents or development site plans for any and all properties
containing permanently protected natural resource areas.
2. Description: The detailed site analysis shall be shown on a map of the subject
property which depicts the location of all protected natural resource areas, as defined
by the provisions of this Article, and as located by an on-site survey. The detailed site
analysis shall meet the following requirements:
a. Scale: A minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet shall be used.
b. Topography: Topographic information is not required for any property which does
not contain steep slopes (as designated on the Official Zoning Map). For such
properties, topographic information with a minimum contour interval of two feet is
required.
c. Specific Natural Resources Areas: All natural resource areas which require
protection under the provisions of this Chapter shall be accurately outlined and
clearly labeled. Particular care as to clarity shall be taken in areas where different
resource types overlap with one-another. The Staff of the Southeastern Wisconsin
Regional Planning Commission, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources,
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 274
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval through
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval
or other expert recognized by one of these agencies, shall stake the edge of the
resource in the field, and this staked line shall be transferred by a registered
surveyor or engineer to the site plan base map. (Ord. No. 99-4 3/8/99)
d. Development Pads:
1. All site disruption (including selective cutting) proposed to occur within
permanently protected natural resource areas shall be limited to development
pads. Development pads shall be depicted on the detailed site analysis map,
site plans required for development permits, and the recorded Plat of
Subdivision or Certified Survey Map.
2. Beyond visible damage to natural resources, vegetation, soil, and drainage
patterns, site disruption activities shall not compact soil covering tree roots, or
otherwise damage trees beyond the area from which trees are to be removed.
All trees with calipers exceeding 3 inches, whose canopies are located
adjacent to disturbed areas, which die within a period of five years following
site disruption shall be replaced by the property owner with a 3 inch caliper tree
of the same type (canopy or understory). Therefore, care shall be taken to
ensure that equipment and actions associated with permitted site disruption
activities are limited to the area in which they are permitted. The use of snow
fences and other barriers to outline development pads during disruption activity
is strongly recommended to limit the extent of inadvertent compaction or other
disturbance of earth, and collision damage to vegetation intended for
protection. Such barriers should be placed no closer to protected trees than a
point on the ground directly under their outer canopy edge.
e. Mitigation Areas: All mitigation areas related to the provisions of this Chapter
shall be depicted on the detailed site analysis map with notations provided which
describe the mitigation techniques employed.
3. Required Procedure for Submission and Review
a. Required Timing of Submission: The detailed site analysis map shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator for initial review prior to, or concurrently with,
the submission of the Preliminary Plat of Subdivision or the Certified Survey Map;
or if the proposed development does not involve a land division, then submittal is
required as an attachment to a required site plan. A concept plan of the proposed
development may be submitted prior to the submission of the detailed site analysis
map, however, in no way does the acceptance and/or general approval of the
concept plan indicate the approval of natural resource feature locations. A detailed
site analysis map prepared for the subject property which has been previously
approved by City Staff, may be submitted for any subsequent development activity
on the site. However, modifications to such a previously approved map will be
required if the analysis is no longer accurate for the subject property.
b. Review by City Staff: City staff shall review the submitted detailed site analysis
map for general compliance with the following data sources:
1. The Official Zoning Map;
2. Applicable USGS 7.5 minute topographic maps for the City of Lake Geneva
and its environs;
3. Air photos of the subject property;
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 275
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval through
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval
4. USGS Quads and other sources of topographic information;
5. Applicable FEMA and related floodplain maps;
6. Applicable Federal and State Wetland Inventory Maps;
7. The City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive Master Plan; and
8. Site visits. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the petitioner with a written
evaluation of the submitted detailed site analysis map which shall indicate the
acceptance by City Staff; or the need for further analysis work, discussion with
the petitioner and/or Staff-recognized experts, or a joint site visit.
c. Modification of Detailed Site Analysis Map: If necessary, as determined by City
Staff, revised detailed site analysis maps shall be prepared and submitted for
review by City Staff, until a version is deemed acceptable. Staff review of the
detailed site analysis map may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals as a
matter of Ordinance Interpretation. (See Section 98-934.).
d. Acceptance of Detailed Site Analysis Map: Upon notification of acceptance by
City Staff, (or in case of appeal, by determination of the Board of Zoning Appeals),
the petitioner may proceed with the submittal of necessary development
documents.
4. Integration of Detailed Site Analysis Information with Required Development
and/or Land Division Documents: Information contained on the detailed site
analysis map relating to the boundaries of permanently protected green space areas
(including natural resource protection areas, other permanently protected green space
areas, and required mitigation areas) shall be clearly depicted on any and all site plans
required as a precondition for application for any development permit (such as a
Building Permit) and on any proposed Plat of Subdivision or Certified Survey Map.
(4) Review by the Plan Commission
(a) The Plan Commission, in its consideration of the submitted complete application, shall
take into account the basic intent of the Zoning Ordinance to ensure attractive, efficient,
and appropriate development of land in the community, and to ensure particularly that
every reasonable step has been taken to avoid depreciating effects on surrounding
property and the natural environment. Beyond protection of the public health, safety and
welfare, this Section shall enable the Plan Commission to consider factors related to
community aesthetics, urban design, and architectural consistency within the community.
The Plan Commission, in reviewing the application may require such additional measures
and/or modifications to any or all elements of the site plan as described in the application
submittal required per Section (3)(a)-(h), as it deems necessary to accomplish this
objective. If such additional measures and/or modifications are required, the Plan
Commission may withhold approval of the Site Plan until a revisions depicting such
additional measures and/or modifications are submitted to the satisfaction of the Plan
Commission, or may approve the application subject to the provision of a revised
application reflecting the direction of the Plan Commission to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator. Such amended plans and conditions applicable to the proposed use shall
be made a part of the official record, and development activity on the subject property may
not proceed until the revised application has been approved by one of the two above
procedures as directed by the Plan Commission.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 276
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval through
Section 98-908 Site Plan Review and
Approval
(b) In reviewing said application the Plan Commission shall make findings on each of the
following criteria to determine whether the submitted site plan shall be approved, approved
with modification, or denied:
1. All standards of the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable City, State and Federal
regulations are met;
2. The public health and safety is not endangered;
3. Adequate public facilities and utilities are provided;
4. Adequate control of stormwater and erosion are provided and the disruption of existing
topography, drainage patterns, and vegetative cover is maintained insofar as is
practical;
5. Appropriate traffic control and parking are provided;
6. Appropriate landscaping and open space areas are provided;
7. The appearance of structures maintains a consistency of design, materials, colors, and
arrangement with nearby properties of similar use, which comply with the general
architectural guidelines provided in subsections i. through v., below:
a. Exterior construction materials shall be consistent with Section 98-718;
b. Exterior building design or appearance shall not be of such unorthodox or
abnormal character in relation to its surroundings as to be unsightly or offensive to
generally accepted taste and community standards;
c. Exterior building design or appearance shall not be so identical with nearby
buildings so as to create excessive monotony or drabness. A minimum of five basic
home styles shall be provided in each residential subdivision;
d. Exterior building design or appearance shall not be constructed or faced with an
exterior material which is aesthetically incompatible with other nearby buildings or
which presents an unattractive appearance to the public and from surrounding
properties; and
e. Exterior building, sign, and lighting design or appearance shall not be sited on the
property in a manner which would unnecessarily destroy or substantially damage
the natural beauty of the area.
(5) Initiation of Land Use or Development Activity: Except with the written permission of the
Zoning Administrator, absolutely no land use or development activity, including site clearing,
grubbing, or grading shall occur on the subject property prior to the approval of the required
site plan. Any such activity prior to such approval shall be a violation of this Chapter and shall
be subject to all applicable enforcement mechanisms and penalties.
(6) Modification of an Approved Site Plan: Any and all variation between development and/or
land use activity on the subject property and the approved site plan is a violation of this
Chapter. An approved site plan shall be revised and approved via the procedures of
Subsections (2) and (4), above, so as to clearly and completely depict any and all proposed
modifications to the previously approved site plan, prior to the initiation of said modifications.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 277
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-909 Certificate of Occupancy through Section 98-909 Certificate of Occupancy
(7) Sunset Clause: All buildings on an approved site plan not fully developed within two years of
final Common Council approval shall expire, and all other portions of a project on an approved
site plan not fully developed within a period of five years of final Common Council approval
shall expire, and no additional site plan development shall be permitted on undeveloped
portions of the subject property. The Common Council may extend this period, as requested
per the Applicant, through the conditional use process following a public hearing.
(8) Fee: A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 98-935.
Section 98-909 Certificate of Occupancy
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations governing the review and
approval of Certificates of Occupancy. This procedure is required to ensure completed
development complies with the approved site plan (per the requirements of Section 98-908),
and the requirements of this Chapter as a whole.
(2) Land Uses and Development Requiring a Certificate of Occupancy: Certificates of
Occupancy shall be required for any of the following:
(a) Occupancy and use of a building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered.
(b) New occupancy and use of an existing building when the new use is of a different land use
classification (a different line in Table 98-203).
(c) Occupancy and use of vacant land.
(d) New use of vacant land when the new use is of a different land use classification (a
different line in Table 98-203).
(e) Any change in the use of a nonconforming use. No such occupancy, use of change of use
shall take place until a Certificate of Occupancy therefore shall have been issued by the
Building Inspection Superintendent.
(3) Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy
(a) Every application for a Building Permit shall also be deemed to be an application for a
Certificate of Occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which is to be
substantially altered or enlarged as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Such
Certificate shall be issued within ten working days after a written request for the same has
been made to the Building Inspector after the erection or alteration of such building or part
thereof has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
(b) Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy for the use of vacant land or for a
change in the use of land or of a building, or for a change in a nonconforming use, as
herein provided, shall be made to the Building Inspector; if the proposed use is in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, the Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued
within ten working days after the application therefore has been made.
(c) Every Certificate of Occupancy shall state that both the building, and the proposed use of
a building or land, substantially complies with all provisions of this Chapter. A record of all
Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector and
copies shall be furnished on request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest
in the building or land affected.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 278
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-910 Variances through Section 98-910 Variances
(4) Certificate of Occupancy for Legal Nonconforming Uses: Upon application, a Certificate
of Occupancy shall be issued for all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by
adoption of this Chapter, or in existence at the effective date of this Chapter (see Section 98-
011). Application for such Certificate of Occupancy for nonconforming use shall be filed with
the Building Inspector by the owner or lessee of the building or land occupied by such
nonconforming use within one year of the effective date of this Chapter. It shall be the duty of
the Building Inspector to issue a Certificate of Occupancy for a legal nonconforming use.
(5) Termination of a Certificate of Occupancy: It shall constitute a violation of this Chapter for
any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association, either owner or agent, to do any of the
things mentioned in Subsection (2), above, without having first obtained a Certificate of
Occupancy. Any Certificate issued upon a false statement of any fact which is material to the
issuance thereof shall be void. Whenever the fact of such false statement shall be established
to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector, he shall forthwith revoke the Certificate of
Occupancy, by notice in writing to be delivered by him to the holder of the void Certificate upon
the premises where the violation has occurred, or if such holder be not found there, by mailing
the said notice of revocation by Certified Letter to his last known address. Any person who
shall proceed thereafter with such work or use without having obtained a new Certificate of
Occupancy shall be deemed guilty of violation of this Chapter.
(6) Fee: A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 98-935.
Section 98-910 Variances
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations which enable the City to hear
and decide requests for permitted variation from the terms of this Chapter as will not be
contrary to the public interest; where owing to special factors, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that
the spirit of this Chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial
justice done; as provided for by Wisconsin Statutes 62.23(7)(e)(7).
(2) Initiation of Request for Approval of a Variance: Proceedings for approval of a requested
variance shall be initiated by:
(a) an application of the owner(s) of the subject property
(3) Application Requirements: All applications for requested variances shall be approved as
complete by the Zoning Administrator a minimum of two weeks prior to the initiation of this
procedure. The submittal of an application to the City Clerk to initiate this procedure shall not
occur until the Zoning Administrator has certified acceptance of the complete application to the
City Clerk. No placement of the application on any agenda, as an item to be acted upon, shall
occur unless said certification has occurred. The item may be placed on any agenda as a
discussion-only item, with the permission of the Zoning Administrator, without an application.
Prior to the submittal of the Official Notice regarding the application to the newspaper by the
City Clerk, the Applicant shall provide the City Clerk with 20 copies of the complete application
as certified by the Zoning Administrator. Said complete application shall be comprised of all of
the following:
(a) A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the variance is proposed, and all
other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the
names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the
current records of the Register of Deeds of Walworth County (as determined by the City of
Lake Geneva). Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 279
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-910 Variances through Section 98-910 Variances
and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. Said map and all its
parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a
photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot
dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided;
(b) A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location of the subject property
in relation to the City as a whole;
(c) A written description of the proposed variance describing the type of specific requirements
of the variance proposed for the subject property;
(d) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development. Said site plan shall
conform to any and all the requirements of Section 98-908(3); and,
(e) Written justification for the requested variance consisting of the reasons why the Applicant
believes the proposed variance is appropriate, particularly as evidenced by compliance
with the standard set out in Subsection (4)(c)1.-6., below.
(4) Review by The Zoning Administrator: The requested variance shall be reviewed by the
Zoning Administrator as follows:
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills
the requirements of this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Chapter, he shall
return the application to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is complete, he shall so notify Applicant.
(b) Upon notifying the Applicant that his application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall
review the application and evaluate and comment on the written justification for the
proposed variance provided in the application per Subsection (3)(a)-(e), above.
(c) The Zoning Administrator may also evaluate the application to determine whether the
requested variance is in harmony with the recommendations of the City of Lake Geneva's
Comprehensive Master Plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards
of Subsection (4)(c)1.-6., below:
1. What exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or special factors are present which
apply only to the subject property? The response to this question shall clearly indicate
how the subject property contains factors which are not present on other properties in
the same zoning district. Specifically:
a. The hardship or difficulty shall be peculiar to the subject property and different from
that of other properties, and not one which affects all properties similarly. Such a
hardship or difficulty shall have arisen because of the unusual shape of the original
acreage parcel; unusual topography or elevation; or because the property was
created before the passage of the current, applicable zoning regulations, and is not
economically suitable for a permitted use or will not accommodate a structure of
reasonable design for a permitted use if all area, yard, green space, and setback
requirements are observed;
b. Loss of profit or pecuniary hardship shall not, in and of itself, be grounds for a
variance;
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 280
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-910 Variances through Section 98-910 Variances
c. Self-imposed hardship shall not be grounds for a variance. Reductions resulting
from the sale of portions of a property reducing the remainder of said property
below buildable size or cutting-off existing access to a public right-of-way or deed
restrictions imposed by the owner's predecessor in title are considered to be such
self-imposed hardships;
d. Violations by, or variances granted to, neighboring properties shall not justify a
variance;
e. The alleged hardship shall not be one that would have existed in the absence of a
zoning ordinance. (For example, if a lot were unbuildable because of topography in
the absence of any or all setback requirements.)
2. In what manner do the factors identified in 1., above, prohibit the development of the
subject property in a manner similar to that of other properties under the same zoning
district? The response to this question shall clearly indicate how the requested
variance is essential to make the subject property developable so that property rights
enjoyed by the owners of similar properties can be enjoyed by the owners of the
subject property.
3. Would the granting of the proposed variance be of substantial detriment to adjacent
properties? The response to this question shall clearly indicate how the proposed
variance will have no substantial impact on adjacent properties.
4. Would the granting of the proposed variance as depicted on the required site plan (see
(3)(d), above), result in a substantial or undue adverse impact on the character of the
neighborhood, environmental factors, traffic factors, parking, public improvements,
public property or rights-of-way, or other matters affecting the public health, safety, or
general welfare, either as they now exist or as they may in the future be developed as
a result of the implementation of the intent, provisions, and policies of this Chapter, the
Comprehensive Plan, or any other plan, program, map, or ordinance adopted or under
consideration pursuant to official notice by the City or other governmental agency
having jurisdiction to guide growth and development? The response to this question
shall clearly indicate how the proposed variance will have no substantial impact on
such long-range planning matters.
5. Have the factors which present the reason for the proposed variance been created by
the act of the Applicant or previous property owner or their agent (for example:
previous development decisions such as building placement, floor plan, or orientation,
lotting pattern, or grading) after the effective date of this Chapter (see Section 98-011.)
The response to this question shall clearly indicate that such factors existed prior to
the effective date of this Chapter and were not created by action of the Applicant, a
previous property owner, or their agent.
6. Does the proposed variance involve the regulations of Section 98-203 (Table of Land
Uses)? The response to this question shall clearly indicate that the requested variance
does not involve the provisions of this Section.
(d) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the report per (4)(b), and if prepared the report per
(4)(c), to the Zoning Board of Appeals for the Board's review and action. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of the
City's Zoning Ordinance and Comprehensive Master Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall
note this determination in the report.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 281
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-910 Variances through Section 98-910 Variances
(5) Review and Determination by Zoning Board of Appeals
(a) Within 30 days after filing of the complete application as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the
requested variance and the public hearing shall conform to the requirements of Section
62.23(7)(d) of Wisconsin Statutes. Said notice shall contain a description of the subject
property and the proposed variance per Subsections (3)(a) and (c), above. In addition, at
least ten days before said public hearing, the City Clerk shall mail an identical notice to the
Applicant of the proposed variance; to the Clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are
within 1,000 feet of any portion of the subject property; and to all property owners within
300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property as identified in Subsection (3)(a), above.
Failure to mail said notice, to said clerk(s) of such neighboring municipalities, provided it is
unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this Section.
(b) Within 30 days after the holding of the public hearing (per (5)(a), above, (or, within an
extension of said period approved by the Applicant and granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals), the Zoning Board of Appeals make its findings per Subsection (4), above, and its
determination regarding the application as a whole. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
request further information and/or additional reports from The Zoning Administrator and/or
the Applicant. The Zoning Board of Appeals may take final action on said request for
approval of the requested variance at time of its initial meeting, or said proceedings may
be continued from time-to-time for further consideration. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall make a written report of its findings and determinations following its determination.
(c) If the Zoning Board of Appeals fails to make a determination within 30 days after said
public hearing, then the request for the variance shall be considered denied.
(d) Said report shall include a formal findings of facts developed and approved by the Zoning
Board of Appeals concerning the requirements of (4)(c)1.-6., above.
(6) Effect of Denial: No application for a variance which has been denied (either wholly or in
part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial,
except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning
Administrator.
(7) Limited Effect of a Variance: Where the Zoning Board of Appeals has granted a variance,
such approval shall neither change the use classification of the building or premises, nor give
it any status as a nonconforming use other than that which it has as a result of the variance.
Granting of a variance shall be considered as unique to the variance granted, and shall not be
construed as precedent for any other proposed variance.
(8) Stay of Proceedings: An application for a variance shall stay all legal proceedings furthering
enforcement of any provisions of this Chapter from which the Applicant is requesting a
variance, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the
request for the variance has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a
stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals, or by a Court of Record on application, on notice to the Zoning
Administrator, and on due cause shown. State Law Reference: Section 62.23(7)(e)5.,
Wisconsin Statutes.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 282
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-911 Interpretations through Section 98-911 Interpretations
(9) Notice to the DNR: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall transmit a copy of each application for
a variance to conservancy regulations in the Shoreland-Wetland, Floodway, Floodplain, or
Floodfringe Overlay Zoning Districts, and a copy of all Shoreland floodland appeals, to the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) for review and comment at least 10 days
prior to any public hearings. A copy of all decisions relating to variances to shoreland-wetland
conservancy regulations or to floodland regulations, and a copy of all decisions to shorelandwetland
conservancy and floodland appeals, shall be transmitted to the DNR within 10 days of
the date of such decision.
(10)Fee: A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 98-935.
Section 98-911 Interpretations
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to assign responsibility for the official interpretation of
the provisions of this Chapter, and to describe the required procedure for securing such
interpretation.
(2) Initiation of Request for an Interpretation: Proceedings for an interpretation may be
initiated by any of the following four methods:
(a) an application of the owner(s) of the subject property;
(b) a recommendation of the Plan Commission;
(c) by action of the Common Council, or;
(d) by a request by The Zoning Administrator.
(3) Application Requirements: All applications for interpretations, regardless of the party of their
initiation per (2) above, shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator a minimum
of two weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. The submittal of an application to the City
Clerk to initiate this procedure shall not occur until the Zoning Administrator has certified
acceptance of the complete application to the City Clerk. No placement of the application on
any agenda, as an item to be acted upon, shall occur unless said certification has occurred.
The item may be placed on any agenda as a discussion-only item, with the permission of the
Zoning Administrator, without an application. Prior to the submittal of the Official Notice
regarding the application to the newspaper by the City Clerk, the Applicant shall provide the
City Clerk with 20 copies of the complete application as certified by the Zoning Administrator.
Said complete application shall be comprised of all of the following:
(a) All requests for interpretations shall clearly indicate the part of the text of this Chapter for
which the interpretation is requested and the specific questions the Applicant has
regarding said text.
(b) If the requested interpretation relates to the application of this Chapter to a specific
property, the additional following information shall be required:
1. A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the interpretation is
requested, and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property,
together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the
same appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds of Walworth County as
provided by the City of Lake Geneva. Said map shall clearly indicate the current
zoning of the subject property and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains
that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form
which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 283
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-911 Interpretations through Section 98-911 Interpretations
less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic
scale, and a north arrow shall be provided;
2. A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location of the subject
property in relation to the City as a whole;
3. A written description of the reason for the requested interpretation and how the
proposed interpretation relates to type of activities, buildings, and structures currently
located on, and proposed for, the subject property; and,
4. A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development. Said site plan shall
conform to any and all the requirements of Section 98-908(3).
(c) If the requested interpretation relates to the classification or treatment of a particular land
use under the provisions of this Chapter, a series of written responses to the following
questions:
1. How is the subject land use (in general) in harmony with the purposes, goals,
objectives, policies and standards of the City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive Plan,
this Chapter, and any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted, or under
consideration pursuant to official notice by the City?
2. How is the subject land use in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies
and standards of the pertinent zoning district for which the interpretation is being
sought?
3. Do the potential public benefits of the proposed interpretation outweigh any and all
potential adverse impacts of the proposed interpretation?
(4) Review by Zoning Administrator
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills
the requirements of this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Chapter, he shall
return the application to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is complete, he shall so notify Applicant.
(b) Upon notifying the Applicant that the application is complete, and within 30 days of such
filing, the Zoning Administrator shall review the application and shall evaluate and
comment on the written justification for the proposed interpretation provided in the
application per Subsection (3), above. This review shall also take into consideration the
standards for review presented in Subsection (5), below. The Zoning Administrator shall
also evaluate the application to determine whether the requested is in harmony with the
recommendations of the City of Lake Geneva's Comprehensive Master Plan.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall forward a report to the Applicant indicating the
interpretation of the Zoning Administrator. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of the City's Comprehensive Master Plan,
the Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 284
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-911 Interpretations through Section 98-911 Interpretations
(5) Standards for Review of Requested Interpretations: This Chapter shall be interpreted in a
manner which is consistent with the purposes intended by the City of Lake Geneva Common
Council as noted in this Chapter and the Comprehensive Plan. The intent of the standards and
supporting definitions of this Chapter is to protect both individual property owners and the
general public from adverse impacts that may result from a proposed, modified, or existing
land use. To this end, those called upon to interpret this Chapter shall proceed as follows:
(a) Articulate certain public purpose(s) underlying the standard(s) for which an interpretation is
required.
Rationale: Before any zoning interpretation is made, there must be an explicit discussion
of certain purpose(s) for which the regulation was initially imposed. Each zoning regulation
is intended to protect the interests of both present and future neighbors and the general
public. Each standard is developed as a regulatory response to an identifiable potential
negative impact. A sound interpretation of any standard cannot be ensured without careful
analysis of the regulation and the end toward which it is directed. It is understood that
there may be other public purposes underlying the interpretation which are not explicitly
articulated.
(b) Articulate the actual impact of various proposed interpretations, permitting flexibility in
design and prohibiting any interpretation that lowers the protection afforded to the public.
Rationale: There is a critical distinction between an interpretation which provides a greater
degree of design freedom to achieve a permitted land use, and an interpretation which
permits a new or not previously permitted use, or which allows a use to be enlarged, or
have its intensity increased beyond the degree specified in the Chapter. Design freedom is
to be encouraged while a lowering of the standards of this Chapter is to be prohibited.
(c) Determine whether the proposed interpretation will ensure a just balance between the
rights of the landowner and all others who will be affected by that person's land use
proposal.
Rationale: If an interpretation would merely allow a design solution that is slightly different
from the one expressly stated or permitted, and if it would result in a same or greater
degree of protection to any affected party (either the adjoining landowners, the public at
large, and/or a future property owner or renter), such an interpretation may be
appropriately made. Any interpretation which would result in any identifiable loss of
protection for one group to the benefit of others is contrary to the spirit of this Chapter.
Similarly, any interpretation which would either increase the nuisance potential of any use
or alter the purpose for which the regulation was adopted shall be considered counter to
the legislative intent of this Chapter. Any interpretation which will result in any loss of
protection or increase in intensity beyond that already permitted shall only be made if the
party interpreting this Chapter has the power to impose additional restrictions or
requirements and exercise this power in order to protect the public.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 285
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-911 Interpretations through Section 98-911 Interpretations
(d) This Chapter has been carefully designed by the Common Council to combine maximum
achievement of public goals, and the protection of adjoining property owners while
providing flexibility for property owners to use their land for a variety of uses consistent
with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan for the City of Lake Geneva.
Great care has been taken to balance the rights of competing groups while achieving
maximum protection with flexibility and a range of use options. Persons interpreting this
Chapter should not substitute their own judgments for the legislative acts of the Common
Council.
(e) In addition to the Applicant's response to the questions required by Subsection (3) above,
the following standards shall govern the decision on the requested interpretation on land
use interpretation matters:
1. No interpretation shall allow the establishment of any land use which was previously
considered and rejected by the Common Council on an application for an amendment
to the Zoning Ordinance, the Official Zoning Map, or a previously applied for appeal
from a requested interpretation.
2. No interpretation shall permit a land use listed as a use permitted by right or a
conditional use in another zoning district if the use is not listed as permitted in the
zoning district of the subject property (see Section 98-203).
3. No interpretation shall permit a land use in a zoning district unless evidence is
presented which demonstrates that the land use will comply with any and all
regulations applicable to development in the subject property's zoning district (see
Sections 98-203 and 98-206).
4. No interpretation shall permit a land use in a particular zoning district unless such use
is substantially similar to other uses permitted in that same district and is more similar
to such other uses than to uses either not permitted in said district, or permitted in a
more intensive district in the same zoning district category (see Sections 98-102 and
98-203).
5. If the proposed land use is more similar to a land use permitted only as a conditional
use in the subject property's district than to a use permitted by right, then an
interpretation permitting such use shall be conditioned upon the approval of a
conditional use pursuant to Section 98-905.
(6) Effect of a Favorable Land Use Interpretation: No interpretation finding a particular land
use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specific zoning district shall authorize either
the establishment of such use or the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or
moving of any building or structure. A favorable interpretation merely authorizes the
preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits and approvals which may be
required by this Chapter. These permits and approvals include, but are not limited to required
site plans, conditional uses, and certificates of occupancy.
(7) Limitations on Favorable Land Use Interpretation
(a) No interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a
specified zoning district shall be valid for a period of more than 365 days from the date of
issuance of the interpretation, unless a Building Permit is issued and development is
actually begun within that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or a
Certificate of Occupancy is obtained and a use commenced within that period.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 286
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-912 Appeals of Zoning
Interpretations through
Section 98-912 Appeals of Zoning
Interpretations
(b) An interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a
specified zoning district shall be deemed to authorize only that particular use at that
particular location for which the interpretation was issued. The interpretation shall not be
deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate interpretation has not
been issued. A favorable interpretation shall automatically expire and cease to be of any
force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any reason, be
discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or more.
(8) Fee: A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 98-935.
Section 98-912 Appeals of Zoning Interpretations
(1) Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations which enable the City to hear
and decide requests for appeals from the interpretations of the Zoning Administrator per
Section 98-911 as provided for by Wisconsin Statutes 62.23(7)(e)(7).
(2) Initiation of Request for Review of Zoning Interpretation: Proceedings for the review of an
appeal may be initiated by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or
bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Time Limit for Filing An Appeal: Any appeal of an interpretation under the provisions of this
Section shall be made per the requirements of Subsection (4), below, within a period not
exceeding 45 days from the date of issuance of the interpretation by the Zoning Administrator.
Failure to initiate this appeal procedure within this 45 day period shall constitute a final and
binding waiver of the right to appeal said interpretation.
(4) Application Requirements: All applications for review of an interpretation, regardless of the
party of their initiation per (2) above, shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator, and
shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator a minimum of two weeks prior to
the initiation of this procedure. The Zoning Administrator shall forward copies of said complete
application to the office of the City Clerk, and to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Said complete
application shall be accompanied by all of the following:
(a) A copy of pertinent items in the file on the matter at hand maintained by the Zoning
Administrator, as identified by the Zoning Administrator and/or the Applicant.
(b) A written statement from the Applicant indicating the reasons why an appeal is justified,
based upon an analysis of the Zoning Administrator's interpretation. This statement shall
be dated and signed by the Applicant.
(5) Review by the Zoning Administrator: The submitted appeal shall be reviewed by The
Zoning Administrator in the following steps:
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills
the requirements of this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Chapter, he shall
return the application to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is complete, he shall so notify Applicant.
(b) Upon notifying Applicant that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall
review the application and shall evaluate and comment on the written justification for the
appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals as submitted by the Applicant. The Zoning
Administrator shall also evaluate the application to determine whether the requested is in
harmony with the recommendations of the City of Lake Geneva's Comprehensive Master
Plan.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 287
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall forward a report to the Zoning Board of Appeals for review
and action. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with
the provisions of the City's Comprehensive Master Plan or Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning
Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
(6) Review and Action by the Zoning Board of Appeals
(a) Within 45 days after the filing of the complete application as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall schedule a reasonable time and place for
a public hearing to consider the application. Notice of the appeal and said public hearing
shall conform to Section 63.23(7)(d) of the Wisconsin Statutes. Said notice shall contain a
description of the issue per Subsection (4)(b), above. At least ten days before said public
hearing, the City Clerk shall mail an identical notice to the Applicant; to the Clerk of any
municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this
Chapter; and to any property owner within 300 feet of the subject property. Failure to mail
said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this Section.
(b) Within 60 days after the filing of the complete application as determined by the Zoning
Administrator (or, within an extension of said period requested in writing by the Applicant
and granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals), the Zoning Board of Appeals make its
findings per Subsection (3) above. The Zoning Board of Appeals may request further
information and/or additional reports from The Zoning Administrator and/or the Applicant.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may take final action on the application for appeal at the
time of its initial meeting, or may continue the proceedings at Applicant's request. Said
final action shall be followed by a written report which shall include a formal finding of facts
developed and approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals concerning the request.
(c) If the Zoning Board of Appeals fails to make a determination within 60 days after the filing
of said complete application, then the request for the appeal shall be considered denied.
(7) Effect of Denial: No application for an appeal which has been denied (either wholly or in part)
shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on
grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
(8) Limited Effect of a Favorable Ruling on an Appeal
(a) No ruling by the Zoning Board of Appeals on an appeal finding a particular land use to be
permitted or conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be valid for a period
of more than 365 days from the date of issuance of the ruling on the appeal, unless a
building permit is issued and development is actually begun within that period, and is
thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or a Certificate of Occupancy is obtained and a
use commenced within that period.
(b) A ruling by the Zoning Board of Appeals on an appeal finding a particular land use to be
permitted or conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be deemed to
authorize only that particular use at that particular location for which the ruling was issued.
The ruling shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate
ruling has not been issued. A favorable ruling shall automatically expire and cease to be of
any force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any reason, be
discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or more.
(9) Fee: A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 98-935.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 288
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay Zoning District
(1) Purpose and Scope: This district is intended to implement the urban design
recommendations of the comprehensive master plan by preserving and enhancing the
historical quality of the downtown, and by attaining a consistent visually pleasing image for the
downtown area. This district is designed to forward both aesthetic and economic objectives of
the City by controlling the site design and appearance of development within the district in a
manner which is consistent with sound land use, urban design, and economic revitalization
principles. The application of these standards will ensure the long-term progress and broad
participation toward these principles.
(2) Definitions
(a) Design Review Commission: The Design Review Commission is comprised of members of
the Plan Commission.
(b) cornice: The topmost projecting portion of the entablature, or top portion of a building. This
term also refers to any "crowning" projection of a building.
(c) header: A brick laid so that the end only appears on the face of the wall, as opposed to a
stretcher, which is a brick laid so that the side only appears.
(d) kickplate: A horizontal area on the façade of a building located between the
sidewalk/entrance pavement and the lowest storefront windows.
(e) sign band: A horizontal area on the façade of a building located between the transom and
the cornice, which is typically opaque and provides a location for signage indicating the
name of the establishment.
(f) sill: A horizontal, lower member or bottom of a door or window casing.
(g) transom: A horizontal bar of stone, wood or glass across the opening of a door or window.
(3) Designation of Downtown Design Overlay Zoning District Boundaries:The Downtown
Design Overlay Zoning District boundaries are depicted on the City of Lake Geneva Zoning
Map. All properties having frontage on either side of the following described route, and all
other properties located within the boundaries of described route: BEGINNING at the
intersection of Main Street and Cook Street; thence south along Cook Street to Wrigley Street;
thence southeast along Wrigley Street to Baker Street; thence east along Baker Street to
Lakeshore Drive; thence north along Lakeshore Drive to Main Street; thence along Main
Street to the former Railroad; thence northwest along the former Railroad to Geneva Street;
thence westerly along Geneva Street to Broad Street; thence northerly along Broad Street to
abandoned railroad right-of-way; thence southerly along Broad Street to Geneva Street;
thence west along Geneva Street to Cook Street; thence south along Cook Street to the point
and place of BEGINNING. (Ord. No. 02-35 1/28/02)
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 289
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
(4) Powers and Duties of the Zoning Administrator, Design Review Commission, and Plan
Commission for All Development: Proposed changes to the exterior appearance of
properties used exclusively for residential purposes and which do not have frontage on Main
Street are hereby excluded from the provisions of this Section. All other applications within the
Downtown Design Overlay Zoning District are subject to one of the following three processes,
as determined by the Zoning Administrator:
(a) Applications which involve only a renovation of the exterior appearance of a property (such
as repainting, re-roofing, residing or replacing with identical colors and materials approved
by the City and listed in the attached Appendix), or a change in the exterior appearance of
a property in absolute clear and complete compliance with the provisions of Subsection (6)
below (as determined by the Zoning Administrator), are subject to Downtown Renovation
Review by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether
the petition requires only certification of thorough compliance with the technical
requirements set out in Subsection (5)(a) below. In part, this effort shall be guided by the
City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive Master Plan;
(b) Applications which involve only a change in the appearance of a property (such as
painting, roofing, siding, architectural component substitution, fencing, paving, or signage),
are subject to Downtown Design Review by the Zoning Administrator and the Design
Review Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall serve as the liaison between the
applicant and the Design Review Commission, in facilitating the thorough and expedient
review of an application, and shall ensure that the technical and procedural requirements
of the Zoning Ordinance are met. The Design Review Commission shall serve as the final
review and determining body in these matters, and shall focus its review on whether the
application complies with sound aesthetic, urban design, historic and architectural
practices pursuant to the procedures outlined in Subsection (5)(b), below. In part, this
effort shall be guided by the comprehensive master plan;
(c) Applications which involve modification to the physical configuration of a property (such as
grading, the erection of a new building, the demolition of an existing building, or the
addition or removal of bulk to an existing building) are subject to Downtown Project
Review by the Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission, and the Design Review
Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall serve as the liaison between the applicant,
the Plan Commission and the Design Review Commission in facilitating the thorough and
expedient review of an application, and shall ensure that the technical and procedural
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance are met. The Plan Commission shall serve as the
initial and final discretionary review body on site design, and shall focus its review on the
application's compliance with sound land use, site design and economic revitalization
practices. In part, this effort shall be guided by the comprehensive master plan. The
Design Review Commission shall serve as the initial and final review and determining
body on aesthetics, and shall focus its review on whether the application complies with
sound aesthetic, urban design, historic and architectural practices pursuant to the
procedures outlined in Subsection (5)(c), below. In part, this effort shall be guided by the
comprehensive master plan.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 290
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
(5) Procedures for Downtown Project Review and Approval
(a) Downtown Renovation Review: Applications which involve only a renovation of the
exterior appearance of a property (such as repainting, re-roofing, residing or replacing with
identical colors and materials approved by the City and listed in the attached Appendix), or
a change in the exterior appearance of a property in absolute clear and complete
compliance with the provisions of Subsection (6) below (as determined by the Zoning
Administrator), are subject to Downtown Renovation Review by the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall serve to determine whether the applications
simply requires certification of thorough compliance with the technical requirements below.
In part, this effort shall be guided by the attached appendix, which provides a list of sample
projects which are eligible for this form of review. (Refer to the procedure summary chart
at the end of this Section.)
1. Application Requirements: All applications for Downtown Renovation Review shall
be made to the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by the Building Permit
application, and, in addition, shall be accompanied by all of the following:
a. A clear depiction of the existing appearance of the property. Clear color
photographs are recommended for this purpose. Scaled and dimensioned
drawings of existing components such as windows, doors, railings, fencing or other
site components, and/or detailed building elevations which are proposed for
alteration or replacement may be required by the Zoning Administrator;
b. A clear depiction of the proposed appearance of the property. Paint charts,
promotional brochures, and/or clear color photographs of replacement architectural
components are recommended for this purpose. Scaled and dimensioned
drawings of proposed components such as windows, doors, railings, fencing or
other site components, and/or detailed building elevations which are proposed for
renovation or replacement may be required by the Zoning Administrator;
c. A written description of the proposed renovation, including a complete listing of
proposed components, materials, and colors.
d. Written justification for the proposed renovation consisting of the reasons why the
Applicant believes the requested alteration is in harmony with the
recommendations of the comprehensive master plan, particularly as evidenced by
compliance with the standards set out is Subsection 2.b., below.
2. Review by the Zoning Administrator: The application for Downtown Renovation
Review shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as follows:
a. Within 20 days after the filing of the application, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine whether the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this
Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not complete
and does not fulfill the requirements of this ordinance, he shall return the
application to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is complete, he shall so notify Applicant.
b. Within 20 days after the filing and notification of a complete application, the Zoning
Administrator shall review the application which: 1) shall evaluate its status as
merely requiring Downtown Renovation Review; and, 2) shall evaluate and
comment on the written justification for the proposed alteration provided in the
application per Subsection (5)(a)1.d., above. The Zoning Administrator shall also
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 291
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
evaluate the application based on the following question: How is the proposed
alteration in harmony with the recommendations of the comprehensive master
plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards of Subsection (6),
below?
3. Action by the Zoning Administrator
a. The Zoning Administrator may request further information and/or additional reports
from the Applicant.
b. The Zoning Administrator may approve the application as originally proposed, may
approve the application with modifications, may deny the application, or (where the
proposal requires discretionary aesthetic judgment) shall forward the application to
Design Review Commission as an application for Downtown Design Review.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall not approve any application unless he makes
written findings of facts regarding the application.
d. The approval of the proposed renovation shall be considered as the approval of a
unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed
alteration.
(b) Downtown Design Review: Applications which involve only a change in the appearance
of a property (such as painting, roofing, siding, architectural component substitution,
fencing, paving, or signage), are subject to Design Review by the Zoning Administrator
and the Design Review Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall serve as the liaison
between the Applicant and the Design Review Commission in facilitating the thorough and
expedient review of an application, and shall ensure that the technical and procedural
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance are met. The Design Review Commission shall
serve as the final review and determining body in these matters, and shall focus its review
on the application's compliance with sound aesthetic, urban design, historic and
architectural practices per the procedures outlined below. In part, this effort shall be guided
by the comprehensive master plan. (Refer to the procedure summary chart at the end of
this Section.)
1. Procedure: Downtown Design Review proposals shall follow the procedures for Site
Plan Review and Approval, see Section 98-908.
2. Application Requirements: In addition to the application requirements for Site Plan
Review and Approval, all applications for Downtown Design Review shall be made to
the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by the Building Permit application,
and, in addition, shall be accompanied by all of the following:
a. A clear depiction of the existing appearance of the property. Clear color
photographs are recommended for this purpose. Scaled and dimensioned
drawings of existing components such as windows, doors, railings, fencing or other
site components, and/or detailed building elevations which are proposed for
alteration or replacement may be required by the Zoning Administrator or by the
City;
b. A clear depiction of the proposed appearance of the property. The applicant shall
provide physical color samples of all proposed paints or coatings applied to the
actual building material. Samples will not be returned to the applicant. Promotional
brochures and/or clear color photographs of replacement architectural components
are alsorecommended for this purpose. Scaled and dimensioned drawings of
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 292
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
proposed components such as windows, doors, railings, fencing or other site
components, and/or detailed building elevations which are proposed for alteration
or replacement may be required by the City;
c. A written description of the proposed modification, including a complete listing of
proposed components, materials, and colors.
d. Written justification for the proposed alteration consisting of the reasons why the
Applicant believes the requested alteration is in harmony with the
recommendations of the comprehensive master plan, particularly as evidenced by
compliance with the standards set out is Subsection 2.b., below., using the
following question to develop said written justification. How is the proposed
alteration in harmony with the recommendations of the comprehensive master
plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with Subsection (6), below?
(c) Downtown Project Review: Applications which involve modification to the physical
configuration of a property (such as the erection of a new building, the demolition of an
existing building, or the addition or removal of bulk to an existing building) are subject to
Downtown Project Review by the Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission, and the
Design Review Commission. Specifically, the powers of the Zoning Administrator, Plan
Commission, and the Design Review Commission within the Urban Design Overlay
Zoning District shall be as described in the following sections. The Zoning Administrator
shall serve as the liaison between the Applicant, the Plan Commission, and the Design
Review Commission, in facilitating the thorough and expedient review of an application,
and shall ensure that the technical and procedural requirements of the Zoning Ordinance
are met. The Plan Commission shall serve as the initial and final discretionary review body
on site design, and shall focus its review on the application's compliance with sound land
use, site design and economic revitalization practices. In part, this effort shall be guided by
the comprehensive master plan. The Design Review Commission shall serve as the final
review and determining body on aesthetics, and shall focus its review on the application's
compliance with sound aesthetic, urban design, historic and architectural practices per the
procedures outlined below. In part, this effort shall be guided by the comprehensive master
plan. (Refer to the procedure summary chart at the end of this Section.)
1. Procedure: Downtown Project Review proposals shall follow procedures for
Conditional Use Permits, refer to Section 98-905.
2. Application Requirements: In addition to the application requirements for Conditional
Use Permits, Section 98-905, all applications for Downtown Project Review shall be
made to the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by the Building Permit
application, and, in addition, shall be accompanied by all of the following:
a. A clear depiction of the existing appearance of the property. Clear color
photographs are recommended for this purpose. Scaled and dimensioned
drawings of existing components such as windows, doors, railings, fencing or other
site components, and/or detailed building elevations which are proposed for
alteration or replacement may be required by the Zoning Administrator or by the
Plan Commission.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 293
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
b. A clear depiction of the proposed appearance of the property. The applicant shall
provide physical color samples of all proposed paints or coatings applied to the
actual building material. Samples will not be returned to the applicant. Promotional
brochures and/or clear color photographs of replacement architectural components
are also recommended for this purpose. Scaled and dimensioned drawings of
proposed components such as windows, doors, railings, fencing or other site
components, and/or detailed building elevations which are proposed for alteration
or replacement may be required by the Zoning Administrator or by the Plan
Commission.
c. For all projects involving a new building, or an addition exceeding 100 square feet
of gross floor area, a detailed site plan which provides the following information:
i. A title block which indicates the name and address of the current property
owner, developer and project consultants;
ii. The date of the original plan and the latest date of revision to the plan;
iii. A north arrow and a graphic scale. Said scale shall not be smaller than one
inch equals 100 feet;
iv. All property lines and existing and proposed right-of-way lines with bearings
and dimensions clearly labeled;
v. All existing and proposed easement lines and dimensions with a key provided
and explained on the margins of the plan as to ownership and purpose;
vi. All existing and proposed buildings, structures, and paved areas, including
walks, drives, decks, patios, fences, utility poles, drainage facilities, and walls;
vii. All required building setback lines;
viii. A legal description of the subject property;
ix. The location, type and size of all signage on the site;
x. The location, type and orientation of all exterior lighting on the subject property;
xi. The location of all access points, parking and loading areas on the subject
property, including a summary of the number of parking stalls and labels
indicating the dimension of such areas;
xii. The location of all outdoor storage areas;
xiii. The location and type of any permanently protected green space areas;
xiv. The location of existing & proposed drainage facilities;
xv. In the legend, the following data for the subject property:
Lot Area;
Floor Area;
Floor Area Ratio;
Impervious Surface Area;
Impervious Surface Ratio; and
Building Height
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 294
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
d. A detailed landscaping plan of the subject property, at the same scale as the main
plan, showing the location, species and size of all proposed plant materials.
e. A written description of the proposed project, including a complete listing of
proposed components, materials, and colors.
f. Written justification for the proposed project consisting of the reasons why the
Applicant believes the requested alteration is in harmony with the
recommendations of the comprehensive master plan, particularly as evidenced by
compliance with the standards set out is Subsection 2.b., below., using the
following question to develop said written justification: How is the proposed project
in harmony with the recommendations of the comprehensive master plan,
particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards of Subsection (9),
below?
(6) Additional Recommendations Permitted Under the Design Review Process
(a) The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to make recommendations for, or require
modifications to, a proposed application for Downtown Renovation Review; and to make
recommendations for the modification of a proposed application for Downtown Design
Review or Downtown Project Review.
(b) The Design Review Commission is hereby authorized to make recommendations for, or
require modifications to, a proposed application for aesthetic aspects for Downtown
Design Review and Downtown Project Review.
(c) The Plan Commission is hereby authorized to make recommendations for, or require
modifications to, a proposed application for site design aspects for Downtown Project
Review.
(7) Appeals: Appeals from the decisions of the Zoning Administrator and Plan Commission may
be made per the provisions of the Municipal Code and State Statutes.
(8) Penalty: Penalty for violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be per the provisions of
Section 98-936.
(9) Downtown Design Standards
(a) Overall Design Theme: The design theme for the Downtown area is based on historic
commercial and residential architectural styles which dominated the economic growth
period from 1890 through the 1920s.
1. Nonresidential Development: The design theme varies by location.
a. Main Street Frontage: Along Main Street frontage from Cook Street to Center
Street, the nonresidential design theme is characterized by a variety of
architectural styles popular at the time, including Italianate, Romanesque and
Neoclassical, in a two story format with office, storage or residential located over
commercial. The façades of these buildings have a traditional main street
storefront appearance, are relatively small in scale, have street-yard and side-yard
setbacks of zero feet, have prominent horizontal and vertical patterns formed by
regularly-spaced window and door openings, detailed cornice designs, rich
detailing in masonry coursing, window detailing and ornamentation, and are
predominantly of brick, stone or wood. Exterior building materials are of high-
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 295
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
quality. Exterior appurtenances are minimal. Exterior colors are harmonious,
simple and muted. Exterior signage blends, rather than contrasts with buildings in
terms of coloring (complementary to building), location (on-building), size (small)
and number (few).
b. Remainder of Downtown Design Overlay Zoning District: In this area, the
nonresidential design theme is characterized by a variety of architectural styles
popular throughout the entire 20th Century. Building styles, heights, setbacks and
details vary significantly. In the desired theme, exterior building materials are of
high-quality. Exterior appurtenances are minimal. Exterior colors are harmonious,
simple and muted. Exterior signage blends, rather than contrasts with buildings in
terms of coloring (complementary to building), location (on-building), size (small)
and number (few).
2. Residential Development: This theme is characterized by a variety of architectural
styles popular at the time, including Queen Anne, Gothic, High Victorian, Georgian,
and Prairie. These homes have generous street-yard, side-yard and rear-yard
setbacks, and are well-landscaped with a mixture of canopy and understory yard trees,
and foundation shrubs and/or flower beds. For illustrative purposes, examples of
architectural styles which tend to have elements incompatible with Downtown historic
styles include (with no attempt to be inclusive) Spanish Mission, Scandinavian Modern,
Bavarian, and California Contemporary.
(b) Non-Residential Construction
1. General: Nonresidential construction, including new structures, building additions,
building alterations, and restoration or rehabilitation shall correspond to the downtown
design guidelines as determined by the Design Review Commission and as evidenced
by certain existing structures within the Downtown and by the following requirements
for building setback; height; building mass; horizontal rhythms (created by the
placement and design of façade openings and related elements such as piers,
columns); vertical rhythms (created by
the placement and design of façade
details such as sills, transoms,
cornices and sign bands); roof forms;
exterior materials; exterior surface
features and appurtenances; exterior
colors; exterior signage; on-site
landscaping; exterior lighting; parking
and loading area design; and the use
of screening.
2. Building Setback: Throughout the
district, the setback of buildings from
street-yard and side-yard property lines
shall be compatible with existing
buildings in the immediate area which
conform to the general design theme
noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b.,
and 2., above.
Figure 1
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 296
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
3. Building Height:Throughout the district, the height of buildings shall be compatible
with existing buildings in the immediate area which conform to the general design
theme noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2., above. In no instance shall buildings
be more than one story taller or shorter than the height of a building of similar use on
one of the immediately adjoining properties, which conform to the general design
theme noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2., above.
4. Building Mass: Throughout the district, the mass of buildings shall be compatible with
existing buildings in the immediate area which conform to the general design theme
noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2., above. The characteristic proportion
(relationship between façade height and width) of the general design theme shall be
maintained. Building mass for large structures (with a façade area exceeding 5,000
square feet) shall be disguised through the use of façade articulations, or through the
use of exterior treatments which give the impression of directly adjoining individual
buildings. (See Figures 2 and 3.)
5. Horizontal Rhythms: Along Main Street between Cook Street and Center Street, the
horizontal pattern of exterior building elements formed by patterns of building openings
for windows and doors, and related elements such as piers and columns shall be
spaced at regular intervals across all visible façades of the building, and shall be
compatible with those of existing buildings in the immediate area which conform to the
general design theme noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2., above. (See Figures
2 and 3.)
6. Vertical Rhythms: Along Main Street
between Cook Street and Center Street, the
floor heights on main façades shall appear
visually in proportion to those of adjoining
buildings. The rhythm of the ground floor
shall harmonize with the rhythm of upper
floors. The vertical pattern of exterior
building elements formed by patterns of
building openings for windows and doors,
and related elements such as sills, headers,
transoms, cornices and sign bands shall be
compatible in design and elevation with
those of existing buildings in the immediate
area which conform to the general design
theme noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b.,
and 2., above.
Figure 2
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 297
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
7. Roof Forms: Along Main Street between Cook Street and Center Street, flat or gently
sloping roofs which are not visible from the street shall be used. Mansards or other
exotic roof shapes not characteristic of the general design theme noted in Subsection
(9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2., above, as determined by the Design Review Commission shall
not be used. Throughout the district, roof shapes not characteristic of the general
design theme noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2., above, shall not be used.
8. Exterior Materials: Selected building materials shall be compatible with those of
existing buildings in the immediate area which conform to the general design theme
noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2., above. In addition:
a. Masonry: Along Main Street between Cook Street and Center Street, stone or
brick facing should be of even coloration and consistent size. Cinder block,
concrete block, concrete slab, or concrete panel shall not be permitted.
b. Siding: Along Main Street between Cook Street and Center Street, wood or thin
board textured vinyl or textured metal clapboard siding may be appropriate --
particularly if the proposed non-masonry exterior was used on a building which
conforms to the general design theme noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2.,
above. In certain instances clapboard, board and batten may be in keeping with
the general design theme. Asphalt shingles shall not be permitted.
c. Glazing: Along Main Street between Cook Street and Center Street, clear, or
slightly tinted glass or related glazing material shall be used. Mirrored glass,
smoked glass, or heavily tinted glass shall not be permitted.
9. Exterior Surface Appurtenances: Exterior surface appurtenances shall be
compatible with those of existing buildings in the immediate area which conform to the
general design theme noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2., above. In addition:
Figure 3
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 298
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
a. Along Main Street between Cook Street and Center Street, the traditional
storefront design theme (characterized by strong horizontal and vertical rhythms
formed by building openings, storefront columns, storefront cornices, upper
cornices, kickplates, signbands, large display windows, and transom windows)
shall be employed for all new nonresidential buildings -- including retail, office,
professional service, personal service, maintenance, lodging, entertainment, and
storage uses.
b. Throughout the district, avoid cluttering building façades with brackets, wiring,
meter boxes, antennae, gutters, downspouts and other appurtenances.
Unnecessary signs shall also be avoided. Where necessary, such features shall be
colored so as to blend in, rather than contrast, with the immediately adjacent
building exterior. Extraneous ornamentation which is inconsistent with the general
design theme noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2., above, is also prohibited.
c. Awnings: Throughout the district, awning size, color and placement should
complement the architectural character of the building. Soft, weather-treated
canvas or vinyl materials which allow for flexible or fixed installation shall be used.
Aluminum or suspended metal canopies shall be prohibited. Signage applied to
awnings shall be simple and durable. Backlit awnings are prohibited.
10. Building and StructureExterior Colors: Selected exterior colors for structures and
appurtenances including fixtures, but not including exterior signage which is regulated
per (9)(b)11., below, shall be compatible and harmonious with those of existing
buildings in the immediate area which conform to the general design theme noted in
Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2., above. Specifically, throughout the district:
a. Bold colors, bright colors, and fluorescent, "day glow", and/or "neon" colors shall
not be permitted.The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether a proposed
color is bold, bright, fluorescent, “day glow,” or “neon” using the process outlined in
Appendix B, Where such colors constitute a component of a standardized
corporate theme or identity, muted versions of such corporate colors shall be used.
b. High gloss paints, enamels, lacquers, varnishes or other shiny non-glazing
surfaces shall not be used, except as provided for under Subsection (c), below.Flat
paint or satin finishes are encouraged.
c. Color combination schemes shall be limited to no more than three different colors
for all the structures and appurtenances on a property. Varying shades, tints or
intensities of a color shall count as a different color for this purpose. Natural
exterior materials such as stone, brick, wood and glass, having a fine-grained
assortment of colors may be considered as one color. Additional colors, including
bold colors, enamels, and high gloss coatings, may be permitted, but are limited to
appurtenances and small architectural elements not to exceed 5 percent of an
individual façade area. Appurtenances and small architectural elements include but
are not limited to awnings, doors, sills, lintels, dentils, moldings, frames, brackets,
and modillions.
d. Color schemes shall be used consistently throughout the property, including on
both the upper and lower portions of buildings, and on all façades of a building or
structure.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 299
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
11. Exterior Signage: All signage which is visible from any point outside of the building or
structure shall be compatible and harmonious with the general design theme noted in
Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2., above. Signage regulations are provided in Article
VII. In addition:
a. Number of Signs: No more than three exterior signs for the same business shall
be visible from any single vantage point on or off the subject property.
b. Area of Signage: Signage area shall comply with the requirements for the
Commercial Business (CB) district in Section 98-806(6).
c. Types of Signage: Wall signs, projecting signs (smaller than five square foot) and
awning signs (see Subsection 9. d. above, for additional restrictions for awning
signs) may be used for individual businesses. Roof signs, mobile signs and
portable signs are not permitted in any instance. Holiday and special event signs
shall be regulated per Section 98-807 of this Chapter.
d. Group Development Signs: Group Development signs may be wall, projecting,
awning or freestanding signs. Such freestanding signs shall be limited to one per
lot, shall not exceed the height of the principle building on the subject property,
shall be limited in area to a maximum of one square foot of sign area for every two
feet of frontage along the public street located closest to the freestanding sign, and
shall in no instance exceed the area allocated in Table 98-806(6). The base of
freestanding signs shall be fully landscaped per the requirements of Subsection
12. d. below. The supports of freestanding signs shall be constructed of materials
and in a style which is consistent with the materials and style of the principle
structure on the site, and with the design guidelines as determined by the Design
Review Commission.
e. Sign Colors:
i. Bold colors, bright colors and fluorescent, "day glow", and/or "neon" colors
shall not be permitted. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether a
proposed color is bold, bright, fluorescent, “day glow,” or “neon” using the
process outlined in Appendix B, Where such colors constitute a component
of a standardized corporate theme or identity, muted versions of such
corporate colors shall be used.
ii. High gloss paints, enamels, lacquers, varnishes or other shiny non-glazing
surfaces shall not be used, except as provided for under Subsection (iii),
below. Flat paint or satin finishes are encouraged.
iii. Color combination schemes shall be limited to no more than three different
colors for all signs on a property. Varying shades, tints or intensities of a
color shall count as a different color for this purpose. Natural exterior
materials such as stone, brick, wood and glass, having a fine-grained
assortment of colors may be considered as one color. Additional colors
including bold colors, enamels, and high gloss coatings may be
permitted,but are limited to appurtenances and small architectural elements
not to exceed 5 percent of the sign area. Appurtenances and small
architectural elements include but are not limited to moldings, frames, and
brackets.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 300
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
iv. Color schemes and lettering styles shall be used consistently on all signage
used throughout the property.
f. Sign Materials: Permitted sign materials include glass, plastic, wood, brass, metal
leaf, metal plates, canvass or related fabric, or etched glass, stone or concrete.
g. Sign Illumination: Illumination of exterior signage shall be limited to shielded
spotlight. The lighting element of such fixtures shall not be visible from public
rights-of-way or adjoining properties. Flashing signs (including illuminated awnings
with or without messages) are not permitted, including neon and related
illumination systems.
h. Sign Location: Wall signs, canopy signs and projecting signs shall not be located
on any portion of upper stories. The location of signs shall fit the building. (See
Figure 4, below.)
j. Removal of Signs: Illegal nonconforming signs, poorly maintained signs, and
obsolete signs pertaining to a closed business, shall be removed. The property
owner shall be responsible for the removal of such signs.
12. On-Site Landscaping and Screening: On-site landscaping is not required within
portions of the Downtown Design Overlay Zoning District located along Main Street
between Cook Street and Center Street, except to provide vegetated ground cover for
pervious (non-paved/roofed) surfaces, and to provide screening and shading of on-site
paved areas.
a. Groundcover: All areas which are not covered by impervious paving or structures
shall be covered with vegetative groundcover. Appropriate groundcover includes
grasses, forbs, and shrubs.
b. On-Site Paved Areas: On-site landscaping shall also be provided for on-site
paved areas used for outdoor seating, vehicular parking, or loading, except for
pedestrian and vehicle walks and drives which connect such areas to public rightsof-
way (such as driveways and walks to building entrances).
i. Required Screening: On-site paved areas, including parking lots, loading
areas, circulation drives, and patios shall be partially screened from the view of
Figure 4
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 301
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
public rights-of-way and adjoining properties by, at minimum, a continuous
vegetated hedge with a minimum width of five feet, and a height of between 40
and 60 inches. This hedge may be supplemented by trees and/or compatible
iron, masonry, or wood fencing, and/or berming.
ii. Required Shading: In addition, one canopy tree (with a minimum installed
breast height caliper of 2½ inches) shall be provided within, or within five feet
of the edge of, on-site paved areas for every 2,000 square feet (or fraction
thereof) of paved area.
c. Exterior Storage and Utility Areas: Trash storage areas, air conditioning units,
and related storage and utility areas and components shall be fully screened from
the view of adjoining properties, public rights-of-way, and customer areas.
d. Freestanding Signs: The base of freestanding signs shall be fully concealed by
plants to a minimum height of twenty-four inches.
e. Additional landscaping standards are found in Article VI.
13. Exterior Lighting: Throughout the district, on-site exterior lighting shall be compatible
and harmonious with the general design theme noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b.,
and 2., above. Specifically:
a. Pedestrian Lighting: The design, color, height, location and light quality of on-site
pedestrian lighting shall be consistent with the pedestrian lighting fixtures which
complement the district's character.
b. Vehicular Circulation Lighting: The design, color, height, location and light
quality of on-site vehicular circulation lighting shall be consistent with the lighting
fixtures which complement the district's character.
c. Additional lighting standards are found in Section 98-707.
14. Rehabilitation and Restoration: New projects, building additions, and new
appurtenances and features shall comply with the provisions of 1-13, above. The
following standards shall apply where existing construction is proposed for
rehabilitation and/or restoration:
a. In General: Buildings shall be restored relying on physical evidence (such as
photographs, original drawings, and existing architectural details) as much as
possible, in keeping with the general design theme noted in Subsection (9)(a)1.a.,
1.b., and 2., above. Specifically, throughout the Downtown Design Overlay Zoning
District:
i. Exterior Materials and Surface Features: Materials and features identical to
the original shall be used. Where such knowledge is lacking, materials and
features in common use at the time of building erection shall be used.
Significant architectural features, including cornices, moldings and coursings
shall be preserved or replaced with identical features and materials where
possible.
ii. Windows and Doors: The size, proportion and rhythm of original windows and
doors shall not be altered. Original window and door openings shall not be
blocked, except with a dark opaque panel placed behind the window or door to
preserve the appearance of the opening. Where now blocked in another
manner, blocked window and doors shall be restored using said method.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 302
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
Window and door features, including lintels, sills, architraves, shutters,
pediments, hoods and hardware, shall be preserved where possible, or
replaced with identical features and materials. Dark frames (i.e. anodized
bronze) shall be used to replace storefront and upper story windows. Clear
aluminum finishes and mill finish aluminum storm windows are prohibited. Real
shutters and awnings shall be used if there is evidence that they were a
component of the original building design. Vinyl and plastic shutters and
awnings shall be prohibited.
iii. Shop Fronts: Shop fronts should fit inside the original shop front in terms of all
three dimensions (vertical, horizontal and front to back articulation);
iv. Display Windows: Display windows should be restored to their original
appearance.
v. Entrances and Porches: Original porches and steps shall be retained, except
as required to meet accessibility standards. Porches, steps and related
enclosures which do not comply with the architectural design theme shall be
removed.
vi. Roofs: The original roof shape and character of visible materials shall be
retained. Original architectural features which give the roof its essential
character, including dormer windows, cupolas, cornices, brackets, chimneys
and weathervanes, shall be preserved if in keeping with the architectural
design theme.
vii. Painting and Color: See Subsection (b) 10., above.
viii. Signage: Any and all signage, existing upon the adoption date of this Chapter,
which does not comply with the standards of Subsection (b) 11., above may be
continued so long as well maintained. However, the maintenance of such legal
nonconforming signs shall be limited to repair of the sign structural or lighting
elements, and to the repainting or replacement of the sign face with identical
new material, message, and original appearance. Should a change in material,
message, or original appearance be desired, the legal nonconforming sign
shall be removed.
ix. Cleaning: Structural components and exterior materials shall be cleaned when
necessary, and with only the gentlest possible methods. Low pressure water
and soft natural bristle brushes are acceptable. Sandblasting is never
acceptable. Other methods shall be pre-approved by the Plan Commission.
(c) Residential Construction: Proposed residential construction, located on properties
having frontage on Main Street between Cook Street and Center Street, including new
structures, building additions, building alterations, and restoration or rehabilitation shall be
reviewed per Section (5) above and shall correspond to the design guidelines as
determined by the Design Review Commission. The building setback, height, mass, roof
form, exterior materials, exterior surface appurtenances, exterior colors, landscaping and
lighting shall be compatible and harmonious with the general design theme noted in
Subsection (9)(a)1.a., 1.b., and 2., above.
(d) Designated Historic Structures: Landmark Center, 772 Main Street; Riviera Building,
810 Wrigley Drive; Stone Manor, 880 S. Lakeshore Drive; T.C. Smith House, 865 Main
Street; Youngland Coach House, 701 S. Lakeshore Drive; St. Moritz, 327 Wrigley Drive.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 303
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
(15)-(19)Reserved.
(20) Community Entry Corridor Urban Design Overlay Zoning District:
(a) Requirement of Compatibility: Proposed site design and construction within this District,
including new structures and building additions shall be reviewed, per Section (5) above,
by the Plan Commission. The building setback, height, mass, roof form, exterior materials,
exterior surface appurtenances, exterior colors, landscaping and lighting shall be
compatible with the following General Design Theme, as determined by the Plan
Commission.
(b) Design Standards for Residential Development: The General Design Theme for
residential development within the Community Entry Corridor Urban Design Overlay
Zoning District shall be designed to accommodate typical impacts of transportation and
nearby non-residential development -- particularly through the use of building orientation,
door and window location and design, and on-site landscaping and related buffering
structures or berms. Above and beyond such concerns, particular attention shall be
devoted to ensuring that selected residential design components complement nearby
residential styles with high-quality building materials, in an attractive manner as becoming
an entry corridor, and as determined by the Plan Commission. Where a detailed
Neighborhood Plan has been adopted, it should be used to provide additional guidance in
the design review process.
(c) Design Standards for Non-Residential Development: The general design theme for
non-residential development within the Community Entry Corridor Urban Design Overlay
Zoning District is characterized by high-quality building materials, architectural design, site
design, and on-site landscaping. Prominent urban design elements and architectural
details, which are decorative and functional, shall be considered as a required component
of each site within the District. Above and beyond such concerns, particular attention shall
be devoted to ensuring that selected non-residential design components complement
nearby non-residential styles and to reflect positively on the character of the community, as
becoming an entry corridor, and as determined by the Plan Commission. Where a detailed
Neighborhood Plan has been adopted, it should be used to provide additional guidance in
the design review process.
(d) These requirements shall become effective upon the date of adoption of detailed
neighborhood plans and upon the date of depicting these overlay zoning districts on the
Official Zoning Map.
(21)-(29)Reserved.
(30)Community Gateway Urban Design Overlay Zoning District:
(a) Requirement of Compatibility: Proposed site design and construction within this District,
including new structures and building additions shall be reviewed, per Section (5) above,
by the Plan Commission. The building setback, height, mass, roof form, exterior materials,
exterior surface appurtenances, exterior colors, landscaping and lighting shall be
compatible with the following General Design Theme, as determined by the Plan
Commission.
(b) Design Standards for Residential Development: The General Design Theme for
residential development within the Community Gateway Urban Design Overlay Zoning
District shall be designed to accommodate typical impacts of transportation and nearby
non-residential development, and to assist in creating a sense of welcome to the City of
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 304
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-913 Downtown Design Overlay
Zoning District through
Section 98-913 Downtown Design
Overlay Zoning District
Lake Geneva -- particularly through the use of building orientation, door and window
location and design, and on-site landscaping and related buffering structures or berms.
Above and beyond such concerns, particular attention shall be devoted to ensuring that
selected residential design components complement nearby residential styles with highquality
building materials, in an attractive manner as becoming a gateway entry to the
community, as determined by the Plan Commission. Where a detailed Neighborhood Plan
has been adopted, it should be used to provide additional guidance in the design review
process.
(c) Design Standards for Non-Residential Development: The general design theme for
non-residential development within the Community Entry Corridor Urban Design Overlay
Zoning District is characterized by high-quality building materials, architectural design, site
design, and on-site landscaping. Prominent urban design elements and architectural
details, which are decorative and functional, shall be considered as a required component
of each site within the District. Above and beyond such concerns, particular attention shall
be devoted to ensuring that selected non-residential design components complement
nearby non-residential styles and to reflect positively on the character of the community,
and to assist in creating a sense of welcome to the City of Lake Geneva, as becoming a
gateway entry area to the community, and as determined by the Plan Commission. Where
a detailed Neighborhood Plan has been adopted, itshould be used to provide additional
guidance in the design review process.
(d) These requirements shall become effective upon the date of adoption of detailed
neighborhood plans and upon the date of depicting these overlay zoning districts on the
Official Zoning Map.
(31)-(39)Reserved.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 305
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures through
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures
Process for Residential and Nonresidential Proposal Review
?? Procedure ??
?? Type of Proposal ??
Renovation
1
Design2 Project3
1. Optional meeting with Plan Commission to discuss proposal No optional recommende
d
2. Submit Zoning Permit Application to the Zoning Administrator, including: Yes Yes Yes
a. Color photos/drawings of existing property, with close-ups of details Yes Yes Yes
b. Drawings/depictions of proposed changes to the site & bldg. exterior Yes Yes Yes
c. For new projects or additions ?? 100 sf, provide Site Plan including:
i. Chapter block with name of current property owner and Applicant;
ii. Date of original plan graphic and date of most recent revision;
iii. North arrow and graphic scale;
iv. Property lines and right-of-way lines (with distances & bearings);
v. Easements;
vi. Existing and proposed buildings, structures and paved areas;
vii. Required building setback lines;
viii. Legal description of the property;
ix. Location, size, type and orientation of all exterior signage;
x. Location, type and orientation of all exterior lighting;
xi. Location of all vehicle access drives, circulation areas, loading areas and
parking stalls;
xii. Location of all outdoor storage and display areas (including trash
facilities);
xiii. Location and purpose of all drainage facilities;
xiv. Location of all permanent green space areas; and,
xv. Site Summary Data: Lot Area, Floor Area, Floor Area Ratio, Impervious
Surface Area, Impervious Surface Ratio
No No Yes
d. Landscaping Plan showing the location, size and type of plants No No Yes
e. Written description of proposal, including exterior materials & colors Yes Yes Yes
f. Written justification of proposal answering: How does the proposal comply
with the design standards?
Yes Yes Yes
3. Review and action by the Zoning Administrator/City Staff Yes Yes Yes
4. Review and action by the Design Review Commission on aesthetics No Yes Yes
5. Review and action by the Plan Commission on site design No No Yes
6. If proposal is approved:
a. Record documents with Register of Deeds;
b. Work must start within 365 days and be complete within 730 days;
c. Conditions of approval run with the property.
If the proposal is denied: It may not be resubmitted for 12 months
Yes Yes Yes
KEY: Yes: Step is required. No: Step is not required.
1Only a renovation of the exterior appearance of a property.
2Only a change in the appearance of a property.
3Modification to the physical configuration of a property.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 306
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures through
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures
Section 98-914 Planned Development Procedures
(1) Purpose
(a) The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure and
requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed Planned Developments,
and to provide for the possible relaxation of certain development standards pertaining to
other standard zoning districts.
(b) Planned Developments are intended to provide more incentives for infill development and
redevelopment in areas of the community which are experiencing a lack of significant
reinvestment. They are also intended to provide for flexible development standards to
accommodate unique sites, mixtures of land uses, or development configurations.
Furthermore, Planned Developments are designed to forward both the aesthetic and
economic development objectives of the City by controlling the site design and the
appearance, density or intensity of development in terms of more flexible requirements for
land uses, density, intensity, bulk, landscaping, and parking requirements. In exchange for
such flexibility, the Planned Development shall provide a much higher level of site design,
architectural control and other aspects of aesthetic and functional excellence than
normally required for other developments.
(c) Planned Developments have the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby
properties if allowed to develop simply under the general requirements of this Chapter. In
addition to such potential, Planned Developments also have the potential to create
undesirable impacts on nearby properties which potentially cannot be determined except
with a binding site plan, landscape plan and architectural plan, and on a case by case
basis. In order to prevent this from occurring, all Planned Developments are required to
meet certain procedural requirements applicable only to Planned Developments, in
addition to the general requirements of this Chapter. A public hearing process is required
to review a request for a Planned Development. This process shall essentially combine the
process for a zoning map amendment with that required for a conditional use, with several
additional requirements.
(2) Provision of Flexible Development Standards for Planned Developments
(a) Permitted Location: Planned Developments shall be permitted with the approval of a
Planned Development Zoning District, specific to the approved Planned Development,
within any one or more Standard Zoning Districts identified in Section 98-102.
(b) Flexible Development Standards: The following exemptions to the development
standards of the underlying zoning district may be provided with the approval of a Planned
Development:
1. Land Use Requirements: All land uses listed as "Residential", "Institutional", or
"Commercial" in Section 98-203, and permitted in the base zoning district, may be
permitted within a Planned Development.
2. Density and Intensity Requirements: All requirements listed in Sections 98-304 and
98-305 for residential density and nonresidential intensity may be waived within a
Planned Development.
3. Bulk Requirements: All requirements listed in Sections 98-402, 98-403, 98-404, 98-
405, 98-406 and 98-407 may be waived within a Planned Development. (Ord. No. 99-
11 7/26/99)
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 307
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures through
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures
4. Landscaping Requirements: All requirements listed in Sections 98-604, 98-605, 98-
606, 98-607, 98-608, 98-609 and 98-610 may be waived within a Planned
Development.
5. Parking and Loading Requirements: All requirements listed in Sections 98-704 and
98-705 may be waived within a Planned Development.
(c) Requirements to Depict All Aspects of Development: Only development which is
explicitly depicted on the required site plan approved by the Common Council as part of
the approved Planned Development, shall be permitted, even if such development
(including all aspects of land use, density and intensity, bulk, landscaping, and parking and
loading), is otherwise listed as permitted in Section 98-403-98-407. Requested exemptions
from these standards shall be made explicit by the Applicant in the application, and shall
be recommended by the Plan Commission and approved explicitly by the Common
Council. If not so requested and approved, such exemptions shall not be permitted.
(3) Initiation of Request for Approval of a Planned Development: Proceedings for approval of
a Planned Development shall be initiated by:
(a) an application of the owner(s) of the subject property;
(b) a recommendation of the Plan Commission; or
(c) by action of the Common Council.
(4) Application Requirements: All applications for proposed Planned Developments, regardless
of the party of their initiation per (3) above, shall be approved as complete by the Zoning
Administrator a minimum of two weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. The Zoning
Administrator shall forward copies of said complete application to the office of the City Clerk.
Said application shall apply to each of the process steps in (5) through (8) below.
(5) PD Process Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
(a) The Applicant shall contact the Zoning Administrator to place an informal discussion item
for the PD on the Plan Commission agenda.
(b) No details beyond the name of the Applicant and the identification of the discussion item
as a PD is required to be given in the agenda.
(c) At the Plan Commission meeting, the Applicant shall engage in an informal discussion with
the Plan Commission regarding the potential PD. Appropriate topics for discussion may
include the location of the PD, general project themes and images, the general mix of
dwelling unit types and/or land uses being considered, approximate residential densities
and non-residential intensities, the general treatment of natural features, the general
relationship to nearby properties and public streets, and relationship to the Master Plan.
(d) Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of the process shall be in no
way be binding upon the Applicant or the City, but should be considered as the informal,
non-binding basis for proceeding to the next step.
(6) PD Process Step 2: Concept Plan
(a) The Applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a draft PD Concept Plan
Submittal Packet for a determination of completeness prior to placing the proposed PD on
the Plan Commission agenda for Concept Plan review. This submittal packet shall contain
all of the following items, prior to its acceptance by the Zoning Administrator and
placement of the item on a Plan Commission agenda for Concept Plan review:
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 308
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures through
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures
1. A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11" x 17", as depicted on a
copy of the City of Lake Geneva Land Use Plan Map;
2. A general written description of proposed PD including:
a. general project themes and images;
b. the general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses;
c. approximate residential densities and non-residential intensities as described by
dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and impervious surface area ratio;
d. the general treatment of natural features;
e. the general relationship to nearby properties and public streets;
f. the general relationship of the project to the Master Plan;
g. an initial draft list of zoning standards which will not be met by the proposed PD
and the location(s) in which they apply and, a complete list of zoning standards
which will be more than met by the proposed PD and the location(s) in which they
apply. Essentially, the purpose of this listing shall be to provide the Plan
Commission with information necessary to determine the relative merits of the
project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit, and in regard to the
mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility; and,
3. A written description of potentially requested exemption from the requirements of the
underlying zoning district, in the following order:
a. Land Use Exemptions;
b. Density and Intensity Exemptions;
c. Bulk Exemptions;
d. Landscaping Exceptions;
e. Parking and Loading Requirements Exceptions;
4. A conceptual plan drawing (at 11" x 17") of general land use layout and general
location of major public streets and/or private drives. Applicant may submit copies of a
larger version of the plan in addition to the 11" x 17" reduction.
(b) Within ten working days of receiving the draft PD Concept Plan Submittal Packet, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the submittal is complete. Once the Zoning
Administrator has received a complete packet, the proposed PD Concept Plan shall be
placed on the Plan Commission agenda.
(c) At the Plan Commission meeting, the Applicant shall engage in an informal discussion with
the Plan Commission regarding the conceptual PD. Appropriate topics for discussion may
include any of the information provided in the PD Concept Plan Submittal Packet, or other
items as determined by the Plan Commission.
(d) Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of the process shall in no way
be binding upon Applicant or the City, but should be considered as informal, non-binding
basis for proceeding to the next step. The preferred procedure is for one or more iterations
of Plan Commission review of the Concept Plan to occur prior to introduction of the formal
rezoning petition which accompanies GDP application.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 309
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures through
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures
(7) PD Process Step 3: General Development Plan (GDP)
(a) The Applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a draft GDP Plan Submittal
Packet for a determination of completeness prior to placing the proposed GDP on the Plan
Commission agenda for GDP review. This submittal packet shall contain all of the
following items, prior to its acceptance by the Zoning Administrator and placement of the
item on a Plan Commission agenda for GDP review:
1. A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11" x 17", as depicted on a
copy of the City of Lake Geneva Land Use Plan Map;
2. A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the Planned Development is
proposed, and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property,
together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the
same appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds of Walworth County (as
provided by the City of Lake Geneva). Said map shall clearly indicate the current
zoning of the subject property and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains
that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form
which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not
less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic
scale, and a north arrow shall be provided;
3. A general written description of proposed PD including:
a. general project themes and images;
b. the general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses;
c. approximate residential densities and non-residential intensities as described by
dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and impervious surface area ratio;
d. the general treatment of natural features;
e. the general relationship to nearby properties and public streets;
f. the general relationship of the project to the Master Plan,
g. a Statement of Rationale as to why PD zoning is proposed. This shall identify
barriers that the Applicant perceives in the form of requirements of standard zoning
districts and opportunities for community betterment the Applicant suggests are
available through the proposed PD zoning.
h. a complete list of zoning standards which will not be met by the proposed PD and
the location(s) in which they apply and a complete list of zoning standards which
will be more than met by the proposed PD and the location(s) in which they apply
shall be identified. Essentially, the purpose of this listing shall be to provide the
Plan Commission with information necessary to determine the relative merits of the
project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit, and in regard to the
mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility.
i. A written description of potentially requested exemption from the requirements of
the underlying zoning district, in the following order:
1. Land Use Exemptions;
2. Density and Intensity Exemptions;
3. Bulk Exemptions;
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 310
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures through
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures
4. Landscaping Exceptions;
5. Parking and Loading Requirements Exceptions.
4. A General Development Plan Drawing at a minimum scale of 1"=100' (11" x 17"
reduction shall also be provided by Applicant) of the proposed project showing at least
the following information in sufficient detail to make an evaluation against criteria for
approval:
a. A conceptual plan drawing (at 11" x 17") of the general land use layout and the
general location of major public streets and/or private drives. The Applicant may
submit copies of a larger version of the plan in addition to the 11" x 17" reduction;
b. location of recreational and open space areas and facilities and specifically
describing those that are to be reserved or dedicated for public acquisition and
use;
c. statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the development, the approximate areas of
large development lots and pads, density/intensity of various parts of the
development, floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio and landscape surface
area ratio of various land uses, expected staging, and any other plans required by
the Plan Commission or Common Council; and
d. notations relating the written information provided in (7)(a)3.a.-f., above to specific
areas on the GDP Drawing.
5. A general conceptual landscaping plan for subject property, noting approximate
locations of foundation, street, yard and paving, landscaping, and the compliance of
development with all landscaping requirements of this Chapter (except as noted in the
listing of exceptions) and the use of extra landscaping and bufferyards.
6. A general signage plan for the project, including all project identification signs and
concepts for public fixtures and signs (such as street light fixtures and/or poles or
street sign faces and/or poles) which are proposed to vary from City standards or
common practices.
7. Written justification for the proposed Planned Development. (The Applicant is advised
to use the requirements of the conditional use procedure to develop said written
justification.)
8. The process for review and approval of the GDP shall be identical to that for an
amendment to the official zoning map per Section 98-903 of this ordinance and (if land
is to be divided) to that for preliminary and final plats of subdivision per the Municipal
Code. The approval of a GDP shall establish a PD/GDP overlay that is depicted as
such on the official zoning map. The underlying use zoning, however, shall control
development within the area of the GDP until all or portions of the GDP are approved
as a PIP.
9. a. Any approved PD/GDP for which the owner has not initiated construction activity
within two years of final Common Council approval shall expire and the property
subject to the PD zoning shall automatically revert to the previous zoning district.
Prior to such an expiration and reversion, the applicant may request an extension
of this period. Said request shall require formal approval by the Common Council
and shall be based on a showing of acceptable justification (as determined by
Common Council). (Ord. No. 08-11 08/11/08)
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 311
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures through
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures
b. All portions of an approved PD/GDP not fully developed within five years of final
Common Council approval shall expire, and no additional PD-based development
shall be permitted under the GDP. No later than 60 days prior to the expiration of
the five year period, the Zoning Administrator shall make a recommendation to the
Plan Commission regarding successor zoning for the portions of the GDP area
which remain undeveloped and partially developed. This recommendation may be
for time period extensions of the GDP (for up to a total of ten more years), a new
standard zoning district or a combination of standard zoning districts.
Recommendations for standard zoning districts shall be based on the standard
zoning district(s) most comparable in land use and intensity to the approved GDP,
and/or the Comprehensive Plan. The recommendation of the Zoning Administrator
shall be considered by the Plan Commission following a public hearing for a
Zoning Map Amendment. The Plan Commission shall then make a
recommendation to the Common Council for its decision. (Ord. No. 08-11 08/11/08)
(8) PD Process Step 4: Precise Implementation Plan (PIP)
(a) After the effective date of the rezoning to PD/GDP, the Applicant may file an application for
a proposed Precise Implementation Plan (PIP) with the Plan Commission. This submittal
packet shall contain all of the following items, prior to its acceptance by the Zoning
Administrator and placement of the item on a Plan Commission agenda for PD review:
1. A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11" x 17", as depicted on a
copy of the City of Lake Geneva Land Use Plan Map;
2. A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the Planned Development is
proposed, and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property,
together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the
same appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds of Walworth County (as
provided by the City of Lake Geneva). Said map shall clearly indicate the current
zoning of the subject property and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains
that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form
which is clearly reproducible, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch
equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north
arrow shall be provided;
3. A general written description of proposed PIP including:
a. specific project themes and images;
b. the specific mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses;
c. specific residential densities and non-residential intensities as described by
dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and impervious surface area ratio;
d. the specific treatment of natural features;
e. the specific relationship to nearby properties and public streets;
f. a Statement of Rationale as to why PD zoning is proposed. This shall identify
barriers that the Applicant perceives in the form of requirements of standard zoning
districts and opportunities for community betterment the Applicant suggests are
available through the proposed PD zoning.
g. a complete list of zoning standards which will not be met by the proposed PIP and
the location(s) in which they apply and a complete list of zoning standards which
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 312
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures through
Section 98-914 Planned Development
Procedures
will be more than met by the proposed PIP and the location(s) in which they apply
shall be identified. Essentially, the purpose of this listing shall be to provide the
Plan Commission with information necessary to determine the relative merits of the
project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit, and in regard to the
mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility.
4. A Precise Implementation Plan Drawing at a minimum scale of 1"=100' (11" x 17"
reduction shall also be provided by Applicant) of the proposed project showing at least
the following information in sufficient detail to make an evaluation against criteria for
approval:
a. A PIP site plan conforming to any and all the requirements of Section 98-908(3). If
the proposed Planned Development is a cluster development (per Section 98-
206(1) (b) through (f)) or a group development (per Section 98-208) a proposed
preliminary plat or conceptual plat shall be provided in addition to the required site
plan.
b. location of recreational/open space areas and facilities, specifically describing
those that are to be reserved or dedicated for public acquisition and use;
c. statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the development, the precise areas of all
development lots and pads, density/intensity of various parts of the development,
floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio and landscape surface area ratio of
various land uses, expected staging, and any other plans required by the Plan
Commission or Common Council; and
d. notations relating the written information provided in (8)(a)3.a.-f., above to specific
areas on the GDP Drawing.
5. A landscaping plan for subject property, specifying the location, species, and installed
size of all trees and shrubs. This plan shall also include a chart which provides a
cumulative total for each species, type and required location (foundation, yard, street,
paved area or bufferyard) of all trees and shrubs.
6. A series of building elevations for the entire exterior of all buildings in the Planned
Development, including detailed notes as to the materials and colors proposed.
7. A general signage plan for the project, including all project identification signs,
concepts for public fixtures and signs (such as street light fixtures and/or poles or
street sign faces and/or poles), and group development signage themes which are
proposed to vary from City standards or common practices.
8. A general outline of the intended organizational structure for a property owners
association, if any; deed restrictions and provisions for private provision of common
services, if any.
9. A written description which demonstrates the full consistency of the proposed PIP with
the approved GDP.
10. Any and all variations between the requirements of the applicable PD/GDP zoning
district and the proposed PIP development; and,
11. The Applicant shall submit proof of financing capability pertaining to construction and
maintenance and operation of public works elements of the proposed development.
12. The area included in a Precise Implementation Plan may be only a portion of the area
included in a previously approved General Implementation Plan.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 313
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-915 Zoning Permit through Section 98-915 Zoning Permit
13. The Precise Implementation Plan (PIP) submission may include site plan and design
information, allowing the Plan Commission to combine design review and review of the
PIP. Design review may, at the choice of the Applicant, be deferred until a later time
when specific site and building developments will be brought forth.
14. The Plan Commission or Common Council may specify other plans, documents or
schedules that must be submitted prior to consideration or approval of the PIP, as such
may be relevant to review.
15. The process for review and approval of the PD shall be identical to that for conditional
use permits per Section 98-905 of this ordinance and (if land is to be divided) to that
for preliminary and final plats of subdivision per the Municipal Code. The approval of a
PD/PIP shall formally establish the PD/PIP overlay zoning district and any such land
uses and site plans included in the approved PIP's.
16. All portions of an approved PD/PIP not fully developed within five years of final
Common Council approval shall expire, and no additional development shall be
permitted under the PIP. No later than 60 days prior to the expiration of the five year
period, the Zoning Administrator shall make a recommendation to the Plan
Commission regarding successor zoning for the portions of the PIP area which remain
undeveloped and partially developed. This recommendation may be for time period
extensions of the PIP (for up to a total of ten more years), a new standard zoning
district or a combination of standard zoning districts. Recommendations for standard
zoning districts shall be based on the standard zoning district(s) most comparable in
land use and intensity to the approved PIP, and/or the Comprehensive Plan. The
recommendation of the Zoning Administrator shall be considered by the Plan
Commission following a public hearing for a Zoning Map Amendment. The Plan
Commission shall then make a recommendation to the Common Council for its
decision. (Ord. No. 08-11 08-11-08)
17. The City may require the Applicant to provide surety, with the approval of the City
Attorney, to ensure the development of public and private improvements.
Section 98-915 Zoning Permit
(1) When Required: No structure, land, water, or air shall hereafter be used and no structure
or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged, converted, or structurally altered without a zoning permit, and without full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable local, county, state
and federal regulations. Unless another Section of this Chapter specifically exempts
certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning permit shall be obtained from
the Zoning Administrator before any new development, as defined in Subsection (3)(b), or
any change in the use of an existing building or structure is initiated.
(2) Application: An application for a zoning permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator
upon forms furnished by the City and shall include for the purpose of proper enforcement
of these regulations the following information:
a. General Information:
1. Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property owner, architect,
engineer, and contractor, where applicable.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 314
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-915 Zoning Permit through Section 98-915 Zoning Permit
2. Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded subdivision or by metes
and bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; existing and proposed
operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees; and the zoning
district within which the subject site lies.
3. Additional information as may be required by the Plan Commission or Zoning
Administrator.
4. Fee receipt from the City Treasurer in an amount specified in sub. (2) of this
section.
b. Plat of Survey. Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in Wisconsin
showing the location, boundaries, dimensions, uses and size of the following: subject
site; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed easements, streets and
other public ways; off street parking, loading areas and driveways; existing highway
access restrictions; high water, channel floodway and floodplain boundaries; and
existing and proposed street, side and rear yards. In addition, the plat of survey shall
show type, slope and boundaries of soils shown on the operations soil survey maps
prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service for the Southeastern Wisconsin
Regional Planning Commission.
c. Site Development Plan. The site development plan shall be submitted as a part of the
permit application and shall contain the following information drawn to scale:
1. Dimensions and area of the lot.
2. Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and
centerline of all abutting streets or highways.
3. Description of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water
supply systems.
4. Location of the ordinary high watermark of any abutting navigable waterways.
5. Boundaries of all wetlands.
6. Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover.
7. Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined from
floodplain zoning maps.
8. Location of existing or future access roads.
9. Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration.
d. Fees.
a. All applicants shall pay a zoning permit fee as determined by the Common
Council from time to time.
b. Zoning permit fees do not include and are in addition to building permit fees
established in the Municipal Code.
c. A double fee may be charged by the Zoning Administrator if work is started
before a permit is applied for and issued. Such double fee shall not release the
applicant from full compliance with this chapter nor from prosecution for violation
of this chapter.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 315
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-931 Purpose of Administrative
Regulations through Section 98-932 Zoning Administrator
(3) Determination and Expiration: A zoning permit shall be granted or denied by the Zoning
Administrator in writing within 30 days of application and the applicant shall post such
permit in a conspicuous place at the site. The permit shall expire within 4 months unless
work equal to 10% of the dollar amount of the permits has been completed or within 18
months after the issuance of the permit if the structure for which a permit issued is not
75% completed as measured by the dollar amount of the permit. The applicant shall
reapply for a zoning permit before recommencing work on the structure. Any permit
issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.
Section 98-931 Purpose of Administrative Regulations
The purpose of this portion of the Article is to establish the administrative and enforcement
framework for the application of this Chapter.
Section 98-932 Zoning Administrator
(1) Designation: The Building Inspector or a designee of the Building Inspector is hereby
designated as the administrative and enforcement officer for the provisions of this Code and is
also herein referred to as the Zoning Administrator. The duty of the Zoning Administrator is to
interpret and administer this Code and to issue, after on-site inspection, all permits required by
this Code.
(2) Duties: The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning
Administrator or a designee, who in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority shall:
(a) Determine that all Detailed Site Analyses, Building Permits, Certificates of Occupancy,
Sign Permits, Site Plans, (and their constituent plans) comply with all provisions of this
Chapter.
(b) Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, waters and land to determine compliance
with all provisions of this Chapter.
(c) Be permitted access to premises and structures during reasonable hours to make those
inspections as deemed necessary by him to ensure compliance with this Chapter. If,
however he is refused entry after presentations of his identification, he may procure a
special inspection warrant in accordance with Section 66.122 of the Wisconsin statutes.
Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, waters and land to determine compliance
with all provisions of this Chapter.
(d) Maintain permanent and current records of this Chapter, including but not limited to all
maps, amendments, conditional uses, temporary uses, sign permits, site plans, occupancy
permits, variances, appeals, interpretations, and applications therefore.
(e) Record the first floor and lowest floor (basement or crawlway) elevations of all structures
erected, moved, altered, or improved in the floodland districts.
(f) Receive, file and forward all applications for any and all procedures governed by this
Chapter to the designated official bodies.
(g) Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures and the use of
structures, lands, and waters, give notice of all violations of this Code to the owner,
resident, agent, or occupant of the premises, and report uncorrected violations to the City
Attorney in a manner specified by him.
(h) Institute, in the name of the City of Lake Geneva, any appropriate actions or proceedings
against a violator of this Chapter, as provided by law.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 316
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-933 Plan Commission through Section 98-934 Zoning Board of Appeals
(i) Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until he has inspected and
approved such use or erection.
(j) Where useful, the Zoning Administrator, or his agent, may set marks on bridges or
buildings or other markers which show the depth of the regional flood; or may set marks
delineating the boundaries of wetlands.
(k) Request assistance and cooperation from the City Police Department and City Attorney as
deemed necessary.
(l) Make available to the public, to the fullest extent possible, all reports and documents
concerning the City's comprehensive plan and ordinances. In addition, information in the
form of reports, bulletins, maps, and engineering data shall be readily available and widely
distributed. The Common Council may set fees necessary to recover the cost of providing
information to the public.
(m)The Zoning Administrator or other City staff may designate Deputy Zoning Administrators.
(n) Make interpretations regarding the provisions of this Chapter per Section 98-911.
(o) Grant minor variations from the dimensional (setback, height, and area requirements of
this Chapter; up to a maximum variation of 10% for setbacks and height limitations; and up
to a maximum variation of 10% or 1,000 square feet for area requirements (whichever is
less); so long as the spirit and intent of the performance standards are preserved.
Section 98-933 Plan Commission
The Plan Commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall make reports and
recommendations relating to the plan and development of the City to the Common Council, other
public officials and other interested organizations and citizens. The Commission, its members and
employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations
and surveys.
In general, the Plan Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to
perform its functions and promote municipal planning. Under this Code, its functions are primarily
recommendatory to the Common Council pursuant to guidelines set forth in this Code as to
various matters, and, always, being mindful of the intent and purposes of this Code.
Recommendations shall be in writing. A recording thereof in the Commission's minutes shall
constitute the required written recommendation. The Commission may, in arriving at its
recommendation, on occasion and of its own volition, conduct its own public hearing.
Section 98-934 Zoning Board of Appeals
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power and duty to review and determine all matters
relating to requested variances from the provisions of this Chapter (see Section 98-910); or
appeals regarding an interpretation of the Zoning Administrator of the provisions of this Chapter
(see Section 98-911 and 98-912).
(1) Establishment and Membership: A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall consists of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the Common Council, for three (3) years, except that of those first appointed,
one shall serve for one year; two for two years. The members shall serve without
compensation and shall be removable by the Mayor for cause upon written charges and after
public hearing. The Mayor shall designate one of the members chairman. The Mayor shall
appoint subject to confirmation of the Council for staggered terms of three (3) years, two
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 317
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-934 Zoning Board of Appeals through Section 98-934 Zoning Board of Appeals
alternate members of such board, in addition to the five members above provided for.
Annually, the Mayor shall designate one of the alternate members as first alternate and the
other as second alternate. The first alternate shall act, with full power, only when a member of
the board refuses or declines to vote, is disqualified because of interest, or when a member is
absent. The second alternate shall so act when the first alternate so refuses or declines to
vote, is disqualified because of interest or is absent or when more than one member so
refuses or declines, is disqualified, or is absent. Other provisions herein appearing, with regard
to removal and filling of vacancies, shall apply to such alternates. Vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired terms of members whose terms become vacant. Appointments shall be made at
the organizational meeting the Third Tuesday in April. Terms of office shall commence the first
day of May. The City Clerk shall serve as Secretary of the Board. The Board of Appeals may
employ other employees.
(2) Organization: The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules for its government and procedure.
Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairman, and at such other
times as the Board of Appeals may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence an elected
Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meeting
shall be open to the public.
The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each questions, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the office of the Board of Appeals, which is the City Clerk's office, and shall be a public
record.
(3) Powers
(a) The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator.
2. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Code upon which the Board
of Appeals is required to pass.
3. To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this Code
as will not be contrary to the public interest, when, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit
of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial
justice done.
4. Permit in appropriate cases, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Code, a building or premises to be
erected or used for such public utility purposes in any location which is reasonably
necessary for the public convenience and welfare.
(b) In exercising the above listed powers, the Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly
or in part or may modify any order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
and shall make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion ought
to be made in the premises and to that end shall have all the powers of the Zoning
Administrator or other administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken. The
concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse
any order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from or to decide in favor of
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 318
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-934 Zoning Board of Appeals through Section 98-934 Zoning Board of Appeals
the applicant on any matter on which it is required to pass or to effect any variation in the
requirements of this Code.
(c) In addition to the foregoing powers, the Board of Appeals shall have the following specific
powers:
1. To interpret the provisions of this Code in such a way as to carry out the intent and
purpose of the plan, as shown on the Zoning Map accompanying and made a part of
this Code, where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout
on the aforesaid map.
2. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to call on any other city department for
assistance in the performance of its duties and it shall be the duty of such other
departments to render such assistance as may be reasonably required.
(d) Except as specifically provided, no action of the Board of Appeals shall have the effect of
permitting in any district uses prohibited in such districts.
(4) Appeals: Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer, department, board or bureau of the City of Lake Geneva affected by any decision of
the administrative officers. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty days, as provided by the
rules of the Board of Appeals, by filing with the officer(s) from whom the appeal is taken and
with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, together with
payment of a filing fee as may be established by the Common Council. The officer(s) from
whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals all papers
constituting the record of appeals upon which the action appealed from was taken. The Board
of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals and give public notice thereof
as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and shall decide to same within a reasonable
time. (Ord. No. 00-15 12/11/00)
(5) Notice of Hearing: The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for the
hearing, within forty-five days of filing, cause notice thereof to be published in the official
newspaper not less than seven (7) days prior thereto, cause notice to be given to the
appellant or applicant and the administrative officer(s) appealed from by regular mail or by
personal service not less than five (5) days prior to the date of hearing. In every case involving
a variance, notice shall also be mailed not less than five (5) five days prior to the hearing to
the fee owners of record of all land within 300 feet of any part of the subject building or
premises involved in the appeal. (Ord. No. 00-15 12/11/00)
(6) Hearings: Hearings on appeals shall be public and shall be conducted according to the rules
of procedure adopted by the Board. At the hearing, the appellant or applicant may appear in
person, by agent or by attorney. Decisions of the Board following public hearing may be made
either in public or closed session as the Board shall determine.
(7) Findings
(a) Findings of fact and reasons for all actions taken shall be reduced by the Board to writing
in the minutes of the proceedings.
(b) The Board is authorized to grant a variance from the Zoning Ordinance which is not
contrary to the public interest and if the following findings are found to be in the affirmative:
1. There exists a unique hardship, which is caused by special condition of the property
and is not self created by the Applicant.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 319
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-934 Zoning Board of Appeals through Section 98-934 Zoning Board of Appeals
2. A literal enforcement of the provisions of the Ordinance will result in practical difficulty
or undue hardship.
3. Granting of the variance is within the spirit of the Zoning Code.
4. The Public’s health, safety and welfare are secured.
5. Granting of the variance will result in justice being served. (Ord. No. 04-33 8/23/04)
(c) Further to be considered by the Board in case of appeal based on variance, in arriving at
its reasons and grounds for the above required findings, are the following:
1. Preservation of Intent: No variance shall be granted that is not consistent with the
purpose and intent of the regulations for the district in which the development is
located. No variance shall have the effect of permitting a use in any district that is not a
stated permitted use, accessory use, or conditional use in that particular district.
2. Exceptional Circumstances: There may be exceptional, extraordinary, or unusual
circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or parcel, structure, use or intended use
that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same district and the
granting of the variance would not be of so general recurrent nature as to suggest that
the Zoning Code should be changed.
3. Economic Hardship and Self-Imposed Hardship Not Grounds for Variance: No
variance shall be granted solely on the basis of economic gain or loss. Self-imposed
hardships shall not be considered as grounds for the granting of a variance.
4. Preservation of Property Rights: Such variance may be necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other
properties in the same district and same vicinity.
5. Absence of Detriment: Such variance should not create substantial detriment to
adjacent property and shall not materially impair or be contrary to the purpose and
spirit of this Code or the public interest.
(d) Additional Requirements in Floodland Districts. No variance shall be granted when it is
found:
1. Filling and development contrary to the purpose and intent of the Floodway District
(FW) and the Floodplain District (FP) would result.
2. A change in the boundaries of the Floodway District (FW), Floodplain District (FP), or
the Floodfringe District (FF) would result.
3. A lower degree of flood protection than a point two (2) feet above the 100-year
recurrence interval flood for the particular area would result.
4. Any action contrary to the provisions of Subchapter NR-116 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code would result.
(8) Wetland and Floodland Mapping Disputes
(a) Wetland Disputes: See Section 98-504(13).
(b) Floodland Disputes: Whenever the Board of Appeals is asked to interpret a floodland
boundary where an apparent discrepancy exists between the federal Flood Insurance
Study and the actual field conditions, the following procedure shall be used. The floodland
boundary shall be determined by use of the flood profiles contained in an engineering
study, or where such information is not available to the Board of Appeals, the person
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 320
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-935 Fees through Section 98-936 Violations and Penalties
contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given the opportunity to present his
own technical evidence. Where it is determined that the floodplain is incorrectly mapped,
the Board of Appeals shall advise the City Plan Commission of its findings and the Plan
Commission shall proceed to petition the Common Council for a map amendment.
(9) Decision: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals and applications within 30
days after the public hearing and shall transmit by regular mail to the address on the
application a signed copy of the Board's decision to the appellant or applicant, Zoning
Administrator, and City Plan Commission.
(a) Conditions may be placed upon any Zoning Permit ordered or authorized by this Board.
(b) Variances, substitutions, or use permits granted by the Board shall expire within six (6)
months unless substantial work has commenced pursuant to such grant.
(c) Applicants receiving variances in floodlands shall be notified, in writing, by the Board of
Appeals that increased flood insurance premiums and risk to life or property may result
from the granting of the variance. The Board shall keep a record of the notification in its
files.
(10)Notice to the DNR: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall transmit a copy of each application for
a variance to conservancy regulations in the lakeshore portion of the shoreland-wetland
overlay district or to the floodland regulations in a FW, FP, or FF floodland district, and a copy
of all shoreland-wetland and floodland appeals, to the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) for review and comment at least 10 days prior to any public hearings. Final
action on the application shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR has made its
recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions relating to variances to
shoreland-wetland regulations or to floodland regulations, and a copy of all decisions to
shoreland-wetland and floodland appeals, shall be transmitted to the DNR within 10 days of
the date of such decision.
(11)Review by Court of Record: Any persons aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals
may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is
illegal and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court
within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the offices of the Board.
Section 98-935 Fees
(1) Fees for Procedures or Permits Requested by a Private Party: The fees for the
procedures and permits established by this Chapter shall be established by resolution of the
Common Council of the City of Lake Geneva
(2) Fees for Procedures Requested by the City of Lake Geneva: There shall be no fee in the
case of applications filed in the public interest by the Common Council or the Plan
Commission, other agency, or official of the City of Lake Geneva.
(3) Payment of Fees: Fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed with the appropriate
officer of the City (per the requirements of this Chapter), and are not refundable.
(4) Professional Consultant Review Services: The City may retain the services of professional
consultants (including planners, engineers, architects, attorneys, environmental specialists,
recreation specialists, and other experts) to assist in the City's review of a proposal coming
before the Plan Commission. The City may apply the charges for these services to the
Petitioner. The City will require the Petitioner to sign a professional consultant review services
form. The City may delay acceptance of the application or petition as complete, or may delay
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 321
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-936 Violations and Penalties through Section 98-936 Violations and Penalties
final approval of the proposal, until such fees are paid by the Petitioner. The submittal of a
development proposal application or petition by a Petitioner shall be construed as an
agreement to pay for such professional review services applicable to the proposal. Review
fees which are applied to a Petitioner, but which are not paid, may be assigned by the City as
a special assessment to the subject property.
Section 98-936 Violations and Penalties
(1) Violation of this Chapter: It shall be unlawful to construct or use any land, engage in any
development activity (including disruption of protected vegetation), or construct or use any
structure, land or water in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, or otherwise
neglect, refuse or fail to comply with this Chapter's requirements. Any person who violates or
fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalties set forth in Subsection (2), below, and in addition, shall pay all costs
and expenses, including actual reasonable attorney and other fees involved in the case. Each
day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Penalties: Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this
Code or any order of the Zoning Administrator shall be subject to the penalty provisions of the
City of Lake Geneva Municipal Code of Ordinances.
(3) City Promulgated Correction of Violation: In addition to any other penalty imposed by this
Article for a violation of the provisions of this Chapter, the City reserves and maintains the
continued right to abate violations of this Chapter.
(a) Hazardous Condition Caused by Violation of this Chapter: If the Zoning Administrator
determines that a violation of this Chapter exists, and further determines that the nature of
such violation poses a great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace,
morals or decency, the Zoning Administrator shall cause the violation to be abated. Costs
associated with said abatement shall be charged to the owner of the property on which
said violation has occurred per Subsection (c), below. The Zoning Administrator is hereby
authorized to abate a violation of this Chapter.
(b) Non-Hazardous Condition Caused by Violation of this Chapter: If the Zoning
Administrator determines that a violation of this Chapter exists, and further determines that
the nature of such violation is not such as to pose great and immediate danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Zoning Administrator shall serve
written notice by Registered Mail on the current owner of the property (as indicated by
current City of Lake Geneva tax records) on which said violation is occurring to remove
said violation within ten working days. If such violation is not removed within such ten
working days, the Zoning Administrator shall cause the violation to be abated per
Subsection (a), above. Costs associated with said abatement shall be charged to the
owner of the property on which said violation has occurred per Subsection (c), below.
(c) Cost of Abatement: In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Article for a violation
of the provisions of this Chapter, the cost of abating a violation of this Chapter per
Subsections (a) and/or (b), above, shall be collected as a debt from the owner of the
property on which said violation has occurred. An account of the expenses incurred by the
City to abate the violation shall be kept and such expenses shall be charged to and paid
by the property owner. Notice of the bill for abatement of the violation shall be mailed to
the last known address of said property owner by Registered Mail, and shall be payable
within 30 calendar days from the receipt thereof. Within 60 days after such costs and
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 322
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-936 Violations and Penalties through Section 98-936 Violations and Penalties
expenses are incurred and remain unpaid, the City Clerk shall enter such charges onto the
tax roll as a special tax as provided by State Statute 66.615(5).
LIST OF AMENDMENTS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
Map ID # File # Property Description
Zoning Date of
Council
Action
Ord.
From To No.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 323
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Section 98-936 Violations and Penalties through Section 98-936 Violations and Penalties
expenses are incurred and remain unpaid, the City Clerk shall enter such charges onto the
tax roll as a special tax as provided by State Statute 66.615(5).
LIST OF AMENDMENTS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
Map ID # File # Property Description
Zoning Date of
Council
Action
Ord.
From To No.
ARTICLE IX: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 323
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
Appendix A – Recommended Illumination Levels of the Illuminating Engineering Society of
North America
PARKING LOTS:
General Parking & Pedestrian Vehicle Use Only
Level of
Activity
Examples Average Minimum
Uniformity
(Ave./Min.)
Average Minimum
Uniformity
(Ave./Min.)
HIGH Major League Athletic Events
Major Cultural or Civic Events
Regional Shopping Centers
3.6 fc
60,000 lu1
750 W MH
750 W HPS
375 W LPS
0.9 fc
15,000 lu1
185 W MH
185 W HPS
90 W LPS
4:1 1.8 fc
30,000 lu1
375 W MH
375 W HPS
375 W LPS
0.6 fc
10,000 lu1
125 W MH
125 W HPS
65 W LPS
3:1
MEDIUM Community Shopping Centers
Cultural, Civic, or Recreational
Events
Office or Hospital Parking
Transportation Parking
(Airports, Commuter Lots,
Etc.)
Fast Food Facilities
Residential Complex Parking
2.4 fc
40,000 lu1
500 W MH
500 W HPS
250 W LPS
0.6 fc
10,000 lu1
125 W MH
125 W HPS
65 W LPS
4:1 0.9 fc
15,000 lu1
185 W MH
185 W HPS
90 W LPS
0.3 fc
5,000 lu1
60 W MH
60 W HPS
30 W LPS
3:1
LOW Neighborhood Shopping
Industrial Employee Parking
Educational Facility Parking
Church Parking
0.9 fc
15,000 lu1
185 W MH
185 W HPS
90 W LPS
0.18 fc
3,000 lu1
35 W MH
35 W HPS
18 W LPS
4:1 0.45 fc
7,500 lu1
90 W MH
90 W HPS
45 W LPS
0.12 fc
2,000 lu1
25 W MH
25 W HPS
15 W LPS
3:1
Level of Activity Guidelines:
Level of Activity
Regional shopping centers containing retail space of 200,000 SF or greater HIGH
Sports Arenas HIGH
Community shopping centers containing retail space of 4,000 SF to 199,000 SF MEDIUM
Neighborhood shopping containing retail space of less than 4,000 SF LOW
Fast Food Facilities MEDIUM
Automotive Dealerships MEDIUM
Entertainment Theaters MEDIUM
Restaurants MEDIUM
Hotels/Motels MEDIUM
Security Lighting LOW
Other Recommendations:
Automotive Dealership Display Lots: 35 fc (600,000 lumens for a single light)1 7,500 W MH
Service Stations: Pump Island 20 fc (200,000 lumens for a single light)2 2,500 W MH
Service Area 3 fc (50,000 lumens for a single light)2 625 W MH
Entrance Doorways: Active 5 fc (11,000 lumens)3 135 W MH, 135 W HPS, 75 W LPS
Inactive 1 fc (2,000 lumens)3 25 W MH, 25 W HPS, 15 W LPS
1 Assumes light is at a height of 20 feet. If light is at 30 feet the lumens needs to be doubled to achieve the same fc at the ground.
2 Assumes a canopy height of 15 feet.
3 Assumes light at a height of 10 feet.
Appendix A-2
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Climax Trees
(75 Landscaping Points)
Botanical
Name
Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Acer
saccharumRF Sugar Maple S
Round Rich soil; salt sensitive; oval
when young; yellow, orange,
or scarlet fall color.
'Green
Mountain'
Round Scorch resistant; leathery
leaves.
*Carya ovataRF Shagbark Hickory Native and very adaptable,
salt sensitive, fruit-nut, lawn
tree.
Ginkgo biloba
'Fastigiata'
Ginkgo
Sentry Ginkgo
S Pyramidal
Columnar
Very urban; dioecious,
females produce smelly fruits;
golden yellow fall color.
Seedless.
Juglans nigraRF Walnut
Eastern Walnut
Black Walnut
F Best in public open spaces or
lawns; not to be used as a
street tree; poisonous to other
plants within the drip zone;
susceptible to caterpillars and
leaf spot disease.
*Quercus albaRF White Oak S Round Extremely sensitive to soil
compaction; tolerant of urban
conditions; dry soil; subject to
iron chlorosis; red fall color;
very difficult to transplant;
excellent lawn or shade tree.
Continued on the next page.
KEY: * Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-3
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Climax Trees (Cont.)
(75 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Quercus bicolorRF Swamp White Oak S Round Very tolerant of urban conditions; moist
to wet, intolerant of alkaline soil;
tolerates poor drainage; difficult to
transplant; yellow fall color.
*Quercus
macrocarpaRF
Bur Oak
Mossycup Oak
S Round Sensitive to soil compaction; tolerant of
urban conditions; dry to wet soil; no fall
color; very difficult to transplant.
*Quercus palustris Pin Oak M Pyramidal Sensitive to soil compaction; tolerant of
urban conditions; moist, acid soil;
pendulous lower branches; red fall
color; iron chlorosis on alkaline soil;
lawn tree; cultivar 'Sovereign' best for
streets.
*Quercus rubraRF
(also known as
Quercus Borealis)
Northern Red Oak
Red Oak
M Round Sensitive to soil compaction; tolerant of
urban conditions; pyramidal when
young; red fall color; well-drained soil;
fast growing for oaks, excellent lawn,
shade, and street tree.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-4
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Tall Deciduous Trees (30 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
Acer nigrum Black Maple M Oval Does well in poor, dry soils; red to
bright gold fall color; excellent for lawn,
shade, or street.
Acer platanoides Norway Maple M Round Shallow root system, not to be used
along streets.
'Cleveland' F Ovalupright
Uniform, dense foliage.
'Columnare' Columnar Indistinct central leader.
'Crimson King' Keeps deep purple leaf color through
out summer; susceptible to sun scald,
bark splitting, and transplant shock.
'Drummondii' Harlequin N.M. S Round Variegated, cream-edged leaves.
'Emerald Queen' F Oval Vigorous; crisp foliage.
'Globosum' Globe N.M. S Globe Useful on a standard under utility
wires, 20' height.
'Greenlace' Round Deeply divided, fine textured leaves.
'Royal Red' S Round Best for purple summer foliage.
'Schwedleri' Round New foliage reddish; bronze by
summer.
'Summershade' F Rapidly growing cultivar; deep green,
large, leathery leaves.
*Acer rubrumRF Red Maple
Scarlet Maple
Swamp Maple
F Round Moist, acid soil; tolerates poor
drainage; smooth gray bark; yellow,
orange, or red fall color; salt sensitive.
'Armstrong' Fastigiate No fall color, light gray bark.
'Autumn Flame' Early scarlet fall color.
'Bowhall' Oval Orange fall color.
'Red Sunset' Late, scarlet fall color.
'Schlesingeri' Red-orange fall color.
Continued on the next page.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-5
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Tall Deciduous Trees (Cont.)
(30 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Acer saccharinumRF Silver Maple
Soft Maple
White Maple
River Maple
F Vase Hearty and fast growing; moist soil;
tolerates poor drainage; fine-textured;
weak-wooded (develops heart rots
after 50 years, limbs may fall);
yellowish or no fall color.
'Blair' VF Strong branch structure; storm
resistant.
'Pyramidale' Upright S.M. Pyramidal Improved branch structure.
'Silver Queen' Seedless S.M. Round Seedless.
'Wieri' Cutleaf S.M. Shredded leaves, pendulous branches.
Aesculus
hippocastanum
Horsechestnut M Round Urban; coarse; showy, white, May
flowers; litter problem; no fall color;
difficult to transplant; pest or disease
problems may limit use.
Alnus glutinosa European Alder
Black Alder
F Oval Rich or wet soils; produces catkins;
possible winterkill.
Betula luteaRF Yellow Birch M Round Drooping branches; moist well drained
soils; yellow-orange bark; rusty yellow
fall color.
Catalpa speciosa Northern Catalpa F Oval Poor, dry soil; showy, white, June
flowers; coarse; litter problem; no fall
color.
*Celtis occidentalisRF Common Hackberry M Vase Tolerates alkaline soils; "pebbled" bark;
yellowish fall color; pest or disease
problem may limit use.
*Fagus grandifoliaRF American Beech S Oval Moist, rich soil; smooth, gray bark;
yellow-bronze fall color; difficult to
transplant; salt sensitive; sensitive to
soil compaction.
Fagus sylvatica European Beech S Round Moist, rich soil; less difficult to
transplant than above; several cultivars
available; excellent lawn tree.
Continued on the next page.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-6
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Tall Deciduous Trees (Cont.)
(30 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Fraxinus americanaRF White Ash M Round Moist soil; tolerates poor drainage;
dioecious; orange to purple fall color;
tolerates urban conditions.
'Autumn Purple' Round Seedless, superior fall color.
'Rosehill' Oval Seedless, superior fall color.
Fraxinus excelsior European Ash F Round Jet black buds; no fall color.
'Aurea' Golden E.A. M Round Golden, young foliage, twigs and fall
color; green summer foliage.
'Hessei' Hesse E.A. Round Simple leaves.
Fraxinus nigraRF Black Ash M Irregular Deep, rich, moist soils; tolerates wet
soils; yellow fall color, scaly bark.
Fraxinus
pennsylvanicaRF
Green Ash
Red Ash
F Oval;
irregular
Dry to wet soils; tolerates poor
drainage; slat tolerant; twiggy and
weak-wooded; yellow fall color; pest or
disease problem may limit use;
tolerates urban conditions.
'Marshall's Seedless' Oval Seedless; glossy, dark green foliage;
improved habit of growth.
'Summit' Upright Finer textured foliage.
*Gleditsia triancanthos
inermis
Thornless
honeylocust
F Vase Tolerates poor drainage; thornless, as
are all the following; pest or disease
problem may limit use; salt tolerant;
yellow fall color.
'Imperial' Round Podless; low-growing; flat-topped; pest
or disease problem may limit use.
'Shademaster' Irregular Podless; vase shape in age; pest or
disease problem may limit use.
'Skyline' Upright Podless; tends to form central leader;
good golden fall color; pest or disease
problem may limit use.
'Sunburst' Irregular Podless; yellow new foliage; poor
branch structure; pest or disease
problem may limit use.
Continued on the next page.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-7
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Tall Deciduous Trees (Cont.)
(30 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Gymnocladus dioica Kentucky Coffeetree M Upright Moist, rich soil; coarse and rugged;
dioecious; yellowish fall color.
Juglans cinereaRF Butternut S Needs good soil and consistent
moisture; fairly good shade tree;
susceptible to butternut decline.
Larix decidua European Larch F Pyramidal Full sun; graceful, fine-textured;
transplant in spring before buds open;
yellow fall color.
'Pendula' F Interesting weeping branches.
Larix kaempferi Japanese Larch F Wide-
Pyramidal
Similar to above, more picturesque.
Larix laricinaRF American Larch
Tamarack
M Narrow-
Pyramidal
Hardy; drought tolerant; used in
shelterbelts.
Liriodendron tulipifera Tuliptree F Upright Rich, moist soil; unique leaves and
interesting June flowers; yellow fall
color; purchase from northern source.
*Platanus occidentalis Sycamore
American Planetree
F Pyramidal Moist soil; tolerates poor drainage;
mottled bark; coarse, maple-like
leaves; no fall color; pest or disease
problem may limit use.
Populus alba
'Pyramidalis'
White Poplar F Fastigiate Moist soil; tolerates poor drainage;
mottled bark; coarse, maple-like
leaves; no fall color; pest or disease
problem may limit use.
Populus deltoidesRF Eastern Poplar VF Fastigiate Hardy, fast growing; golden yellow fall
color; tolerates drought; brittle; may
produce "cotton"; too large for homes.
'Robusta' VF Upright Seedless.
'Siouxland' VF Larger greener leaves; seedless;
uniform in shape; hardy.
'Cottonless' VF Seedless; many similar species
available.
Populus
grandidentataRF
Bigtooth Aspen F Narrow Moist, sandy, gravelly soils; not shade
tolerant; yellow fall color.
Continued on the next page.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-8
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Tall Deciduous Trees (Cont.)
(30 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Prunus serotinaRF Black Cherry M Oval Dry soil; white flowers and black fruits
in drooping racemes; orange fall color;
pest or disease problem may limit use.
Taxodium distichum Baldcypress F Pyramidal Moist, intolerant of alkaline soil;
tolerates poor drainage; sun; bronze
fall color; fine texture; purchase from
northern source.
*Tilia americanaRF American Linden
Basswood
Linden Tree
Linn Tree
M Round Sensitive to soil compaction; saltsensitive;
coarse; rich soils.
Tilia cordata Littleleaf Linden S Pyramidal Urban; moist soil; fragrant flowers; poor
branch structure, needs training while
young; yellow fall color.
'Chancellor' Uniform, upright habit.
'Greenspire' Improved branching habit.
Tilia x euchlora
'Redmond'
Redmond Linden M Pyramidal Urban; dark green foliage.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-9
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Medium Deciduous Trees
(15 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
Aesculus x carnea
'Briotii'
Ruby
Horsechestnut
S Round Rich, moist soil; red flowers.
Aesculus glabra Ohio Buckeye S Round Rich, moist soil; yellow-green flowers;
orange fall color.
Alnus glutinosa European Alder F Oval Wet; tolerates poor drainage; catkins;
cone fruits; no fall color.
*Betula nigraRF River Birch M Vase Wet to dry, intolerant of alkaline soils;
tolerates poor drainage; pinkish,
peeling bark.
*Betula papyiferaRF Paper Birch M Oval Cool, moist soil; white, peeling bark;
golden yellow fall color; pest or disease
problem.
Betula pendula
'Gracilis'
Cutleaf European
Birch
M Weeping Cool, moist soil; dissected leaves;
yellow fall color; pests & disease.
Betula platyphylla
japonica
Japanese White
Birch
M Pyramidal White bark; some resistance to bronze
birch borer.
Cercidiphyllum
japonicum
Katsuratree M Columnar Moist soil; dioecious; form controlled by
pruning, wide spreading if multitrunked;
yellow to red fall color.
Cladrastis lutea American
Yellowwood
S Round Moist, rich soil; smooth, light gray bark;
fragrant, white June flowers in large
clusters; yellow fall color.
Magnolia acuminata Cucumbertree F Pyramidal Inconspicuous, greenish flowers; pink
to red fruits; coarse foliage; no fall
color.
*Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum S Pyramidal Moist soil; tolerates poor drainage;
dense habit; dioecious; orange to
scarlet fall color; difficult to transplant.
Phellodendron
amurense
Amur Corktree M Round Urban; dry soil; dioecious; compound
leaves; corky bark; yellow fall color.
Prunus maackii Amur Chokecherry M Round Amber exfoliating bark; does well in
containers.
Continued on the next page.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-10
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Medium Deciduous Trees (Cont.)
(15 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
Prunus padus
commutata
Harbinger European
Bird Cherry
S Round Sun; early to leaf out in spring; pest or
disease problem.
*Prunus
pennsylvanicaRF
Pin Cherry M Upright Poor, dry soil; sun; graceful; shortlived;
suckering; red fruits; orange to red fall
color.
Prunus sargentii Sargent Cherry M Upright Sun, well-drained soil; early, pink
flowers; red fall color.
Salix alba tristis Golden Weeping
Willow
F Weeping Wet soil; tolerates poor drainage; bright
yellow twigs; fine-textured; litter
problem.
Ulmus parvifolia Chinese Elm M Vase Disease resistant; exfoliating bark.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-11
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Low Deciduous Trees
(10 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
Acer ginnala Amur Maple M Round Sun, shade; red fruit; red fall color.
*Alnus rugosa Speckled Alder F Round Wet soil; tolerates poor soil; lenticeled
bark.
*Amelanchier
arboreaRF
Downy Serviceberry S Upright Dry soil; shade; gray bark; white
flowers; yellow to red fall color; edible
fruits.
Amelanchier x
grandiflora
Apple Serviceberry S Spreading Semi-shade; large, white flowers,
edible fruits.
*Amelanchier laevis Allegany
Serviceberry
S Upright Moist soil; shade; white flowers; orange
to red fall color, edible fruits.
*Carpinus carolinianaRF American
Hornbeam
S Spreading Moist soil; shade; smooth, gray
muscle-like trunks; orange fall color.
Cercis canadensis Eastern Redbud M Spreading Sun or shade; purplish-pink flowers;
yellow fall color; purchase form
northern source.
*Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood M Spreading Cool, moist soil; shade; blue-black
berries on red stalks; early, maroon fall
color.
*Crataegus crus-galli
'Inermis'
Thornless Cockspur
Hawthorn
Spreading Urban; sun; persistent, brick red fruits;
orange to red fall color; no thorns.
Crataegus laevigata
'Paulii'
Paul's Scarlet
Hawthorn
S Upright Heavy soil; sun; double, scarlet flowers
in late May; no fall color; pest or
disease problem.
'Superba' Crimson Cloud
Hawthorn
Single, scarlet flowers; resistant to leaf
spot.
Crataegus x lavallei Lavalle Hawthorn S Upright Urban; sun; glossy foliage; bronzy-red
fall color.
*Crataegus mollis Downy Hawthorn S Upright Sun; large, red, early-ripening fruit;
yellow fall color; pest or disease
problem.
Continued on the next page.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-12
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Low Deciduous Trees (Cont.)
(10 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
Crataegus
phaenopyrum
Washington
Hawthorn
M Upright Urban; sun; latest blooming; small,
persistent, orange-red fruits in clusters;
orange fall color.
*Crataegus punctata Dotted Hawthorn S Spreading Moist, heavy soil; sun; picturesque;
pest or disease problem may limit use.
Crataegus x 'Toba' Toba Hawthorn S Sun; double, pink, fragrant flowers;
glossy leaves; red fruits; dwarf-15.
Elaeagnus angustifolia Russianolive F Round Dry, alkaline soil; sun; fragrant,
inconspicuous flowers; silver-gray
foliage; no fall color; pest or disease
problem may limit use.
Magnolia x loebneri
'Merrill'
Dr. Merrill Magnolia M Pyramidal Rich soil; sun; white, many-petaled
flowers; difficult to transplant.
Magnolia x
soulangiana
Saucer Magnolia S Round Rich soil; sun; large pink flowers;
difficult to transplant.
Malus species &
cultivars
Flowering
Crabapples
All require sun and well drained soil.
They all possess a high degree of
resistance to the apple scab disease.
M. 'Adams' Adams F.C. M Spreading Slightly susceptible to fire blight; rosered
flowers; 5/8" diam., persistent,
deep red fruits.
M. baccata jackii Jack F.C. M Upright
spreading
Slightly susceptible to fire blight; white
flowers; tiny 1/3-1/2"diam., dark red
fruits.
M. 'Bob White' Bob White F.C. M Rounded Moderately susceptible to fire blight;
white flowers; 5/8" diam., persistent,
yellow fruits.
M. 'Candied Apple' Weeping Candied
Apple F.C.
Weeping Slightly susceptible to scab; pink
flowers; 5/8" diam., persistent cherryred
fruits; foliage tinged with red.
M. 'Centurian' Centurian F.C. Narrow-
Upright
Disease resistant; rose-red flowers;
5/8" diam., persistent, cherry-red fruits.
Continued on the next page.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-13
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Low Deciduous Trees (Cont.)
(10 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
M. 'David' David Flowering
Crabapple
M Rounded Slightly susceptible to fire blight and
scab; white glowers; 1/4-1 1/2" diam.,
reddish fruits for in alternate years.
M. 'Dolgo' Dolgo F.C. M Upright-
Spreading
Slightly susceptible to fire blight and
scab; white flowers; 1 1/4-1 1/2" diam.,
persistent red fruits.
M. 'Donald Wyman' Donald Wyman F.C. M Rounded Disease resistant; white flowers; 3/8"
diam., persistent red fruits.
M. 'Dorothea' Dorothea F.C. S Horizontal Moderately susceptible to scab; clear
pink semi-double flowers; 1/2" diam.,
yellow fruits.
M. 'Gibb's Golden
Gage'
Gibb's Golden Gage
F.C.
Rounded Disease resistant; white flowers; 1"
diam., persistent, yellow fruits.
M. 'Indian Summer' Indian Summer F.C. Rounded Disease resistant; rose-red flowers;
5/8-3/4" diam., red fruits.
M. 'Mary Potter' Mary Potter F.C. S Horizontal Moderately susceptible to fire blight
and scab; white flowers; 1/2" diam., red
fruits; 10' height.
M. 'Ormiston Roy' Ormiston Roy F.C. M Rounded Slightly susceptible to fire blight; white
flowers, 3/8" diam., persistent, yellow
fruits.
M. 'Profusion' Profusion F.C. M Rounded-
Spreading
Slightly susceptible to fire blight; rosered
flowers; 1/2" diam., deep red fruits;
bronze-green foliage.
M. 'Red Jewel' Red Jewel F.C. Horizontal Moderately susceptible to scab; white
flowers; 1/2" diam., persistent, bright
red fruits.
M. 'Robinson' Robinson F.C. Upright-
Spreading
Disease resistant; rose-red flowers;
3/8" diam, persistent, bright red fruits,
bronze-green foliage.
M. 'Sentinel' Sentinel F.C. Narrowupright
Slightly susceptible to fire blight and
scab; pale pink flowers; 1/2" diam.,
persistent, bright red fruits.
M. 'White Cascade' White Cascade F.C. S Weeping Disease resistant; white flowers, 1/2"
diam., yellowish fruits.
Continued on the next page.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-14
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Low Deciduous Trees (Cont.)
(10 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Ostrya virginianaRF Hophornbeam S Pyramidal Dry soil; shade; catkins; elm-like
leaves; yellow fall color.
*Prunus americanaRF American Plum F Horizontal Dry soil; sun; suckering habit; white
flowers; yellow to orange fall color.
Prunus cerasifera
'Newportii'
Newport Plum M Round Sun; reddish-purple summer foliage.
*Prunus virginianaRF Chokecherry M Upright Dry, infertile soil; suckering habit; white
flowers; yellow to orange fall color.
'Canada Red' or
'Shubert'
Shubert
Chokecherry
Sun; foliage changes from green to
purple in early summer.
Pyrus calleryana and
cultivars
Callery Pear M Oval Sun; early, white flowers; late red fall
color.
Saliz matsudana
'Tortuosa'
Corkscrew or
Contorted Willow
F Upright Wet soil; tolerates poor drainage; sun;
twisted branches; pest or disease
problem may limit use.
Saliz pentandra Laurel Willow M Round Wet soil; sun; foliage glossy, dark
green; dense habit.
Sorbus alnifolia Korean
Mountainash
S Oval Cool soil; simple leaves; small flowers
and fruits; orange to red fall color; pest
or disease problem.
Sorbus aucuparia and
cultivars
European
Mountainash
M Oval Cool soil; orange fruits; pest or disease
problem
*Sorbus decora Showy Mountainash S Upright Cool Soil; large, reddish fruits; pest or
disease problem.
Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac S Horizontal Sun; large, pyramidal, cream-white
flower clusters in June; tan fruits.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-15
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Tall Evergreen Trees
(40 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Height Adaptation and Remarks
Abies concolor White Fur M 70' Dry soil; heat; gray-green foliage.
Picea abies Norway Spruce F 75' Deep soil; dark green foliage; long
cones; pendulous branchlets
*Picea glaucaRF White Spruce M 50' Moist soil; sun; light green needles.
Picea omorika Serbian Spruce S 50' Sun; narrow habit; pendulous
branchlets.
Picea pungens glauca Blue Colorado
Spruce
S 60' Sun; urban; blue needles; stiff, formal
habit.
Pinus cembra Swiss Stone Pine S 50' Sun; narrow habit.
Pinus nigra Austrian pine M 50' Sun; urban; stout, dark green needles,
pest or disease problem.
*Pinus resinosaRF Red Pine F 50' Dry soil; sun; reddish bark; yellowgreen
winter color.
*Pinus strobusRF Eastern White Pine M 75' Moist soil; sun; picturesque; soft, green
foliage, pest or disease problem.
Pinus sylvestris Scots Pine F 50' Dry soil; sun; orange bark; bluish
needles.
Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglasfir M 70' Half-shade; flat, dark green needles.
*Tsuga CanadensisRF Canada Hemlock M 75' Moist soil; soft, feathery foliage.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Medium Evergreen Trees
(20 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Height Adaptation and Remarks
*Thuja occidentalisRF American Arborvitae M 40' Wet soil; half-shade; light green, soft,
scale-like foliage.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-16
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Low Evergreen Trees
(12 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth
Rate
Height Adaptation and Remarks
Juniperus chinnensis
'Keteleeri'
Keteleer Juniper S 20' Dry soil; sun; green foliage; large fruits.
'Mountbatten' Mountbatten
Juniper
S 20' Dry soil; sun; narrow, columnar form;
large fruits.
*Juniperus virginianaRF Eastern Redcedar S 20' Dry soil; sun; brownish winter color.
'Burkii' Burke E.R. Fine-textured, gray-green foliage.
'Canaertii' Canaert E.R. Dark green, tufted foliage.
'Glauca' Silver E.R. Silver-gray foliage; informal habit.
'Hillii' Hill Dundee E.R. Gray-green foliage turns purple in
winter, no fruits.
*Picea glaucaRF
Densata
Black Hills Spruce S 20' Dry soil; sun; narrow, dense habit.
Taxus cuspidata Japanese Yew S 20' Shade; urban, deep green needles;
often sold a T. cuspidata 'Capitata'
*Thuja occidentalisRF
'Fastigiata' Pyramidal
Arborvitae
M 25' Narrow columnar form.
'Techny' Techny Arborvitae S 20' Deep green foliage, year round.
KEY: *Wisconsin native; S = Slow; M = Medium; F = Fast
Appendix A-17
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Tall Deciduous Shrubs
(5 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Amelanchier sp.
(see low trees)
Serviceberry Upright Shade; alkaline soil; white flowers; edible purple
fruits; smooth, gray bark; yellow to orange fall color;
fireblight a problem.
Caragana arborescens Siberian Peashrub Erect, Oval Dry, alkaline soils; yellow flowers; green twig.
Chionanthus virginicus Fringetree Spreading Moist soil; shade; white flowers; blue fruits; coarse.
*Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood Spreading Moist soil; shade; white flowers; blue fruits;
horizontal branches; early, maroon fall color.
Cornus mas Corneliancherry
Dogwood
Oval Shade; urban; yellow flowers in April; flower buds
may be injured or killed during some winters; edible
red fruits.
*Cornus racemosa Gray Dogwood Erect Dry or wet soils; shade; white flowers; white fruits;
purple fall color.
*Cornus sericea Redosier Dogwood Spreading Wet, moist soils; tolerates poor drainage; white
flowers; white fruits; red twigs; often sold a C.
stolonifera.
baileyi Bailey R.D. Erect
Cotoneaster multiflora Manyflowered
Cotoneaster
Mounded Sun; well-drained soil; white flowers; red fruits; very
wide-spreading; pests/diseases.
Elaeagnus umbellata Autumnolive Spreading Poor, dry soil; sun; fragrant flowers; edible, red
fruits; twiggy.
Euonymus alata Winged Euonymus Spreading Sun or shade; well-drained soil; corky, winged
twigs; pink to rose fall color.
*Euonymus
atropurpurea
Eastern Wahoo Tree-like Moist soil; shade; tiny, purplish flowers; orange to
purple fall color.
Euonymus europaea Spindletree of
European
Euonymus
Tree-like Dry-soil; urban; striped bark; persistent pink fruit;
orange to purple fall color.
'Aldenhamensis' Aldenham E.E. Bright pink fruit; shrubby form.
'Redcap' Redcap E.E. Bright red fruit.
Exochorda racemosa Pearlbush Leggy Sun; pearl-like flower buds; tan fruit capsules.
*Hamamelis virginiana Common
Witchhazel
Spreading Shade; yellow October flowers.
Continued on next page.
*Wisconsin native
Appendix A-18
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Tall Deciduous Shrubs (Cont.)
(5 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
Hydrangea paniculata
'Grandiflora'
Peegee Hydrangea Upright Moist soil; white to pink flowers in August;
persistent, tan flower clusters.
Kolkwitzia amabilis Beautybush Upright Alkaline soil; sun; pink flowers in June; shredded
bark; leggy.
Ligustrum amurense Amur Privet Erect Dry soil; white flowers; black fruits; hedge plant.
Ligustrum vulgare
'Cheyenne'
Cheyenne Privet Erect Dry soil; urban; white flowers; black fruits; hedge
plant.
Lonicera x bella
'Candida'
White Belle
Honeysuckle
Uprightmounded
Dry soil; white flowers; red fruits; may become
weedy, pest problem.
Lonicera tatarica
zabelii
Zabel Honeysuckle Rounded Dry soil; urban; red flowers; dense, red fruits; may
become weedy, pest or disease problem, may be
sold as L. korolkowii zabelii.
Magnolia stellata Star Magnolia Rounded Rich soil; white flowers; orange fruits; finest
textured magnolia.
*Physocarpus
opulifolius
Eastern Ninebark Vase Dry soil; semi-shade; white flowers; red, capsular
fruit; shredded bark; course.
Prunus tomentosa Manchu Cherry Rounded Dry soil; sun; white flowers; edible, red fruits.
Prunus triloba Double Flowering
Plum
Rounded Sun; double, pink flowers; no fruit.
Rhamnus frangula
'Columnaris'
Tallhedge Glossy
Buckthorn
Columnar Moist soil; shade; red to black fruits; holds leaves
late.
*Rhus glabra Smooth Sumac Suckering Dry soil; sun; persistent red fruits; smooth stems;
scarlet fall color.
Rhus typhina Staghorn Sumac Suckering Dry soil; sun; persistent red fruits; felty stems;
orange to red fall color.
'Dissecta' Shredleaf S.S. Picturesque Dry soil; sun; red fruits; dissected leaves, orange
to red in fall.
Salix caprea Goat Willow or
French Pussy
Willow
Oval Wet or dry soil; sun; large silver catkins in early
spring.
Shepherdia argentea Buffaloberry Irregular Dry soil; sun; yellowish flowers; dioecious; edible
red fruits; silvery foliage.
Continued on the next page.
*Wisconsin native
Appendix A-19
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Tall Deciduous Shrubs (Cont.)
(5 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Staphylea trifolia American
Bladdernut
Upright Moist soil; shade; whitish flowers; green to brown,
bladder-like fruits; white-striped bark.
Syringa x chinensis Chinese Lilac Vase Dry, alkaline soil; purple-lilac flowers; fine texture.
Syringa x hyacinthiflora
cvs.
Hyacinth Lilacs Upright Sun; white, pink, lilac, purple flowers; early
blooming.
Syringa x prestoniae
cvs.
Preston Lilacs Rounded Sun; pink to purple flowers; late-blooming; coarse
textured.
Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac Tree-like Sun; white flowers in June; tan fruits; cherry-like
bark; often sold as S. amurensis japonica.
Syringa vulgaris cvs. Common Lilac Upright Well-drained soil; sun; white, pink, lilac, purple,
fragrant flowers; pest or disease problem may limit
use.
Tamarix ramosissima Tamarisk Irregular Dry soil; sun; tiny, pink flowers; very fine texture;
often sold as T. pentandra.
Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood
Viburnum
Vase Moist soil; shade; white flowers in June; blue fruits;
maroon fall color.
Viburnum lantana Wayfaringtree V. Upright Dry soil; shade; white flowers; red to black fruits;
late maroon fall color.
*Viburnum lentago Nannyberry V. Upright Moist or dry soil; sun or shade; white flowers; black
fruits; leggy; maroon fall color; pest or disease
problem.
*Viburnum prunifolium Blackhaw Viburnum Spreading Dry soil; shade; white flowers; black fruits; single or
multi-trunked; maroon fall color.
Viburnum sieboldii Siebold Vibernum Tree-like Rich soil; white flowers; red to black fruits; large,
coarse leaves.
*Vibernum trilobum American
Cranberrybush
Vibernum
Upright Moist soil; shade; lacy, white flowers; persistent,
edible fruits.
*Wisconsin native
Appendix A-20
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Medium Deciduous Shrubs
(3 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
Aronia arbutifolia Red Chokeberry Erect Wet soil; shade; tolerates poor drainage; white
flowers; red fruits; red fall color.
Cornus alba
'Argenteomarginata'
Creamedge
Dogwood
Mounded Moist soil; white flowers; white fruit; variegated
foliage.
*Corylus americana American Filbert or
Hazelnut
Rounded Dry soil; shade; catkins in March; orange fall color.
Cotoneaster
divaricatus
Spreading
Cotoneaster
Mounded Dry alkaline soil; red fruits; fine texture; late maroon
fall color; not fully hardy in zone indicated -- needs
a special site or ideal conditions.
Cotoneaster lucidus Hedge Cotoneaster Upright Dry soil; shade; black fruits; orange to maroon fall
color; good hedge plant; C. acutifolius is similar.
Euonymus alatus
'Compacta'
Dwarf Winged
Euonymus
Spreading Sun or shade; pink and orange fruits; red fall color.
Forsynthia x intermedia
cvs.
Border Forsythia Vase Sun; urban; large, pale to yellow flowers; flower
buds may be injured or killed at temperatures lower
than -14??F
Forsythia ovata Early Forsythia Mounded Sun; urban; smaller, earlier, yellow flowers; flower
buds may be injured or killed at temperatures lower
than -25??F.
Forsythia suspensa Weeping Forsythia Mounded Sun; urban; yellow flowers; slender, drooping twigs;
flower buds may be injured or killed at temperatures
lower than -15??F.
*Ilex verticillata Winterberry Upright Wet, acid soil; tolerates poor drainage; dioecious;
red fruits.
Ligustrum obtusifolium
regelianum
Regel's Border
Privet
Spreading Dry soil; shade; white flowers; blue-black fruits; late,
purple fall color.
Malus sargentii Sargent Crabapple Spreading Disease resistant; 5' mature height.
'Tina'
Myrica pensylvanica Bayberry Upright Dry soil; sun; gray, fragrant fruits; dioecious; semievergreen;
suckering.
Philadelphus x
virginalis 'Glacier'
Glacier Mockorange Rounded Sun; double, white, fragrant flowers.
Continued on the next page.
*Wisconsin native
Appendix A-21
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Medium Deciduous Shrubs
(3 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
Prunus x cistena Purple-leaved Sand
Cherry
Rounded Dry soil; sun; white flowers; purple foliage all
season.
Rhodotypos scandens Jetbead Spreading Dry soil; shade; white flowers; sparse red fruits; fine
texture.
Rosa hugonis Father Hugo Rose Vase Poor soil; sun; yellow flowers; sparse red fruits; fine
texture.
Rosa rugosa cvs. Rugosa Rose Rounded Dry soil; sun; white, yellow, pink, or red flowers;
large edible red fruits; fall color; wrinkled leaves;
tolerant of salt.
*Rosa setigera Prairie Rose Sprawlingmounded
Sun; pink flowers in July; red fruits; orange fall
color; can be used as a climber.
Spiraea prunifolia Bridalwreath Spirea Upright Sun; double, white flowers; orange to red fall color.
Spiraea thunbergii Thunberg Spirea Vase Sun; white flowers; yellow to orange fall color; finetextured.
Spiraea x vanhouttei Vanhoutte Spirea Vase Sun; white flowers; arching branches.
Syringa meyeri 'Palibin' Palibin Lilac Rounded Sun; purple flowers; dense; fine-textured; good
informal hedge plant often sold as S. palibiniana.
Viburnum carlesii Koreanspice
Viburnum
Rounded Shade; urban; pink to white, fragrant flowers; blueblack
fruits; red fall color.
*Viburnum cassinoides Witherod Viburnum Rounded Wet, acid soil; tolerates poor drainage; white
flowers; pink to red to blue fruits; red fall color.
Weigela florida Old-fashioned
Weigela
Spreading Well-drained soil; pink, funnel-shaped flowers.
Weigela x 'Vanicekii' Vanicek Weigela Spreading Well-drained soil; red flowers.
*Wisconsin native
Appendix A-22
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Low Deciduous Shrubs
(1 Landscaping Point)
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
Acanthopanax
sieboldianus
Fiveleaf Aralia Upright Dry soil; shade; urban; leaves palmately compound;
thorny.
*Amelanchier
stolonifera
Running
Serviceberry
Suckering Dry soil; shade; white flowers; edible fruits; orange
fall color.
*Aronia melanocarpa Black Chokeberry Suckering Wet soil; shade; white flowers; black fruits; red fall
color.
Berberis thunbergii Japanese Barberry Mounded Dry soil; shade; red fruits; orange fall color; thorns;
good hedge plant.
'Atropurpurea' Redleaf J.B. Sun; red summer foliage.
'Crimson Pygmy' Crimson Pygmy
J.B.
Low-mound Sun; red summer foliage; 2' tall.
Buxus microphylla
koreana
Korean Littleaf Box Rounded Shade; broadleaf evergreen; good hedge plant.
Chaenomeles japonica
alpina
Dwarf Japanese
Floweringquince
Spreading Dry soil; urban; orange flowers; yellow, edible fruits;
dense; 1' tall; flower buds may be injured or killed
during some winters.
Cotoneaster apiculatus Cranberry
Cotoneaster
Mounded Dry soil; red fruits; red fall color.
Deutzia x lemoinei
'Compacta'
Compact Lemoine
Deutzia
Rounded Well-drained soil; white flowers.
*Diervilla lonicera Dwarf
Bushhoneysuckle
Mounded Dry soil; shade; yellow flowers; good bank cover.
Forsythia viridissima
'Bronxensis'
Bronx Forsythia Low-mound Sun; small yellow flowers; fine texture; purple fall
color.
Hydrangea
arborescens
'Annabelle'
Annabelle
Hydrangea
Mounded Moist soil; shade; white, clustered flowers; dense;
blooms on new wood.
'Grandiflora' Snowhill Hydrangea Mounded Smaller flower clusters and less dense than above.
*Hypericum kalmianum Kalm's St.
Johnswort
Rounded Dry soil; sun; yellow flowers; shiny brown twigs.
Continued on next page.
*Wisconsin native
Appendix A-23
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Low Deciduous Shrubs (Cont.)
(1 Landscaping Point)
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
Lonicera x xylosteoides
'Clavey's Dwarf'
Clavey's Dwarf
Honeysuckle
Rounded Dense growth; good hedge or screening plant.
Lonicera xylosteum
'Nanum'
Emerald Mound
Honeysuckle
Mounded Lower growing than preceding; 2'-3'.
Mahonia aquifolium
'Mayhan'
Mayhan
Oregongrape
Suckering Shade; urban; yellow flowers; blue fruits; holly-like
evergreen foliage; not fully hardy in zone - need
special site or ideal conditions.
Philadelphus
coronarius 'Aureus'
Golden Mockorange Rounded Sun; white flowers; yellow summer foliage.
Philadelphus x
lemoinei 'Mont Blanc'
Mont Blanc
Mockorange
Mounded Sun; single; white, fragrant flowers; dense.
Physocarpus
opulifolius 'Nanus'
Dwarf Common
Ninebark
Rounded Dry soil; shade; creamy-white flowers; red capsular
fruits; shredded bark.
*Potentilla fruticosa
cvs.
Bush Cinquefoil Mounded Dry soil; sun; yellow and white flowers; blooms all
summer.
Prunus glandulosa
'Sinensis'
Pink Dwarf
Floweringalmond
Rounded Sun; light soil; double, pink flowers; no fruits;
narrow leaves.
Rhododendron x
kosteranum
Mollis Hybrid
Azaleas
Spreading Moist, acid soil; pink flowers; red fall color.
Rhododendron x 'PJM
Hybrid'
PJM Hybrid
Rhododendron
Rounded Moist, acid soil; shade; lavender flowers; evergreen
leaves turn purple in autumn.
*Rhus aromatica Fragrant Sumac Mounded Dry soil; sun; red fruits; fragrant foliage; turns
orange-maroon in fall.
'Gro-Low' Gro-low Fragrant
Sumac
Uniform 2 1/2' height; glossy leaves.
Ribes alpinum Alpine Currant Rounded Shade; urban; good hedge plant.
Rosa virginiana Virginia Rose Suckering Dry soil; pink flowers; red fruits; red stems; good
bank cover.
Salix repens argentea Silver Creeping
Willow
Spreading Moist soil; sun; silvery foliage.
Spiraea x arguta
'Compacta'
Compact Garland
Spirea
Mounded Sun; white flowers; fine texture.
Continued on next page.
*Wisconsin native
Appendix A-24
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Low Deciduous Shrubs (Cont.)
(1 Landscaping Point)
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
Spiraea x billiardii Billiard Spirea Upright Sun; pink flowers, in July and August.
Spiraea x bumalda
'Anthony Waterer'
AnthonyWaterer
Spirea
Rounded Dry soil; sun; raspberry red flowers; unattractive
fruits.
'Froebelii' Froebel Spirea Rounded Dry soil; sun; raspberry red flowers; orange to
maroon fall color.
Spiraea japonica alpina Daphne Spirea Low-mound Sun; pale pink flowers in July; 10" height.
Spiraea nipponica
'Snowmound'
Snowmound Spirea Mounded Sun; white flowers; blue-green foliage; possible
disease problem.
Symphoricarpos
rivularis
Snowberry Vase Dry soil; shade; tiny pink flowers; showy white fruits;
often sold as S. albus laevigatus.
Symphoricarpos
orbiculatus
Indiancurrant
Coralberry
Suckering Dry soil; shade; pink fruits; good bank cover.
Viburnum opulus
'Compactum'
Compact European
Cranberrybush V.
Rounded Shade; white flowers; persistent, red fruit; dense
habit.
Viburnum opulus
'Nanum'
Dwarf European
Cranberrybush V.
Globe Shade; no flowers or fruits; twiggy.
*Wisconsin native
Appendix A-25
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Tall to Medium Evergreen Shrubs
(5 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Height Form Adaptation and Remarks
Juniperus chinensis
'Ames' Ames Juniper
9' Broad
pyramid Sun; bluish green foliage.
'Blaauw' Blaauw Juniper 4' Upright-vase Sun; grayish blue foliage.
'Herzii' Herz Blue Juniper 15' Ascending-
Spreading
Sun; silvery blue foliage.
'Maney' Maney Juniper 6' Upright,
bushy
Sun; bluish green foliage.
'Old Gold' Old Gold Juniper 4' Spreading Sun; green with gold tips.
'Pfitzerana' Pfitzer Juniper 6' Widespreading
Sun; green foliage; no fruits.
'Pfitzerana Glauca' Blue Pfitzer J. 5' Spreading Sun; blue-gray foliage.
*Juniperus communis
depressa
Oldfield Common
Juniper
4' Spreading Dry soil; sun; light green; brownish in
winter.
Juniperus sabina 'Von
Ehren'
Von Ehren Savin
Juniper
4' Spreading Dry soil; sun; light green; brownish in
winter.
Juniperus squamata
'Meyeri'
Meyer Singleseed
Juniper
5' Picturesque Sun; blue foliage.
Picea glaucaRF 'Conica' Dwarf Alberta
Spruce
7' Pyramidal Shelter from winter sun; light green
foliage.
Pinus mugo Mugo Pine 4' Mounded Dry soil; sun; green foliage.
Taxus cuspidata
'Expansa'
Spreading
Japanese Yew
6' Spreading Shade; urban; dark green foliage;
needs ideal conditions.
'Nana' Dwarf Japanese
Yew
4' Mounded Shade; urban very dark green foliage;
needs ideal conditions.
Taxus x hunnewelliana Hunnewell Yew 6' Spreading Shade; green.
Taxus x media cvs. Anglojapanese Yew 1-10' Round or
upright
Shade; very dark green; needs ideal
conditions.
Thuja occidentalisRF
'Robusta'
Ware American
Arborvitae
8' Broad
Pyramid
Wet soil; half-shade; dark green
foliage. Often sold as T.o. 'Wareana'.
'Woodwardii' Woodward Globe
American Arborvitae
6' Globe Wet soil; half-shade; bright green.
*Wisconsin native
Appendix A-26
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Low Evergreen Shrubs
(3 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Height Form Adaptation and Remarks
Juniperus chinensis
procumbens
Japanese Garden
Juniper
2' Creeping Sun; blue-green, year-round foliage.
Juniperus chinensis
sargentii
Sargent Juniper 1' Creeping Sun; green; or blue-green in cv.
'Glauca'
*Juniperus horizontalis Creeping Juniper 1' Creeping Dry soil; sun; variable color-brown in
winter.
'Bar Harbor' Bar Harbor Juniper 8" Creeping Dry soil; sun; bluish green foliage; slaty
in winter.
'Douglasii' Waukegan Juniper 18" Creeping Dry soil; sun; steel blue; purplish in
winter.
'Plumosa' Andorra Juniper 18" Radialcreeping
Dry soil; sun; gray-green; purplish in
winter.
'Prince of Wales' Prince of Wales
Juniper
4-6" Prostrate Dry soil; sun; bright green; bronzed in
winter.
'Wiltonii' Blue Rug Juniper 4-6" Flat-trailing Dry soil; sun; silvery blue.
'Youngstown' Youngstown Juniper 18" Radialcreeping
Dry soil; sun; gray-green; purplish in
winter.
Juniperus sabina
'Arcadia'
Arcadia Savin
Juniper
18" Lowspreading
Sun; green.
'Broadmoor' Broadmoor Savin
Juniper
2' Mounded Sun; soft grayish green; fine textured.
'Skandia' Skandia Savin
Juniper
12" Lowspreading
Sun; grayish blue.
'Tamariscifolia' Tamarix Savin
Juniper
2' Dense,
spreading
Sun; bluish green; pest or disease
problem.
*Wisconsin native
Appendix A-27
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA ZONING ORDINANCE COD. MAY 1, 1997 RECOD. MAY 2010 RECOD. OCT 2016
DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES -- Non-Contributing Species (0 Points)
Botanical Name Common Name Height Height Adaptation and Remarks
Acer negundo Boxelder Weed tree.
Buckthorn Invasive
Crown Vetch Invasive ground cover; aggressive.
*Crataegus crus-galli Cockspur Hawthorn S Spreading Urban; sun; persistent, brick red fruits;
orange to red fall color; evil thorns.
*Gleditsia triacanthosRF Common
Honeylocust
F Vase Urban; tolerates poor drainage; salt
tolerant; dioecious, females produce
pods; fine-textured foliage; wicked
thorns; yellow fall color; pest or
disease problems may limit use.
Lonicera x bella Belle Honeysuckle Dry soil, white flowers; red fruits; may
become weedy, pest problem.
Lonicera tatarica Tatarian
Honeysuckle
Dry soil; urban, pink to white flowers;
dense, red fruits; may become
weedy, pest or disease problem.
Lonicera morrowi Morrow
Honeysuckle
Urban, dense, white flowers, pest and
disease problem, weedy.
Purple Loosestrife Perennial, common marsh plant, may
choke out native plants.
Rhamnus cathartica Common Buckthorn Becomes weak.
Rhamnus frangula Glossy Buckthorn Becomes weak.
*Wisconsin native
RF refers to reforestation. Marked species are native to Wisconsin, and recommended for
reforestation efforts by the Wisconsin DNR. (See Section 17.609.)
The following sources were used in compiling the preceding lists of plant species:
Department of Natural Resources. Forest Trees of Wisconsin: How to Know Them. Madison,
Wisconsin: Department of Natural Resources, 1987.
Hasselkus, E.R. A Guide to Selecting Landscape Plants for Wisconsin. Madison, Wisconsin:
College of Agricultural and Life Sciences University of Wisconsin - Extension, Cooperative
Extension Programs, 1982.
Hightshoe, Gary L. Native Trees, Shrubs, and Vines for Urban and Rural America: A Planting
Design Manual for Environmental Designers. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1988.
Iowa State University. Landscape Plants for Iowa. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University
Cooperative Extension Service,May1984
Appendix A-28
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA REQUIREMENTS CHECKLIST FOR:
LANDSCAPING FOR BUILDING FOUNDATIONS (Requirements per Section 98-604)
This form should be used by the Applicant as a guide to calculate the minimum required landscaping.
PLANT TYPES
(See Table 98-611 and
Plant Classification Appendix)
LANDSCAPE POINT CALCULATIONS PER THE BUILDING FOUNDATIONS REQUIREMENTS
Example: Bldg
Side = 150 ft (PB
dist.)
Building Side
#1: = ____ feet
Building Side
#2: = ____ feet
Building Side
#3: = ___ feet
Building Side
#4: = ____ feet
Calculation of Landscape
Points Required per Side
in Specific Zoning District
Calculation Formula: (_____ feet of building side ?? 100 linear feet building foundation) x ____
points per 100 linear feet building foundation in the _______ zoning district = _______ Total
Points per Side
(See Table 98-604 for required number of points per zoning district)
Total Points Required
for Each Building Side
40 pts per 100 ft in
PB = 60 pts
________ points ________ points ________ points ________ points
1: Plant Type Pfitzer Juniper
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 2 plants @ 5 pts
Total Points 10 points
2: Plant Type Crabapple
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 3 trees @ 10 pts
Total Points + 30 points
3: Plant Type Chinese Lilac
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 4 shrubs @ 5 pts
Total Points + 20 points
4: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
5: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
6: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
7: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
8: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
TOTAL POINTS PROVIDED = 60 points
TOTAL POINTS REQUIRED 60 points
Appendix A-29
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA REQUIREMENTS CHECKLIST FOR:
LANDSCAPING FOR DEVELOPED LOTS (Requirements per Section 98-605)
This form should be used by the Applicant as a guide to calculate the minimum required landscaping.
PLANT TYPES
(See Table 98-611 and
Plant Classification Appendix)
LANDSCAPE POINT CALCULATIONS PER THE DEVELOPED LOTS REQUIREMENTS
Example: Floor Area
= 5,000 sf (PB dist)
Floor Area =
____ square feet
Floor Area =
____ square
Floor Area =
___ square feet
Floor Area = ___
square feet
Calculation of Landscape
Points Required per Lot Area
in Specific Zoning District
Calculation Formula: (_____ square feet of lot area ?? 1,000 square feet of floor area) x _____ points
per 1,000 square feet of floor area in the ______ zoning district = ______ Total Points per Lot
(See Table 98-605 for required number of points per zoning district)
Total Points Required
for Each Lot Area
10 pts per 1,000 sf in
PB = 50 pts
________ points ________ points ________ points ________ points
1: Plant Type Pfitzer Juniper
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 3 plants @ 5 pts
Total Points 15 points
2: Plant Type River Birch
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 1 tree @ 15 pts
Total Points + 15 points
3: Plant Type Chinese Lilac
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 4 shrubs @ 5 pts
Total Points + 20 points
4: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
5: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
6: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
7: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
8: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
TOTAL POINTS PROVIDED = 50 points
TOTAL POINTS REQUIRED 50 points
Appendix A-30
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA REQUIREMENTS CHECKLIST FOR:
LANDSCAPING FOR STREET FRONTAGES (Requirements per Section 98-606)
This form should be used by the Applicant as a guide to calculate the minimum required landscaping.
PLANT TYPES
(See Table 98-611 and
Plant Classification Appendix)
LANDSCAPE POINT CALCULATIONS PER THE STREET FRONTAGES REQUIREMENTS
Example: Frontage
= 150 ft (PB dist.)
Frontage #1: =
_________ feet
Frontage #2: =
_________ feet
Frontage #3: =
________ feet
Frontage #4: =
________ feet
Calculation of Landscape
Points Required per Frontage
in Specific Zoning District
Calculation Formula: (_____ feet of street frontage ?? 100 linear feet street frontage) x _____ points per
100 linear feet street frontage in the ______ zoning district = ______ Total Points per Frontage
(See Table 98-606 for required number of points per zoning district)
Total Points Required
for Each Street Frontage
40 pts per 100 ft in
PB = 60 pts
________ points ________ points ________ points ________ points
1: Plant Type Black Maple
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 1 tree @ 30 pts
Total Points 30 points
2: Plant Type Amur Maple
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 1 tree @ 20 pts
Total Points + 20 points
3: Plant Type Chinese Lilac
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 2 shrubs @ 5 pts
Total Points + 10 points
4: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
5: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
6: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
7: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
8: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
TOTAL POINTS PROVIDED = 60 points
TOTAL POINTS REQUIRED 60 points
Appendix A-31
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA REQUIREMENTS CHECKLIST FOR:
LANDSCAPING FOR PAVED AREAS (Requirements per Section 98-607)
This form should be used by the Applicant as a guide to calculate the minimum required landscaping.
PLANT TYPES
(See Table 98-611 and
Plant Classification Appendix)
LANDSCAPE POINT CALCULATIONS PER THE PAVED AREAS REQUIREMENTS
Example: Paved Area =
15,000 sf (PB dist)
Paved Area =
___ square feet
Paved Area =
___ square feet
Paved Area =
___ square feet
Paved Area =
___ square feet
Calculation of Landscape
Points Required Paved Area
in Specific Zoning District
Calculation Formula: (_____ square feet of paved area ?? 10,000 square feet of paved area) x _____
points per 1,000 square feet of paved area in the ______ zoning district = ______ Total Points per
Paved Area (See Table 98-607 for required number of points per zoning district)
Total Points Required
for Each Paved Area
80 pts per 10,000 sf in
PB = 120 pts
________
points
________ points ________ points ________ points
1: Plant Type Pfitzer Juniper
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 5 plants @ 5 pts
Total Points 25 points
2: Plant Type Japanese Yew
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 2 shrubs @ 5 pts
Total Points + 10 points
3: Plant Type Chinese Lilac
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 5 shrubs @ 5 pts
Total Points + 25 points
4: Plant Type Red Maple
# of Plants @ Points per Plant 2 trees @ 30 pts
Total Points + 60 points
5: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
6: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
7: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
8: Plant Type
# of Plants @ Points per Plant
Total Points
TOTAL POINTS PROVIDED = 120 points
TOTAL POINTS REQUIRED 120 points
Appendix A-32
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA PROCEDURAL CHECKLIST FOR:
AMENDMENT OF ZONING REGULATIONS (Requirements per Section 98-902)
This form should be used by the Applicant as a guide to submitting a complete application to amend the
Zoning Ordinance text and by the City to process said application. Parts II and III should be used by the
Applicant to submit a complete application; Parts I - IV should be used by the City as a guide when processing
said application.
I.RECORDATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
____ Pre-submittal staff meeting scheduled:
Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
Follow-up pre-submittal staff meetings scheduled for:
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application form filed with Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application fee of $ ____ received by Zoning Administrator: Date: _________by: _____
____ Reimbursement of professional consultant costs agreement executed:Date: ________ by: _____
II.APPLICATION SUBMITTAL PACKET REQUIREMENTS
Prior to submitting the 25 final complete applications as certified by the Zoning Administrator, the Applicant
shall submit 5 initial draft application packets for staff review, followed by one revised draft final application
packet based upon staff review and comments.
Initial Packet (5 Copies to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
?? Draft Final Packet (1 Copy to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
??
____ ____ (a) A copy of the provisions of the current Zoning Ordinance which are to be amended:
____With said provisions clearly indicated in a manner which is clearly reproducible
with a photocopier.
____ ____ (b) A copy of the text which is proposed to replace the current text.
____ ____ (c) Written justification for the proposed text amendment:
____Indicating reasons why the Applicant believes the proposed text amendment is in
harmony with the recommendations of the City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive
Master Plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards set out
in Section 98-902(4)(c)1.-5. (See following page.)
Appendix A-33
III.JUSTIFICATION OF THE PROPOSED ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENT
1. How does the proposed Official Zoning Ordinance amendment further the purposes of the Zoning
Ordinance as outlined in Section 98-005?
2. How does the proposed text amendment further the purposes of the general Article in which the
amendment is proposed to be located?
3. How does the proposed text amendment further the purposes of the specific Section in which the
amendment is proposed to be located?
4. Which of the following has arisen that are not properly addressed in the current zoning text?
a. The provisions of the Zoning Ordinance should be brought into conformity with the
Comprehensive Plan. (If a factor related to the proposed amendment, note pertinent portions
of the Comprehensive Plan.);
b. A change has occurred in the land market, or other factors have arisen which require a new form
of development, a new type of land use, or a new procedure to meet said change(s);
c. New methods of development or providing infrastructure make it necessary to alter the Zoning
Ordinance to meet these new factors;
d. Changing governmental finances require amending the Zoning Ordinance in order to meet the
needs of the government in terms of providing and affording public services.
5. If the proposed text amendment is concerned with the provisions of Articles II and/or III: how does the
proposed amendment maintain the desired overall consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and
land use impacts within the pertinent zoning districts?
IV.FINAL APPLICATION PACKET INFORMATION
____ Receipt of Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator: Date: _________ by: _____
____ Receipt of 25 Copies of Final Application by Zoning Administrator: Date: _________ by: _____
____ Certification of complete Final Application Packet and
required copies to Zoning Administrator by City Clerk: Date: _________ by: _____
____ Class 2 Legal Notice sent to official newspaper by City Clerk: Date: _________ by: _____
____ Class 2 Legal Notice published on _______________ and _______________ by: _____
Appendix A-34
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA PROCEDURAL CHECKLIST FOR:
AMENDMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP (Requirements per Section 98-903)
This form should be used by the Applicant as a guide to submitting a complete application to amend the
Official Zoning Map and by the City to process said application. Parts II and III should be used by the
Applicant to submit a complete application; Parts I - IV should be used by the City as a guide when processing
said application.
I.RECORDATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
____ Pre-submittal staff meeting scheduled:
Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
Follow-up pre-submittal staff meetings scheduled for:
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application form filed with Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application fee of $ ____ received by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Reimbursement of professional consultant costs agreement executed:Date: ________ by: _____
II.APPLICATION SUBMITTAL PACKET REQUIREMENTS
Prior to submitting the 25 final complete applications as certified by the Zoning Administrator, the Applicant
shall submit 5 initial draft application packets for staff review, followed by one revised draft final application
packet based upon staff review and comments.
Initial Packet (5 Copies to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
?? Draft Final Packet (1 Copy to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
??
____ ____ (a) A copy of the Current Zoning Map of the subject property and vicinity:
____Showing all lands for which the zoning is proposed to be amended;
____Showing all other lands within 300 feet of the subject property;
____Referenced to a list of the names and addresses of the owners of said lands;
____Map and all its parts are clearly reproducible with a photocopier;
____Map size of 11" by 17" and map scale not less than one inch equals 800 ft:
____All lot dimensions of the subject property provided;
____Graphic scale and north arrow provided.
____ ____ (b) A copy of the Land Use Plan Map of the subject property and vicinity:
____ ____ (c) Written justification for the proposed map amendment:
____Indicating reasons why the Applicant believes the proposed map amendment is in
harmony with the recommendations of the City of Lake Geneva Master
Comprehensive Plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the
standards set out in Section 98-903(4)(c)1.-3. (See following page.)
Appendix A-35
III.JUSTIFICATION OF THE PROPOSED ZONING MAP AMENDMENT
1. How does the proposed Official Zoning Map amendment further the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance as
outlined in Section 98-005 (and, for floodplains or wetlands, the applicable rules and regulations of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA))?
2. Which of the following factors has arisen that are not properly addressed on the current Official Zoning
Map? (Please provide explanation in space below.)
a. The designations of the Official Zoning Map should be brought into conformity with the
Comprehensive Plan;
b. A mistake was made in mapping on the Official Zoning Map. (That is, an area is developing in a
manner and purpose different from that for which it is mapped.) NOTE: If this reason is cited, it
must be demonstrated that the discussed inconsistency between actual land use and
designated zoning is not intended, as the City may intend to stop an undesirable land use
pattern from spreading;
c. Factors have changed, (such as the availability of new data, the presence of new roads or other
infrastructure, additional development, annexation, or other zoning changes), making the
subject property more appropriate for a different zoning district;
d. Growth patterns or rates have changed, thereby creating the need for an Amendment to the
Official Zoning Map.
3. How does the proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map maintain the desired consistency of land
uses, land use intensities, and land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject property?
IV.FINAL APPLICATION PACKET INFORMATION
____ Receipt of 5 full scale copies in blueline or blackline
of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator: Date: _________ by: _____
____ Receipt of 25 reduced (8.5" by 11" text and 11" x 17" graphics)
copies of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator:Date: _________ by: _____
____ Certification of complete Final Application Packet and
required copies to the Zoning Administrator by City Clerk: Date: _________ by: _____
____ Class 2 Legal Notice sent to official newspaper by City Clerk: Date: _________ by: _____
____ Class 2 Legal Notice published on _______________ and _______________ by: _____
Appendix A-36
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA PROCEDURAL CHECKLIST FOR:
CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW AND APPROVAL (Requirements per Section 98-905)
This form should be used by the Applicant as a guide to submitting a complete application for a conditional
use and by the City to process said application. Parts II and III should be used by the Applicant to submit a
complete application; Parts I - IV should be used by the City as a guide when processing said application.
I.RECORDATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
____ Pre-submittal staff meeting scheduled:
Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
Follow-up pre-submittal staff meetings scheduled for:
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application form filed with Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application fee of $ ____ received by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Reimbursement of professional consultant costs agreement executed:Date: ________ by: _____
II.APPLICATION SUBMITTAL PACKET REQUIREMENTS
Prior to submitting the 25 final complete applications as certified by the Zoning Administrator, the Applicant
shall submit 5 initial draft application packets for staff review, followed by one revised draft final application
packet based upon staff review and comments.
Initial Packet (5 Copies to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
?? Draft Final Packet (1 Copy to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
??
____ ____ (a)A map of the proposed conditional use:
____Showing all lands for which the conditional use is proposed;
____Showing all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property;
____Referenced to a list of the names and addresses of the owners of said lands as
they appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds of Walworth
County (as provided by the City of Lake Geneva);
____Clearly indicating the current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and
the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control;
____Map and all its parts are clearly reproducible with a photocopier;
____Map size of 11" by 17" and map scale not less than one inch equals 800 ft:
____All lot dimensions of the subject property provided;
____Graphic scale and north arrow provided.
____ ____ (b) A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location of the subject
property in relation to the City as a whole:
____ ____ (c)A written description of the proposed conditional use describing the type of activities,
buildings, and structures proposed for the subject property and their general
Appendix A-37
locations (see Site Plan Review checklist);
____ ____ (d) A site plan (conforming to the requirements of Section 98-908(3)) of the subject
property as proposed for development OR if the proposed conditional use is a
group development (per Section 98-208) a proposed preliminary plat or
conceptual plat may be substituted for the required site plan, provided said plat
contains all information required on said site plan per Section 98-908.
____ ____ (e) Written justification for the proposed conditional use:
____Indicating reasons why the Applicant believes the proposed conditional use is
appropriate with the recommendations of the City of Lake Geneva
Comprehensive Master Plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the
standards set out in Section 98-905(4)(b)1.-6. (See below)
III.JUSTIFICATION OF THE PROPOSED CONDITIONAL USE
1. How is the proposed conditional use (the use in general, independent of its location) in harmony with the
purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive Plan,
the Zoning Ordinance, and any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted, or under consideration
pursuant to official notice by the City?
2. How is the proposed conditional use, in its specific location, in harmony with the purposed, goals,
objectives, policies and standards of the City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning
Ordinance, and any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted, or under consideration pursuant to
official notice by the City?
3. Does the proposed conditional use, in its proposed location and as depicted on the required site plan (see
Section 98-905(3)(d)), result in any substantial or undue adverse impact on nearby property, the
character of the neighborhood, environmental factors, traffic factors, parking, public improvements,
public property or rights-of-way, or other matters affecting the public health, safety, or general welfare,
either as they now exist or as they may in the future be developed as a result of the implementation of
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, or any other plan, program, map
ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official notice by the City or other governmental
agency having jurisdiction to guide development?
4. How does the proposed conditional use maintain the desired consistency of land uses, land use
intensities, and land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject property?
5. Is the proposed conditional use located in an area that will be adequately served by, and will not impose
an undue burden on, any of the improvements, facilities, utilities or services provided by public
Appendix A-38
agencies serving the subject property?
6. Do the potential public benefits of the proposed conditional use outweigh all potential adverse impacts of
the proposed conditional use (as identified in Subsections 98-905(4)(b)1.-5.), after taking into
consideration the Applicant's proposal and any requirements recommended by the Applicant to
ameliorate such impacts?
IV.FINAL APPLICATION PACKET INFORMATION
____ Receipt of 5 full scale copies in blueline or blackline
of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Receipt of 25 reduced (8.5" by 11" text and 11" x 17" graphics)
copies of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator:Date: ________ by: _____
____ Certification of complete Final Application Packet and
required copies to the Zoning Administrator by City Clerk: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Class 2 Legal Notice sent to official newspaper by City Clerk: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Class 2 Legal Notice published on _______________ and _______________ by: _____
____ Conditional Use recorded with the County Register of Deeds Office: Date: ________ by: _____
Appendix A-39
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA PROCEDURAL CHECKLIST FOR:
TEMPORARY USE REVIEW AND APPROVAL (Requirements per Section 98-906)
This form should be used by the Applicant as a guide to submitting a complete application for a temporary use
and by the City to process said application. Part II should be used by the Applicant to submit a complete
application; Parts I - III should be used by the City as a guide when processing said application.
I.RECORDATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
____ Pre-submittal staff meeting scheduled, as needed:
Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
Follow-up pre-submittal staff meeting scheduled, as needed:
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application form filed with Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application fee of $ ____ received by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Reimbursement of professional consultant costs agreement executed:Date: ________ by: _____
II.APPLICATION SUBMITTAL PACKET REQUIREMENTS
The Applicant shall submit an application packet for staff review which includes the following information:
Application Packet (1 Copy to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
??
____ (a) A map of the subject property:
____Showing all lands for which the temporary use is proposed;
____Showing all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property;
____Indicating current zoning of the subject property and environs, and the jurisdiction(s)
which maintains that control;
____Map and all its parts are clearly reproducible with a photocopier;
____Map scale not less than one inch equals 800 feet;
____All lot dimensions of the subject property provided;
____Graphic scale and north arrow provided.
____ (b) A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location of the subject property
in relation to the City as a whole;
____ (c) A written description of the proposed temporary use:
____Describing the type of activities, buildings and structures proposed for the subject property
and their general locations;
____ (d) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development conforming to all
requirements of Section 98-908(3). (See "Site Plan Approval" checklist)
III.FINAL APPLICATION PACKET INFORMATION
____ Certification of complete Application by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
Appendix A-40
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA PROCEDURAL CHECKLIST FOR:
SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL (Requirements per Section 98-908)
This form should be used by the Applicant as a guide to submitting a complete application for a site plan
review and by the City to process said application. Part II should be used by the Applicant to submit a
complete application; Parts I - III should be used by the City as a guide when processing said application.
I.RECORDATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
____ Pre-submittal staff meeting scheduled:
Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
Follow-up pre-submittal staff meetings scheduled for:
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application form filed with Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application fee of $ ____ received by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Reimbursement of professional consultant costs agreement executed:Date: ________ by: _____
II.APPLICATION SUBMITTAL PACKET REQUIREMENTS
Prior to submitting the 25 final complete applications as certified by the Zoning Administrator, the Applicant
shall submit 5 initial draft application packets for staff review, followed by one revised draft final application
packet based upon staff review and comments.
Initial Packet (5 Copies to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
?? Draft Final Packet (1 Copy to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
??
____ ____ (a) A written description of the intended use describing in reasonable detail the:
____Existing zoning district(s) (and proposed zoning district(s) if different);
____Land use plan map designation(s);
____Current land uses present on the subject property;
____Proposed land uses for the subject property (per Section 98-206);
____Projected number of residents, employees, and daily customers;
____Proposed amount of dwelling units, floor area, impervious surface area, and
landscape surface area, and resulting site density, floor area ratio, impervious
surface area ratio, and landscape surface area ratio;
____Operational considerations relating to hours of operation, projected normal and
peak water usage, sanitary sewer or septic loadings, and traffic generation;
Appendix A-41
____Operational considerations relating to potential nuisance creation pertaining to
noncompliance with the performance standards addressed in Article VII
(Sections 98-701-98-721) including: street access, traffic visibility, parking,
loading, exterior storage, exterior lighting, vibration, noise, air pollution, odor,
electromagnetic radiation, glare and heat, fire and explosion, toxic or noxious
materials, waste materials, drainage, and hazardous materials;
____If no nuisances will be created (as indicated by complete and continuous
compliance with the provisions of Article VII), then include the statement "The
proposed development shall comply with all requirements of Article VII.";
____Exterior building and fencing materials (Sections 98-718 and 98-720);
____Possible future expansion and related implications for points above;
____Any other information pertinent to adequate understanding by the Plan
Commission of the intended use and its relation to nearby properties.
____ ____ (b) A Small Location Map at 11" x 17" showing the subject property, all properties within 300
feet, and illustrating its relationship to the nearest street intersection. (A photocopy of
the pertinent section of the City's Official Zoning Map with the subject property clearly
indicated shall suffice to meet this requirement.)
____ ____ (c) A Property Site Plan drawing which includes:
____A title block which indicates the name, address and phone/fax number(s) of the
current property owner and/or agent(s) (developer, architect, engineer, planner)
for project;
____The date of the original plan and the latest date of revision to the plan;
____A north arrow and a graphic scale (not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet);
____A reduction of the drawing at 11" x 17";
____A legal description of the subject property;
____All property lines and existing and proposed right-of-way lines with bearings and
dimensions clearly labeled;
____All existing and proposed easement lines and dimensions with a key provided and
explained on the margins of the plan as to ownership and purpose;
____All required building setback lines;
____All existing and proposed buildings, structures, and paved areas, including
building entrances, walks, drives, decks, patios, fences, utility poles, drainage
facilities, and walls;
____The location and dimension (cross-section and entry throat) of all access points
onto public streets;
____The location and dimension of all on-site parking (and off-site parking provisions if
they are to be employed), including a summary of the number of parking stalls
provided versus required by the Ordinance;
____The location and dimension of all loading and service areas on the subject
property and labels indicating the dimension of such areas;
____The location of all outdoor storage areas and the design of all screening devices;
____The location, type, height, size and lighting of all signage on the subject property;
____The location, height, design/type, illumination power and orientation of all exterior
lighting on the subject property -- including the clear demonstration of
compliance with Section 98-707;
____The location and type of any permanently protected green space areas;
____The location of existing and proposed drainage facilities;
____In the legend, data for the subject property on:
____Lot Area;
____Floor Area;
____Floor Area Ratio (b/a);
____Impervious Surface Area;
____Impervious Surface Ratio (d/a);
____Building Height.
Appendix A-42
____ ____ (d) A Detailed Landscaping Plan of the subject property:
____Scale same as main plan (> or equal to 1" equals 100')
____Map reduction at 11" x 17"
____Showing the location of all required bufferyard and landscaping areas
____Showing existing and proposed Landscape Point fencing
____Showing berm options for meeting said requirements
____Demonstrating complete compliance with the requirements of Article VI
____Providing individual plant locations and species, fencing types and heights, and
berm heights;
____ ____ (e) A Grading and Erosion Control Plan:
____Same scale as the main plan (> or equal to 1" equals 100')
____Map reduction at 11" x 17")
____Showing existing and proposed grades including retention walls and related
devices, and erosion control measures.
____ ____ (f) Elevation Drawings of proposed buildings or remodeling of existing buildings:
____Showing finished exterior treatment;
____With adequate labels provided to clearly depict exterior materials, texture, color
and overall appearance;
____Perspective renderings of the proposed project and/or photos of similar structures
may be submitted, but not in lieu of adequate drawings showing the actual
intended appearance of the buildings.
NOTE: Initiation of Land Use or Development Activity: Absolutely no land use or development activity,
including site clearing, grubbing, or grading shall occur on the subject property prior to the
approval of the required site plan. Any such activity prior to such approval shall be a violation
of law and shall be subject to all applicable enforcement mechanisms and penalties.
NOTE: Modification of an Approved Site Plan: Any and all variation between development and/or land
use activity on the subject property and the approved site plan is a violation of law. An
approved site plan shall be revised and approved via the procedures of Subsections 98-908(2)
and (4) so as to clearly and completely depict any and all proposed modifications to the
previously approved site plan, prior to the initiation of said modifications.
III.FINAL APPLICATION PACKET INFORMATION
____ Receipt of 5 full scale copies in blueline or blackline
of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Receipt of 25 reduced (8.5" by 11" text and 11" x 17" graphics)
copies of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator:Date: ________ by: _____
Appendix A-43
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA PROCEDURAL CHECKLIST FOR:
VARIANCE REVIEW AND APPROVAL (Requirements per Section 98-910)
This form should be used by the Applicant as a guide to submitting a complete application for a variance and
by the City to process said application. Parts II and III should be used by the Applicant to submit a complete
application; Parts I - IV should be used by the City as a guide when processing said application.
I.RECORDATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
____ Pre-submittal staff meeting scheduled:
Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
Follow-up pre-submittal staff meetings scheduled for:
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application form filed with Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application fee of $ ____ received by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Reimbursement of professional consultant costs agreement executed:Date: ________ by: _____
II.APPLICATION SUBMITTAL PACKET REQUIREMENTS
Prior to submitting the 25 final complete applications as certified by the Zoning Administrator, the Applicant
shall submit 5 initial draft application packets for staff review, followed by one revised draft final application
packet based upon staff review and comments.
Initial Packet (5 Copies to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
?? Draft Final Packet (1 Copy to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
??
____ ____ (a) A map of the subject property:
____Showing all lands for which the variance is proposed;
____Showing all other lands within 300 feet of the subject property;
____Referencing a list of names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map
as the same appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds of
Walworth County (as determined by the City of Lake Geneva).
____Indicating current zoning of the subject property and environs, and the
jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control;
____Map and all its parts are clearly reproducible with a photocopier;
____Map scale not less than one inch equals 800 feet;
____All lot dimensions of the subject property provided;
____Graphic scale and north arrow provided.
____ ____ (b) A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location of the subject
property in relation to the City as a whole;
Appendix A-44
____ ____ (c) A written description of the proposed variance describing the type of specific
requirements of the variance proposed for the subject property;
____ ____ (d) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development conforming to all
requirements of Section 98-908(3). (See "Site Plan Approval checklist")
____ ____ (e) Written justification for the requested variance consisting of the reasons why the
Applicant believes the proposed variance is appropriate, particularly as
evidenced by compliance with the standards set out Section 98-910(4)(c)1.-6.
(See below)
III.JUSTIFICATION OF THE PROPOSED VARIANCE
1. What exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or special factors are present which apply only to the
subject property? The response to this question shall clearly indicate how the subject property
contains factors which are not present on other properties in the same zoning district.
a. .Describe the hardship or difficulty that is peculiar to the subject property and different from that of
other properties, and not one which affects all properties similarly. Such a hardship or difficulty
shall have arisen because of the unusual shape of the original acreage parcel; unusual
topography or elevation; or because the property was created before the passage of the
current, applicable zoning regulations, and is not economically suitable for a permitted use or
will not accommodate a structure of reasonable design for a permitted use if all area, yard,
green space, and setback requirements are observed;
NOTE: *Loss of profit or pecuniary hardship shall not, in and of itself, be grounds for a variance;
*Self-imposed hardship shall not be grounds for a variance. Reductions resulting from the sale
of portions of a property reducing the remainder of said property below buildable size or
cutting-off existing access to a public right-of-way or deed restrictions imposed by the
owner's predecessor in title are considered to be such self-imposed hardships;
*Violations by, or variances granted to, neighboring properties shall not justify a variance;
*The alleged hardship shall not be one that would have existed in the absence of a zoning
ordinance. (For example, if a lot were unbuildable because of topography in the
absence of any or all setback requirements.)
2. In what manner do the factors identified in 1., above, prohibit the development of the subject property
in a manner similar to that of other properties under the same zoning district? The response to this
question shall clearly indicate how the requested variance is essential to make the subject property
developable so that property rights enjoyed by the owners of similar properties can be enjoyed by the
owners of the subject property.
3. Would the granting of the proposed variance be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties? The
response to this question shall clearly indicate how the proposed variance will have no substantial
impact on adjacent properties.
Appendix A-45
4. Would the granting of the proposed variance as depicted on the required site plan (see (d), above),
result in a substantial or undue adverse impact on the character of the neighborhood, environmental
factors, traffic factors, parking, public improvements, public property or rights-of-way, or other matters
affecting the public health, safety, or general welfare, either as they now exist or as they may in the
future be developed as a result of the implementation of the intent, provisions, and policies of the
Zoning Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, or any other plan, program, map, or ordinance adopted
or under consideration pursuant to official notice by the City or other governmental agency having
jurisdiction to guide growth and development? The response to this question shall clearly indicate how
the proposed variance will have no substantial impact on such long-range planning matters.
5. Have the factors which present the reason for the proposed variance been created by the act of the
Application or previous property owner or their agent (for example: previous development decisions
such as building placement, floor plan, or orientation, lotting pattern, or grading) after the effective date
of the Zoning Ordinance (see Section 98-011.) The response to this question shall clearly indicate that
such factors existed prior to the effective date of the Ordinance and were not created by action of the
Applicant, a previous property owner, or their agent.
6. Does the proposed variance involve the regulations of Section 98-203 (Table of Land Uses)? The
response to this question shall clearly indicate that the requested variance does not involve the
provisions of this Section.
IV.FINAL APPLICATION PACKET INFORMATION
____ Receipt of Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Receipt of 25 Copies of Final Applications by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Certification of complete Final Application Packet and
required copies to the Zoning Administrator by City Clerk: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Class 2 Legal Notice sent to official newspaper by City Clerk: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Class 2 Legal Notice published on _______________ and _______________ by: _____
Appendix A-46
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA PROCEDURAL CHECKLIST FOR:
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND APPROVAL (Per Section 98-914)
This form should be used by the Applicant as a guide to submitting a complete application for a planned
development and by the City to process said application. Parts II, III, V, and VII should be used by the
Applicant to submit a complete application; Parts I - VIII should be used by the City as a guide when
processing said application.
I.RECORDATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
____ Pre-submittal staff meeting scheduled:
Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
Follow-up pre-submittal staff meetings scheduled for:
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: __________ Time of Meeting: __________ Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application form filed with Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Application fee of $ ____ received by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Reimbursement of professional consultant costs agreement executed:Date: ________ by: _____
II.APPLICATION SUBMITTAL PACKET REQUIREMENTS
PD PROCESS STEP 1: PRE-APPLICATION
Step 1 does not require the submittal of an application packet; however, Steps 2-4 do require submittal of all
draft and final application packets to the Zoning Administrator prior to Plan Commission review.
____ A. Contact the Zoning Administrator to place an informal discussion item for the PD on
the Plan Commission agenda. No details beyond the name of the Applicant and the
identification of the discussion item as a PD is required to be given in the agenda.
____ B. Engage in an informal discussion with the Plan Commission regarding the
potential PD. Appropriate topics may include: location, project themes and images,
general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses being considered, approximate
residential densities, and non-residential intensities, general treatment of natural
features, general relationship to nearby properties and public streets, and relationship
to the Comprehensive Plan.
NOTE: Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of the process shall in no
way be binding upon the Applicant or the City, but should be considered as the
informal, non-binding basis for proceeding to the next step.
Appendix A-47
III.APPLICATION SUBMITTAL PACKET REQUIREMENTS
PD PROCESS STEP 2: CONCEPT PLAN
Prior to submitting the 25 complete applications as certified by the Zoning Administrator, the Applicant shall
submit 5 initial draft application packets for staff review, followed by one revised draft final application packet
based upon staff review and comments.
Initial Packet (5 Copies to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
?? Draft Final Packet (1 Copy to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
??
____ ____ A. Provide Zoning Administrator with draft PD Concept Plan Submittal Packet for determination
of completeness prior to placing the proposed PD on the Plan Commission agenda for
Concept Plan review. The submittal packet shall contain all of the following items:
____ (1) A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11" x 17", as depicted on
a copy of the City of Lake Geneva Land Use Plan Map;
____ (2 ) A general written description of proposed PD including:
____General project themes and images;
____The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses;
____Approximate residential densities and non-residential intensities as
described by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and impervious
surface area ratio;
____The general treatment of natural features;
____The general relationship to nearby properties and public streets;
____The general relationship of the project to the Master Plan;
____An initial draft list of zoning standards which will not be met by the
proposed PD and the location(s) in which they apply and, a complete list
of zoning standards which will be more than met by the proposed PD
and the location(s) in which they apply. Essentially, the purpose of this
listing shall be to provide the Plan Commission with information
necessary to determine the relative merits of the project in regard to
private benefit versus public benefit, and in regard to the mitigation of
potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility; and,
____ (3) A written description of potentially requested exemption from the requirements
of the underlying zoning district, in the following order:
1. Land Use Exemptions;
2. Density and Intensity Exemptions;
3. Bulk Exemptions;
4. Landscaping Exceptions;
5. Parking and Loading Requirements Exceptions;
____ (4) A conceptual plan drawing (at 11" x 17") of the general land use layout and the
general location of major public streets and/or private drives. The Applicant
may submit copies of a larger version of the plan in addition to the 11" x 17"
reduction.
Appendix A-48
IV.FINAL APPLICATION PACKET INFORMATION
PD PROCESS STEP 2: CONCEPT PLAN
____ Receipt of 5 full scale copies in blueline or blackline
of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Receipt of 25 reduced (8.5" by 11" text and 11" x 17" graphics)
copies of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator:Date: ________ by: _____
____ Certification of complete Final Application Packet and
required copies to the Zoning Administrator by City Clerk: Date: ________ by: _____
V.APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
PD STEP 3: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN (GDP)
Prior to submitting the 25 complete applications as certified by the Zoning Administrator, the Applicant shall
submit 5 initial draft application packets for staff review, followed by one revised draft final application packet
based upon staff review and comments.
Initial Packet (5 Copies to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
?? Draft Final Packet (1 Copy to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
??
____ ____ A. Provide Zoning Administrator with a draft GDP Submittal Packet for determination of
completeness prior to placing the proposed PD on the Plan Commission agenda for
GDP review. The submittal packet shall contain all of the following items:
____ (1) A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11" x 17", as depicted on
a copy of the City of Lake Geneva Land Use Plan Map;
____ (2) A map of the subject property for which the PD is proposed:
____Showing all lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property;
____Referenced to a list of the names and addresses of the owners of all lands
on said map as the same appear on the current records of the Register
of Deeds of Walworth County (as provided by the City of Lake Geneva);
____ Clearly indicating the current zoning of the subject property and its
environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control;
____ Map and all its parts clearly reproducible with a photocopier;
____Map size of 11" x 17" and map scale not less than one inch equals 800
feet;
____All lot dimensions of the subject property provided;
____Graphic scale and north arrow provided.
Appendix A-49
____ (3) A general written description of proposed PD including:
____ General project themes and images;
____ The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses;
____ Approximate residential densities and non-residential intensities as
described by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and impervious
surface area ratio;
____ The general treatment of natural features;
____ The general relationship to nearby properties and public streets;
____ The general relationship of the project to the Master Plan,
____ A statement of Rationale as to why PD zoning is proposed. This shall
identify barriers that the Applicant perceives in the form of requirements
of standard zoning districts and opportunities for community betterment
the Applicant suggests are available through the proposed PD zoning.
____ A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met by the proposed
PD and the location(s) in which they apply and a complete list of zoning
standards which will be more than met by the proposed PD and the
location(s) in which they apply shall be identified. Essentially, the
purpose of this listing shall be to provide the Plan Commission with
information necessary to determine the relative merits of the project in
regard to private benefit versus public benefit, and in regard to the
mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility.
____ A written description of potentially requested exemption from the
requirements of the underlying zoning district, in the following order:
1. Land Use Exemptions;
2. Density and Intensity Exemptions;
3. Bulk Exemptions;
4. Landscaping Exceptions;
5. Parking and Loading Requirements Exceptions.
____ (4) A General Development Plan Drawing at a minimum scale of 1"=100' (11" x 17"
reduction shall also be provided by Applicant) of the proposed project showing
at least the following information in sufficient detail to make an evaluation
against criteria for approval:
____ A conceptual plan drawing (at 11" x 17") of the general land use layout
and the general location of major public streets and/or private drives.
The Applicant may submit copies of a larger version of the plan in
addition to the 11" x 17" reduction;
____ Location of recreational and open space areas and facilities and
specifically describing those that are to be reserved or dedicated for
public acquisition and use;
____ Statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the development, the approximate
areas of large development lots and pads, density/intensity of various
parts of the development, floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio
and landscape surface area ratio of various land uses, expected
staging, and any other plans required by the Plan Commission or City
Council; and
____ Notations relating the written information provided in (3), above to specific
areas on the GDP Drawing.
Appendix A-50
____ (5)General conceptual landscaping plan for subject property, noting approximate
locations of foundation, street, yard and paving, landscaping, and the
compliance of development with all landscaping requirements of this Ordinance
(except as noted in the listing of exceptions) and the use of extra landscaping
and bufferyards;
____ (6)A general signage plan for the project, including all:
____Project identification signs;
____Concepts for public fixtures and signs (street light fixtures and/or poles or
street sign faces and/or poles) which are proposed to vary from City
standards or common practices;
____ (7)Written justification for the proposed Planned Development. (See Section 98-905
for requirements of the conditional use procedure.)
Appendix A-51
VI.FINAL APPLICATION PACKET INFORMATION
PD STEP 3: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN (GDP)
The process for review and approval of the PD shall be identical to that for conditional use permits per Section
98-905 of the Zoning Ordinance and (if land is to be divided) to that for preliminary and final plats of
subdivision per the Municipal Code. All portions of an approved PD/GDP not fully developed within five years
of final City Council approval shall expire, and no additional PD-based development shall be permitted. The
City Council may extend this five years period by up to five additional years via a majority vote following a
public hearing.
____ Receipt of 5 full scale copies in blueline or blackline
of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Receipt of 25 reduced (8.5" by 11" text and 11" x 17" graphics)
copies of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator:Date: ________ by: _____
____ Certification of complete Final Application Packet and
required copies to the Zoning Administrator by City Clerk: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Class 2 Legal Notice sent to official newspaper by City Clerk: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Class 2 Legal Notice published on _______________ and _______________ by: _____
Appendix A-52
VII.APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
PD STEP 4: PRECISE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN (PIP)
Prior to submitting the 25 complete applications as certified by the Zoning Administrator, the Applicant shall
submit 5 initial draft application packets for staff review, followed by one revised draft final application packet
based upon staff review and comments.
Initial Packet (5 Copies to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
?? Draft Final Packet (1 Copy to Zoning Administrator) Date: ________ by: _____
??
____ ____ A. After the effective date of the rezoning to PD/GDP, the Applicant may file an application for
the proposed PIP with the Plan Commission. This submittal packet shall contain the
following items, prior to its acceptance by the Zoning Administrator and placing the item
on the Plan Commission agenda for PIP review.
____ (1) A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11" x 17", as depicted on a
copy of the City of Lake Geneva Land Use Plan Map;
____ (2) A map of the subject property for which the PD is proposed:
____Showing all lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property;
____Referenced to a list of the names and addresses of the owners of all lands
on said map as the same appear on the current records of the Register
of Deeds of Walworth County (as provided by the City of Lake Geneva);
____ Clearly indicating the current zoning of the subject property and its
environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control;
____ Map and all its parts clearly reproducible with a photocopier;
____Map size of 11" by 17" and map scale not less than one inch equals 800
feet;
____All lot dimensions of the subject property provided;
____Graphic scale and north arrow provided.
____ (3) A general written description of proposed PIP including:
____Specific project themes and images;
____The specific mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses;
____Specific residential densities and non-residential intensities as described
by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and impervious surface area
ratio;
____The specific treatment of natural features;
____ The specific relationship to nearby properties and public streets.
____ A Statement of Rationale as to why PD zoning is proposed identifying
perceived barriers in the form of requirements of standard zoning
districts and opportunities for community betterment through the
proposed PD zoning.
____ A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met by the proposed
PIP and the location(s) in which they apply and a complete list of zoning
standards which will be more than met by the proposed PIP and the
location(s) in which they apply shall be identified. Essentially, the
purpose of this listing shall be to provide the Plan Commission with
information necessary to determine the relative merits of the project in
regard to private benefit versus public benefit, and in regard to the
mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility.
Appendix A-53
____ (4)A Precise Implementation Plan Drawing at a minimum scale of 1"=100' (and
reduced to 11" x 17") of the proposed project showing at least the following
information in sufficient detail: (See following page)
____ A PIP site plan conforming to all requirements of Section 98-908(3). If the
proposed PD is a group development (per Section 98-208) also provide
a proposed preliminary plat or conceptual plat;
____ Location of recreational and open space areas and facilities specifically
describing those that are to be reserved or dedicated for public
acquisition and use;
____Statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the development, the precise areas
of all development lots and pads, density/intensity of various parts of the
development, floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio and
landscape surface area ratio of various land uses, expected staging,
and any other plans required by the Plan Commission or City Council;
and
____ Notations relating the written information (3), above to specific areas on
the GDP Drawing.
____ (5)A landscaping plan for subject property, specifying the location, species, and
installed size of all trees and shrubs. Include a chart which provides a
cumulative total for each species, type and required location (foundation, yard,
street, paved area or bufferyard) of all trees and shrubs.
____ (6)A series of building elevations for the entire exterior of all buildings in the PD,
including detailed notes as to the materials and colors proposed.
____ (7)A general signage plan including all project identification signs, concepts for public
fixtures and signs (such as street light fixtures and/or poles or street sign faces
and/or poles), and group development signage themes which are proposed to
vary from City standards or common practices.
____ (8)A general outline of the intended organizational structure for a property owners
association, if any; deed restrictions and provisions for private provision of
common services, if any.
____ (9)A written description which demonstrates the full consistency of the proposed PIP
with the approved GDP.
____ (10)A written description of any and all variations between the requirements of the
applicable PD/GDP zoning district and the proposed PIP development; and,
____ (11)Proof of financing capability pertaining to construction and maintenance and
operation of public works elements of the proposed development.
Appendix A-54
VIII.FINAL APPLICATION PACKET INFORMATION
PD STEP 4: PRECISE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN (PIP)
The process for review and approval of the PD shall be identical to that for conditional use permits per Section
98-905 of the Zoning Ordinance and (if land is to be divided) to that for preliminary and final plats of
subdivision per the Municipal Code. All portions of an approved PD/PIP not fully developed within five years
of final City Council approval shall expire, and no additional PD-based development shall be permitted. The
City Council may extend this five years period by up to five additional years via a majority vote following a
public hearing.
____ Receipt of 5 full scale copies in blueline or blackline
of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Receipt of 25 reduced (8.5" by 11" text and 11" x 17" graphics)
copies of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator:Date: ________ by: _____
____ Certification of complete Final Application Packet and
required copies to the Zoning Administrator by City Clerk: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Class 2 Legal Notice sent to official newspaper by City Clerk: Date: ________ by: _____
____ Class 2 Legal Notice published on _______________ and _______________ by: _____
Appendix A-55
CITY OF LAKE GENEVA PROCEDURAL CHECKLIST FOR: PRECISE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
REVIEW AND APPROVAL - Requirements per Section 98-914(8)
This form should be used by the Applicant as a guide to submitting a complete application for precise
implementation plan and by the City to process said application. Parts II and III should be used by the
Applicant to submit a complete application; Parts I - IV should be used by the City as a guide when
processing said application.
I. RECORDATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
____ Pre-submittal staff meeting scheduled:
Date of Meeting: _______ Time of Meeting: ______ Date: _______ by: ______
Follow-up pre-submittal staff meetings scheduled for:
____ Date of Meeting: _______ Time of Meeting: ________ Date: _______ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: _______ Time of Meeting: ________ Date: _______ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: _______ Time of Meeting: ________ Date: _______ by: _____
____ Date of Meeting: _______ Time of Meeting: ________ Date: _______ by: ______
____ Application form filed with Zoning Administrator: Date: _______ by: ______
____ Application fee of $________ received by Zoning Administrator Date: ______ by: _____
____ Reimburse professional consultant costs agreement executed: Date: ______ by: _____
II. APPLICATION SUBMITTAL PACKET REQUIREMENTS
Prior to submitting the 25 final complete applications as certified by the Zoning Administrator, the Applicant
shall submit 5 initial draft application packets for staff review, followed by one revised draft final application
packet upon staff review and comments.
Initial Packet (5 Copies to Zoning Administrator) Date: _________ by:
________
?? Draft Final Packet (1 Copy to Zoning Administrator) Date: _________ by:
________
??
____ ____ A map of the proposed precise implementation plan:
____ Showing all lands for which the precise implementation plan is proposed;
____ Showing all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property;
____ Referenced to a list of the names and addresses of the owners of said lands as
they appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds of Walworth County
(as provided by the City of Lake Geneva);
____ Clearly indicating the current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and
The jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control;
____ Map and all its parts are clearly reproducible with a photocopier;
____ All lot dimensions of the subject property provided;
____ Graphic scale and north arrow provided.
Appendix A-56
____ ____ (b) A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location of the subject
property in relation to the City as a whole:
____ ____ (c) A written description of the proposed precise implementation plan describing the type
of activities, building, and structures proposed for the subject property and their
general locations;
____ ____ (d) A site plan (conforming to the requirements of Section 98-908(3) of the subject
property as proposed for development OR if the proposed precise implementation
plan is a group development (per Section 98-208) a proposed preliminary plat or
conceptual plat may be substituted for the required site plan, provided said plat
contains all information required on said site plan, provided said plat contains all
information required on said site plan per Section 98-908.
____ ____ (e) Written justification for the proposed precise implementation plan:
____ Indicating reasons why the Applicant believes the proposed precise
implementation plan is appropriate with the recommendations of the City of
Lake Geneva Comprehensive Master Plan, particularly as evidenced by
compliance with the standards set out in Section 98-905(4)(b) 1.-6. (See
below)
III. JUSTIFICATION OF THE PROPOSED PRECISE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
1. How is the proposed precise implementation plan (the use in general, independent of its location) in
harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the City of Lake Geneva
Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, and any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted, or
under consideration pursuant to official notice by the City?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
2. How is the proposed precise implementation plan, in its specific location, in harmony with the
proposed goals, objectives, policies and standards of the City of Lake Geneva Comprehensive Plan,
the Zoning Ordinance, and any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted, or under consideration
pursuant to official notice by the City?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
3. Does the proposed precise implementation plan, in its proposed location and as depicted on the
required site plan (see Section 98-905(3)(d), result in any substantial or undue adverse impact on
nearby property, the character of the neighborhood, environmental factors, traffic factors, parking,
public improvements, public property or rights-of-way, or other matters affecting the public health,
safety, or general welfare, either as they now exist or as they may in the future be developed as a
result of the implementation of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, or
any other plan, program, map ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official notice
by the City or other governmental agency having jurisdiction to guide development?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
Appendix A-57
4. How does the proposed precise implementation plan maintain the desired consistency of land uses,
land use intensities, and land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject property?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
5. Is the proposed precise implementation plan located in an area that will be adequately served by,
and will not impose an undue burden on, any of the improvements, facilities, utilities or services
provided by public agencies serving the subject property?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
6. Do the potential public benefits of the proposed precise implementation plan outweigh all potential
adverse impacts of the proposed precise implementation (as identified in Subsections 98-905(4)(b)
1.-5.), after taking into consideration the Applicant's proposal and any requirements recommended
by the Applicant to ameliorate such impacts?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
IV. FINAL APPLICATION PACKET INFORMATION
____ Receipt of 5 full-scale copies in blue line or black line of
complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator: Date: ______ by: ______
____ Receipt of 25 reduced (8.5" by 11" text and 11" x 17" graphics)
copies of complete Final Application Packet by Zoning Administrator: Date: ______ by: ______
____ Certification of complete Final Application Packet and
required copies to the Zoning Administrator by City Clerk: Date: ______ by: ______
____ Class 2 Legal Notice sent to official newspaper by City Clerk: Date: ______ by: ______
____ Class 2 Legal Notice published on ______________ and ______________ by: ______
____ Conditional Use recorded with County Register of Deeds Office: Date: ______ by: ______
Appendix A-58

Ordinance 20-04 Page 1 of 2
ORDINANCE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
An ordinance adding sub-sub-sub-subsection xiii to sub-sub-subsection 1c, Property Management
Requirements, and amending sub-sub-sub-subsections i, ii, and iii of sub-sub-subsection 1e, Access and
Inspections of sub-subsection (Y), Tourist Rooming House, of subsection (8) Accessory Land Uses, of Section
98-206, Detailed Lad Use Descriptions and Regulations of Chapter 98: Zoning Ordinance, of the City of Lake
Geneva Zoning Ordinance to amend provisions of the Short Term Rental Ordinance regarding making business
records available, inspection of premises and the installation of knox boxes
Committee N/A
Fiscal Impact: N/A
File Number: 20-04 First Reading :
Second Reading :
May 26, 2020
June 8, 2020
The Common Council of the City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, does hereby ordain as follows:
1. Sub-Sub-Sub Sub-subsection xiii is added to Sub-Sub-Subsection 1c, Property Management Requirements of
Sub-Subsection (y) Short-Term Rental, of Subsection (8) Accessory Land Uses of Section 98-206 Detailed
Land Use Descriptions and Regulations of Chapter 98: Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lake Geneva Zoning
Ordinance is to read as follows:
“xiii. To ensure compliance with section 1 b and c above, or pursuant to an audit as authorized under Sec.
66.0615(2)(a), Wis. Stats., the Designated Operator hereunder shall upon written request by the City, which
must specify the reason for the request and provide at least seven days to comply, provide a copy of the
Business Record described above.”
2. Sub-Sub-Sub Subsections i, ii, and iii of Sub-Sub-Subsection 1 e, Access and Inspections, of Sub-Subsection
(y), Short-Term Rental, of Subsection (8) Accessory Land Uses of Section 98-206 Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations of Chapter 98: Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lake Geneva Zoning Ordinance
are amended to read as follows:
i. The City shall be authorized at all reasonable times upon reasonable notice to the owner,
and with either the owner’s consent or a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stat. Sec.
66.0119, except in cases of emergency where no special inspection warrant is required, and
as provided in Sec. 66.0119(2), Wis. Stats., to enter and examine any building, structure, or
premises, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this ordinance. If the owner declines
to consent to an inspection without a warrant, the City may not conduct an inspection
under this section without first obtaining a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stat. Sec.
66.0119 except in cases of emergency where no special inspection warrant is required, and
as provided in Sec. 66.0119(2), Wis. Stats. The owner, agent or occupant of any such
premises who refuses to permit, or prevents or interferes with any entry into or upon the
premises by any such inspector with a special inspection warrant or in cases of emergency
where no inspection warrant is required and as provided in Sec. 66.0119(2), Wis. Stats., shall
be in violation of this section. It is not a violation of this section to refuse to grant voluntary
consent to an inspection. without a special inspection warrant.
Ordinance 20-04 Page 2 of 2
ii. The City has adopted the Knox Box key box system requiring providing for the installation
of miniature vaults be that are placed upon the exterior buildings, gateposts or other
applicable locations. Contained within the vault are the keys that will allow access to the
Short-Term Rental in emergency situations.
iii. Knox boxes shall be placed on the building for emergency entry into the building. The City
may require more boxes dependent on the size of the structure or facility. Designated
Operators and owners are encouraged, but not required to install the Knox Box Systems on
their short term rentals. Designated Operators and Owners of short term rentals
acknowledge that the City shall not be obligated for damages occurring to short term
rentals in the event emergency access to a short term rentals is required and there is no
Knox Box System installed on the property.
2. That this ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication, as provided by law.
Approved by the City of Lake Geneva Common Council on this 26th day of May, 2020.
Council Action: Adopted Failed Vote
Mayoral Action: Accept Veto
 Charlene Klein, Mayor Date
Attest:
 _______________________________________________________
Lana Kropf, City Clerk Date

ORDINANCE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
An ordinance amending Chapter 98 of the Lake Geneva Zoning Code by amending sub-subsection (a):
Surfacing and Marking; to subsection (6): Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Design Standards,
of Section 704: Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Standards; shall be amended to allow Notfor Profit organizations to park vehicles on the unpaved lots with the issuance of a Temporary Use
Permit
Committee: Plan Commission approved July 20, 2020
Fiscal Impact: N/A
File Number: 20-08 First Reading:
Second Reading:
July 27, 2020
August 12, 2020
The Common Council of the City of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, does hereby ordain as follows:
Section 98-704 Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Standards
(6) Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Design Standards
 (a) Surfacing and Marking
i. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas (including all residential driveways
-- except those within the RH District) shall be paved with a hard all-weather
surface, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. Said surfaces intended
for 6 or more parking stalls shall be marked in a manner which clearly indicates
required parking spaces.
ii. Exceptions The prohibitions of Section (a) above shall not apply to the following:
Not for profit organizations may utilize their unpaved lots for parking (regardless of
zoning classification) after applying for and obtaining a temporary permit from the
Building and Zoning Department. Application must be made at least 4 weeks in
advance of the event.
Granted by action of the Common Council of the City of Lake Geneva this 12th day of August, 2020.
Council Action: Adopted Failed Vote
Mayoral Action: Accept Veto
Charlene Klein, Mayor Date
Attest:
 _______________________________________________________
Lana Kropf, City Clerk Date

